By PAT BORZI and JOE DRAPEOCT. 25, 2016
MINNEAPOLIS — After a student said she was sexually assaulted by four University of Minnesota football players last month, the police and prosecutors investigated but declined to bring charges. The athletes were allowed to resume playing.Yet they and two other players have missed one game, and five of them may miss more because of a restraining order issued by a court that prohibits the players from being near not only the student’s apartment but also her place of employment — the football stadium where the team plays its home games.The decision to issue the order represents an unusual step from an accuser in the national debate over sexual assault accusations on campus and how they are handled.The order, issued last week, applies to five players, all of whom sat out Minnesota’s 34-32 victory over Rutgers on Saturday.AdvertisementThe order has sent both the woman and the players to court, with a judge Tuesday leaving the order in place until a hearing Nov. 3, two days before the team’s next home game.AdvertisementIn court documents, the woman’s lawyer argued that the order provided her with a modicum of safety from the men, at least one of whom, she said, has harassed her in the aftermath of what happened.“My client has been through a traumatic experience,” the lawyer, Amy Isenor, told reporters after the hearing. The woman, who attended the hearing, declined to comment.In court documents, she asked for the orders because she said she did not feel safe in her apartment or on campus. A restraining order against one of the players, Tamarion Johnson, accused him of taunting her on the street after she said the assault occurred.The players, however, argued the order goes too far and causes them “irreparable harm” for something for which they were not arrested or convicted.A number of student-athletes have received intense scrutiny after a series of high-profile accusations — among them the former Stanford swimmer, Brock Turner, whose sentence of six months in jail for sexually assaulting an unconscious woman in 2015 was denounced by critics as too lenient and touched off protests across the country.More recently, the president of Baylor University, Kenneth W. Starr, and the football coach, Art Briles, lost their positions after a damning university-commissioned report on the handling of several accusations and convictions of sex crimes levied against Baylor football players.In Minnesota, the complaint leading to the restraining order accused the players Carlton Djam, Tamarion Johnson, Ray Buford, Dior Johnson and KiAnte Hardin of sexually assaulting the woman on Sept. 2 at an apartment near campus. Hardin, Buford, Johnson and Johnson each served a three-game suspension from the team while the Hennepin County district attorney’s office investigated.Get the big sports news, highlights and analysis from Times journalists, with distinctive takes on games and some behind-the-scenes surprises, delivered to your inbox every week.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.None of the five were arrested or charged.“There is insufficient admissible evidence for prosecutors to prove beyond a reasonable doubt that either force was used, or that the victim was physically helpless as defined by law in a sexual encounter,” the prosecutor’s office said in a statement earlier this month.AdvertisementA restraining order against a sixth player was dropped Monday night. All six were in court Tuesday morning and sat quietly in the gallery.Legal experts said that while the case represented a new approach from an accuser on a campus unsatisfied with the outcome of a criminal investigation, such restraining orders are commonplace among people who feel threatened.“The circumstances are novel,” Douglas E. Fierberg, a lawyer who specializes in issues on college campuses, including sexual assault and hazing, said of the restraining order. “But on a day-to-day-basis, assailants who are deemed threats to other people are prevented from going to the place where they work, or live or where they study. I could care less that it’s a football stadium. I don’t believe football players are entitled to any more legal rights than anyone else has.”Adele P. Kimmel, a senior lawyer for the public interest law group Public Justice, said that if the university had not already opened an investigation into the allegations against the football players, it should. Under the federal Title IX law aimed at curbing gender discrimination on campuses, such investigations are routine.“Law enforcement does their investigation, and the standard is beyond reasonable doubt,” Kimmel said. “The university needs to look at this through a Title IX lens, which uses ‘preponderance of evidence’ as the standard to determine whether an assault took place or not. The school has an obligation to make sure that all students have a safe environment for education.”Evan Lapiska, a spokesman for the university, said it could neither confirm nor deny that an investigation was underway.Each of the five players will have individual hearings before Hennepin County District Court Judge Mel I. Dickstein next week. Judge Dickstein said he might schedule the hearing earlier if lawyers believe extra time is needed to hear their cases before Minnesota’s next home game, against Purdue.AdvertisementHardin, a sophomore, starts at cornerback for the Gophers. Defensive backs Buford and Dior Johnson, both redshirt freshmen, have played as reserves, as has running back Djam, a redshirt sophomore. Tamarion Johnson, a freshman defensive end, has not played.The Minnesota coach, Tracy Claeys, has declined to comment on the allegations. He said the six players will be on the roster to play Saturday at Illinois.The lawyer for the players, Lee Hutton III, said his clients await their day in court. “Ultimately, we’re ready, willing and able to produce evidence that completely contradicts the petitioner’s story,” said Hutton, a former football player for the Gophers.He added: “This is not a specific attempt to address legitimate judicial issues. This is vengeance after the fact that charges were dropped.”The controversy follows other recent allegations of sexual misconduct on the Minnesota campus.In May, a basketball player, Reggie Lynch, was arrested on suspicion of sexually assaulting a 19-year-old woman at a campus apartment. Prosecutors said later there was insufficient evidence to file charges against Lynch.In August 2015, the athletic director, Norwood Teague, resigned amid revelations that he had sexually harassed two female university employees — inappropriately touching both at a university-sponsored event, and sending numerous graphic texts to one.Pat Borzi reported from Minneapolis and Joe Drape from New York.A version of this article appears in print on October 26, 2016, on Page B8 of the New York edition with the headline: Athletes in Sex Assault Case Can Play. Just Not at Home.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.