AdvertisementSupported byBy Tyler KepnerIt might as well be a matchup from a movie: the two teams with the longest title droughts in baseball paired in the same World Series. No wonder, then, that Joe Maddon has watched “Field of Dreams” since his Chicago Cubs clinched the National League pennant.“I cry easily,” said Maddon, the Cubs’ manager. “So the connection to the past is very important.”To loosely quote the script, the memories could be so thick at this World Series, the fans will have to swat them away from their faces. The Cubs have gone 108 years without a championship. The Cleveland Indians have gone 68. No other team in baseball has come close to so many consecutive unfulfilled seasons.“The baseball gods are really happy right now,” the Indians’ Mike Napoli said. “I wanted the Cubs to win, just because I knew how cool it would be to be a part of it. I think it’s going to be a special World Series. There’s two droughts, and there’s going to be a winner.”Until Saturday, the Cubs had not won a pennant since 1945, meaning they have never played a World Series game on television or at night — or, for that matter, with an African-American player on their roster. The Indians have been to the Series just three times since their last title: in 1954, 1995 and 1997.If the Indians need inspiration, they could look to the Cavaliers, their neighbors, who will get their N.B.A. championship rings next door about an hour before Game 1 at Progressive Field on Tuesday. Cleveland, a city that had not won a title in any sport since the Browns took the N.F.L. crown in 1964, could soon be the home of two champions.The Cubs are the favorite because they won 103 games in the regular season — nine more than the Indians — and have looked more imposing lately. The Indians hit just .168 in their American League Championship Series victory over Toronto, and their lineup lacks the star power possessed by the Cubs, who had five players elected to start in the All-Star Game.Then again, the Indians beat the Blue Jays in just five games after sweeping Boston in a division series. The Cubs have lost three playoff games.“There’s a reason we’re here playing,” Cleveland second baseman Jason Kipnis said. “There’s a reason we’ve only lost one game this postseason. We’re playing pretty darn good baseball right now.“We’re underdogs because we don’t match up in terms of numbers or stature or contracts. But when it comes to in between those white lines and playing the game of baseball, I like the way we match up with anybody.”In eight postseason games, the Indians have never gone from leading in a game to trailing. Their two best relievers, Andrew Miller and Cody Allen, have combined for 19 ⅓ scoreless innings.The Cubs encountered a singular bullpen force in the National League Championship Series in the Dodgers’ Kenley Jansen, who silenced them for three innings in the final game. By then, though, the Cubs had a big lead, rendering Jansen irrelevant.“It’s the same thing Joe said before tonight’s game: ‘You’ve got to get a lead,’” Cubs General Manager Jed Hoyer said on the field after Saturday’s clincher. “It sets the tone for the whole game. If you want to keep the bullpen out of the game, either do it the way we did tonight, with Jansen coming in down 5-0, or get an early lead.”To get an early lead in Game 1, the Cubs will need to solve Corey Kluber, who has a 0.98 E.R.A. in three playoff starts. Chicago will counter with Jon Lester, who has been even better in his three starts, with a 0.86 E.R.A.The Indians like to run, and while Lester has problems throwing to bases, he just keeps winning, with a 21-5 record since opening day. He compensates for his throwing trouble by varying his times to the plate, stepping off the rubber and letting teammates handle bunts.“I look at Jon as almost like a pincushion,” said Chris Bosio, the Cubs’ pitching coach. “He’s been stuck so many times that he doesn’t even go, ‘Ow.’”The Cubs generally prioritize amateur hitters over pitchers, believing that the performance of position players is easier to predict. Accordingly, perhaps, they have built a World Series staff almost entirely from pitchers originally signed by other teams. None of the 11 pitchers the Cubs used in the N.L.C.S. were drafted or signed internationally by the Cubs. Reliever Hector Rondon was actually first signed by the Indians from Venezuela at age 16, but Cleveland left him exposed in the 2012 Rule 5 draft after he had Tommy John surgery and subsequent setbacks. Nine strong innings of winter ball persuaded the Cubs to take a chance on Rondon, who has a 2.97 E.R.A. over four seasons in Chicago.While the Los Angeles Dodgers hurt themselves with foolish base-running plays in the N.L.C.S., the Cubs cannot expect the same kind of help from the Indians.“We’ve been a very good base-running team,” Manager Terry Francona said this summer. “That was something we talked about since Day 1 of spring training, and I’ve been very pleased. We have to be a team that moves up on balls in the dirt, goes first to third, and I think we’ve done a really good job of that.”The Indians also steal bases: They made 65 more stolen-base attempts than the Cubs yet were thrown out three fewer times. No team with a winning record had more stolen bases this season than the Indians, with 134 in 165 attempts. Rajai Davis led the A.L. with 43 steals and was caught only six times.Young players do not always appreciate the fashion sensibilities of past generations, but the Indians are an exception. Shortstop Francisco Lindor and the rookie center fielder Tyler Naquin wear high-cut stirrups that seem lifted from a 1980s baseball card. “My pops, he always liked stirrups, and he always told me to wear them,” Lindor told The New York Times this summer. “It’s cool. It’s not like a flashy look. It’s an old-school, classic look.”On the subject of uniforms, there are two subtle oddities about the Cubs’ road look. They are the only team in baseball with a logo patch on their pants (a small Cubs target insignia, right below the belt on the left hip). The Cubs are also the major leagues’ only team with a sleeve patch displaying the logo of their league. When they wear their blue alternate jerseys, the right sleeve has a prominent patch with the National League’s eagle logo.One of the least successful teams in modern baseball, the San Diego Padres, has only itself to blame. Two of the most important players in this World Series joined their teams from San Diego.Needing a bat in a rare pennant race in 2010, the Padres sent Corey Kluber — then in Class AA — to the Indians in a three-way deal that brought in outfielder Ryan Ludwick from St. Louis and sent pitcher Jake Westbrook from the Indians to the Cardinals.In January 2012, the Padres traded first baseman Anthony Rizzo, who had hit .141 for them as a rookie, to the Cubs in a deal for pitcher Andrew Cashner.This was the Padres’ 10th year in a row without a playoff appearance.The cities’ N.B.A. teams have met in the playoffs seven times since 1988, with the Bulls winning the first five and the Cavaliers the last two. Their most famous matchup was the deciding game of a best-of-five first-round series in 1989, at Richfield Coliseum, when the Cavaliers’ Craig Ehlo uttered some famous last words before an inbounds play with a 1-point lead and three seconds to go: “Mr. Jordan, I can’t let you score.” Michael Jordan had other ideas, breaking free for a 15-footer over Ehlo to win the game and the series and then punching the air in triumph.Since these teams are flagship franchises in baseball, it should come as no surprise that more than 200 players have appeared for both. Dennis Eckersley and Hoyt Wilhelm pitched for both but wear other teams’ caps on their Cooperstown plaques. The former Cub Andre Thornton, a beloved Indians slugger from 1977 to 1987, threw out the first pitch before the A.L.C.S. opener, and Kenny Lofton, who roamed center field for both teams in October, will throw out the first pitch before Game 1 on Tuesday.But the most impactful player with dual alumni-club membership is probably Rick Sutcliffe. After making the All-Star team for Cleveland in 1983, Sutcliffe started poorly the next year and was sent to the Cubs in a seven-player deal. He went on a tear, going 16-1 to win the Cy Young Award and lead the Cubs to the playoffs, and now has a brick in his honor on the Cubs’ Hollywood Walk of Fame-style plaza behind the Wrigley Field bleachers.The deal also worked well for the Indians, who got a young Joe Carter as the centerpiece of their return. Cleveland eventually traded Carter to San Diego for Carlos Baerga and Sandy Alomar Jr., who helped the Indians become a power in the 1990s. Alomar — who hit .367 in the 1997 World Series and might have been named its most valuable player if Cleveland had won — is now the Indians’ first-base coach.Terry Francona, who hit .311 for the 1988 Indians and .250 for the 1986 Cubs, said the thing he remembered most about Chicago was the traffic.Francona lived in suburban Northbrook, Ill., and the Cubs played only day games at the time. He had to be at Wrigley Field for batting practice by 10:10 a.m., Francona explained, so he planned accordingly.“I had to leave at, like, 7,” Francona said. “I’d usually pinch-hit about quarter to 6. There would be shadows, I’d make an out, and then I’d fight the traffic home. That was my summer in Chicago.”The Indians plan to use Trevor Bauer, who bled all over the mound in his A.L.C.S. start, for Game 2 on Wednesday, against Jake Arrieta. Bauer cut his right pinkie while repairing a drone, forcing his A.L.C.S. start to be pushed back, and his stitches burst open when he tried to pitch. The Indians would rather use Josh Tomlin in Game 3 in Chicago, where the pitcher has to hit. Tomlin is 6 for 12 in his career, and Bauer is hopeless at the plate. “Couldn’t hit Little League pitching,” he told The Cleveland Plain Dealer. “I’m certainly not going to hit World Series pitching.”The Cubs’ David Ross, 39, is retiring after the season. He has a chance to go out in style by being behind the plate for the final out of the World Series. Ross did that for the Red Sox in 2013, catching the Koji Uehara splitter that struck out St. Louis’s Matt Carpenter to win the championship for Boston. Ross would be the first catcher to be behind the plate for the final out of the World Series for two teams since Rick Dempsey, who was there for the Orioles in 1983 and the Dodgers five years later.Before starting his swing, the Indians’ Jason Kipnis holds his bat nearly parallel to the ground, a technique he learned in the minor leagues to keep himself from wrapping the bat behind his head. The old way made Kipnis’s swing longer, and now he has more time to react to pitches — even if it makes for an unusual stance that brings to mind the Hall of Famer Rod Carew, who is immortalized in bronze outside Target Field. “I laugh every time in Minnesota when I walk by that statue,” Kipnis said. “‘I know what you’re going through, buddy.’”Advertisement