By VICTOR MATHEROCT. 24, 2016
So what happened in Sunday night’s big N.F.C. West matchup between the Seattle Seahawks and the Arizona Cardinals? Did Carson Palmer put a big game together and lead Arizona to victory? Or did Seattle’s crack defense help win the game?Well, neither.The game staggered to a 3-3 finish in regulation. The teams traded field goals on the first two overtime possessions, sending the game to sudden death. With three minutes left, Chandler Catanzaro of the Cardinals banged a 24-yard field goal attempt against the upright. The Seahawks then set up a 28-yard attempt of their own, but Stephen Hauschka shanked it badly with 11 seconds left. Final score: 6-6.Going into the game, the Cardinals had been averaging 26 points a game and the Seahawks 21. The over/under for the game was set at a reasonable 43. “Under” bettors had a comfortable evening.It was the first tie in Seahawks history and the first for the Cardinals since 1986, when they played in St. Louis.Advertisement“I really don’t know how to feel,” Seahawks linebacker Bobby Wagner told The Associated Press. “I’ve never been in a tie game before. It’s certainly not something we’re happy about.”AdvertisementAlthough not common in the N.F.L., tie games do crop up from time to time. The last one came in 2014 when the Panthers and the Bengals finished, 37-37. Sunday night’s game was the sixth tie of the 21st century, and there were a total of 12 in the 1980s and 1990s.Get the big sports news, highlights and analysis from Times journalists, with distinctive takes on games and some behind-the-scenes surprises, delivered to your inbox every week.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.But ties as low-scoring as 6-6 are more unusual. The last one came in 1972, before regular-season overtime took place and ties were much more common. The St. Louis Cardinals and the Philadelphia Eagles slugged it out for 75 minutes without a result. Tom Dempsey and Jim Bakken provided all the offense in that 6-6 tie.To find an even lower scoring tie, you have to go all the way back to November 1943, when the Lions and the Giants met on a rainy, muddy day at Briggs Stadium (later Tiger Stadium) in Detroit. The 17,000 fans were treated to nine total first downs, six completed passes for 31 total net passing yards, no trips inside the 15-yard line, and 0 points.The New York Times headline described a game of futility: Giants, Lions in Scoreless Tie. Field Goal Tries Fail in 0-0 Draw. Lio of Lions Misses Three and Cuff One — Giants Push Into Detroit Territory Once.At least the other headlines that day spoke of decisive results: “Blue Shirts Lose on Garden Ice,” “Cote Again Takes Yonkers Marathon” and “Russians Capture Junction Beyond Kiev.”An earlier version of this article incorrectly stated the name of St. Louis’s N.F.L. team in 1972. They were the St. Louis Cardinals then, not the Rams.We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.