By THE ASSOCIATED PRESSAPRIL 25, 2016
Four of South Africa’s leading sports federations have been banned by the country’s sports minister from hosting or bidding for major international events for at least a year because of their failures to create enough opportunities for black players.Fikile Mbalula, South Africa’s minister for sports and recreation, made the announcement Monday after receiving a report on “transformation” in South Africa’s five biggest sports: rugby, cricket, soccer, track and field, and netball.More than two decades after the end of apartheid, only soccer met the targets it had agreed upon with the government.“I have therefore resolved to revoke the privilege of Athletics South Africa (ASA), Cricket South Africa (CSA), Netball South Africa (NSA) and South African rugby (SARU) to host and bid for major and mega international tournaments,” Mbalula said in a statement.AdvertisementThe ban went into effect immediately. Mbalula said he would review his decision once he had received the results of the federations’ transformation efforts for 2016-17. That could be at the end of next year, or possibly in early 2018.The South African government has been pushing for years for the country’s main sports — especially rugby and cricket — to create more opportunities for black players. It has been 22 years since the end of the apartheid system of minority white rule, and those sports are still generally dominated by whites despite the fact that blacks make up over 80 percent of South Africa’s population.AdvertisementRacially transforming South African sport was “morally” and “strategically” right, Mbalula said, given the demographics of the country. Yet there is fierce debate in South Africa over the fairness of transformation policies that demand that domestic rugby and cricket teams select a certain number of black players over others for every game.All five federations agreed on various transformation targets with the government in 2015. Those agreements involved getting more black players involved at the school, age-group and club levels, right up to the provincial and national levels.The sports ministry said that it also intended to agree on transformation targets with another 14 South African sports federations, including in swimming, where South Africa has had success at the Olympics.Get the big sports news, highlights and analysis from Times journalists, with distinctive takes on games and some behind-the-scenes surprises, delivered to your inbox every week.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.The South African Rugby Union said it “acknowledged” the findings of the report and the penalty imposed by Mbalula.“There is no question that we have more work to do and we could be moving faster, but our sport has undergone a major overhaul in how we do business and how we measure ourselves in the past two or three years, and we have definitely made great progress,” SARU’s chief executive, Jurie Roux, said in a statement.The ban will not affect regular tournaments in South Africa like Super Rugby and the four-nation Rugby Championship, Roux said. However, it complicates South Africa’s intention to bid for the 2023 Rugby World Cup. World Rugby will release tender documents to interested countries in May, and countries must formally confirm their intention to bid in June.South Africa, the host in 1995, has been trying to hold the Rugby World Cup again since 2011 but has failed in three successive bids. Under the decision announced by Mbalula on Monday, SARU would not be allowed to bid for 2023. SARU said it hoped it might have its right to bid reinstated by Mbalula following a meeting of the transformation report’s authors in November. It may then be able to bid for the World Cup before the window closes next year, it said.AdvertisementBoth the rugby and cricket federations said their officials — possibly shocked by Mbalula’s announcement — went into closed-door meetings with sports ministry officials. Cricket South Africa declined to comment immediately. Athletics South Africa said it would need to study the “pronouncement” made by Mbalula before commenting.A version of this article appears in print on April 26, 2016, on Page B12 of the New York edition with the headline: Sports Briefing | International Sports; South Africa Imposes Bans.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.