By THE ASSOCIATED PRESSAPRIL 3, 2017
ST. LOUIS — Randal Grichuk hit a two-run homer in the eighth inning and a game-ending run-scoring single in the ninth, helping the St. Louis Cardinals top the Chicago Cubs, 4-3, in a wild prime-time opener on Sunday night.Jose Martinez started the winning rally with a pinch-hit double off Mike Montgomery, who closed out Chicago’s World Series championship in November.Yadier Molina was then awarded the first no-pitch intentional walk in major league history, an off-season rule change designed to speed up the game.With two outs and the bases loaded, Grichuk lined a 1-2 pitch into the gap in left-center for his second career game-ending hit. He was mobbed as he rounded first in the rain, and what was left of the crowd — reported as a sold-out 47,566 — cheered wildly.AdvertisementThe Cardinals appeared set for a tidy 3-0 win before the Cubs rallied in the ninth. Seung-hwan Oh hit Ben Zobrist with a pitch, and Jason Heyward singled before Willson Contreras hit a drive to left for a tying homer.AdvertisementBefore the dramatic finish, the night belonged to the St. Louis right-hander Carlos Martinez, who retired 12 in a row and 18 of 19 over one stretch against the defending champions. Martinez struck out 10 and walked none in seven and a third innings in his first opening-day start.Get the big sports news, highlights and analysis from Times journalists, with distinctive takes on games and some behind-the-scenes surprises, delivered to your inbox every week.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.Jon Lester kept Chicago in the game with five effective innings even without his best stuff. Kyle Schwarber reached base three times in his first game as the leadoff hitter since Dexter Fowler left the Cubs for an $82.5 million, five-year contract with the Cardinals.Martinez departed with runners on first and second and the Cardinals clinging to a 1-0 lead. He was saluted with a standing ovation.Oh then came in and hit Schwarber with a pitch, loading the bases as it started to rain. But Oh retired Kris Bryant, the National League most valuable player, and Anthony Rizzo on two fly balls to right, ending the inning.St. Louis went 86-76 last year and missed the playoffs for the first time since 2010, but the winter additions of Fowler and reliever Brett Cecil ramped up the optimism for this season. The Cardinals got another positive jolt when they announced a new contract for Molina earlier in the day that runs through the 2020 season.The sellout crowd at Busch Stadium roared its approval when Molina was introduced before the game, prompting the catcher to doff his cap twice as the cheers continued.He got another standing ovation when he went to the plate for the first time in the second inning, and there were chants of “Ya-di! Ya-di!” before he grounded a single back up the middle.Fowler also heard all cheers all night long, and he used his legs to get St. Louis on the board in the third. He reached on an infield single, scampered over to third on Aledmys Diaz’s single to center and scored on Matt Carpenter’s fly ball to right.We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.