By JONAH ENGEL BROMWICHAPRIL 3, 2017
With the N.C.A.A. tournament wrapping up, basketball fans can shift their focus back to the N.B.A. this week — just in time for a sprint to the end of the regular season.The playoff picture is nearly complete in the Western Conference, where only the eighth-seeded team remains in question, barely. Entering Monday night’s game, the Portland Trail Blazers were two games ahead of the ninth-place Denver Nuggets and 5.5 games ahead of the 10th-place New Orleans Pelicans, and had been playing significantly better than both teams. Their fate is all but assured.Things are more complicated — and more exciting — in the East, where seven teams are competing for the final four playoff seedings. After an Eastern renaissance last season, it has been a miserable return to form for the conference: Five of those seven teams are below .500.Still, April competition is better than April apathy. It is the final full week of the regular season and much is still at stake. So plenty of contests should ratchet up to playoff intensity as teams fight to avoid an early summer vacation.AdvertisementLet’s get into some games. Here’s a look at this week’s complete schedule.Cleveland at Boston, Wednesday, 8 p.m., ESPNAdvertisementDespite their recent struggles, the Cleveland Cavaliers are still the favorites to emerge from the East. Until Sunday night, they looked like a bad team with a porous, slow-legged defense.But then they beat a determined Indiana Pacers team in two overtimes on Sunday, thanks largely to the efforts of LeBron James, who had 41 points, 16 rebounds and 11 assists. That win might represent the beginning of the turnaround the Cavs had been looking for.Get the big sports news, highlights and analysis from Times journalists, with distinctive takes on games and some behind-the-scenes surprises, delivered to your inbox every week.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.Five of the Cavaliers’ final six games come against Eastern Conference teams in playoff contention.A course correction will require even more effort from Cleveland’s stars. And that may be a problem. James has averaged more minutes this season than he has since he returned to Cleveland from Miami, and in the past several weeks, he has looked exhausted, often settling for long jumpers. That’s not a good option for James: In March, he attempted 5.5 3-pointers a game and made 1.7, for an average percentage of .317. That kind of shooting is not going to help the Cavs come playoff time. (Against Indiana, James was 3 for 10 from the 3-point line.)Several of his teammates are in worse condition. Kevin Love has struggled since returning from knee surgery, averaging significantly fewer points and becoming even more of a liability on defense. Tristan Thompson had his worst full month of the season in March, failing to average double-digit rebounds (after doing so in November, December and February) and shooting 42.1 percent from the free-throw line.James has been all but invincible in the early rounds of the playoffs since the early years of his career. He has been to the N.B.A. finals in six consecutive seasons, and he has missed the Eastern Conference finals only twice since 2007. That history makes it difficult to see him losing, particularly given the buffer of the early rounds.As good as the Boston Celtics have been, it is difficult to see them beating the Cavs in a postseason series. Boston is a fine team, if an unremarkable one. It has a solid offense, a decent defense, an exciting star in Isaiah Thomas and a good bench. But it lacks a dominant player besides Thomas, and it is hard to imagine who might provide a scoring lift in a grinding playoff series against a team like the Cavaliers.AdvertisementThe Celtics and the Cavs last played on March 1, when Cleveland still looked dominant. It took 31 points from Thomas and an unusually good night of rebounding the ball for the Celtics to earn their first win in three attempts against the Cavs this season. If they fail to do the same on Wednesday, given how poorly Cleveland has been playing, it will only bolster doubts about their chances in the playoffs. The Cavaliers may have looked like a bad team in March, but it is hard to bet against them in April.Minnesota at Portland, Thursday, 10:30 p.m., TNTPortland has won nine of its last 10 games, and it can clinch a playoff spot as soon as Thursday. The Trail Blazers have benefited greatly from the addition of Jusuf Nurkic, who was acquired from the Nuggets in February and is starting regularly. Last week, against his former team, he had 33 points and 15 rebounds, earning a cheerful postgame interview during which he wished the Nuggets a happy summer off.Los Angeles Clippers at San Antonio, Saturday, 8:30 p.m., ABCThe Clippers have been all over the place, winning tough games against teams like the Jazz and the Wizards, and losing to less competitive squads like the Kings and the Mavericks. They are likely to finish fifth in the West. They have been counted out as contenders, but don’t be surprised if they put together a run in the playoffs, particularly if they’re matched with Utah in the first round. A strong game against the Spurs on Saturday would be a good start.League Pass Game of the Week: Milwaukee at Indiana, Thursday, 7 p.m. After a truly impressive effort on Sunday, the Pacers are left in a tough spot by their loss to the Cavaliers. They remain tied with the Heat, and just out of the playoff picture, and are only one game ahead of the Charlotte Hornets and two games ahead of the Detroit Pistons. Every contest from now on will be hard-fought, and you can expect a particularly good game when the Bucks come calling on Thursday.All times are Eastern.We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.