

      By JIM LUTTRELL and 
    
PHIL COFFIN

MAY 4, 2017

The 143rd Kentucky Derby will be run Saturday at Churchill Downs in Louisville, Ky. To get you in the mood for the most exciting two minutes in sports or to give you some trivia to dazzle with at your Derby party, give this quiz a ride. No Googling!
Related Article
This famous photograph, called “The Fighting Finish,” shows why the jockeys became the story of the 1933 Derby as much as Head Play, left, and Brokers Tip. But what made Brokers Tip’s victory a rarity?In the 1957 Derby, Gallant Man had a clear lane and a full head of steam to track down the upset-minded Iron Liege, but the veteran jockey on Gallant Man mistook the 16th pole for the finish line and briefly stood up in the irons, allowing Iron Liege to hang on for the nose victory. Who was that jockey?With a field of up to 20 horses, the Derby is often decided by racing luck. In 1987, it was decided by a horse's having enough athleticism to overcome bad luck. When the leader veered out down the stretch, this colt clipped heels with the front-runner, stumbled badly and nearly unseated his rider. Instead, the colt recovered and rallied to win.Affirmed won the Triple Crown in 1978, edging Alydar in each memorable duel. But what is the name of that No. 9 horse on the rail, who finished in third place?Donerail was a 91-1 shot in 1913 when he set a then-track record and returned what is still a Derby record $184.90 for a $2 wager to win. Parimutuel wagering had been introduced at Churchill Downs just five years earlier, and Donerail’s victory is largely credited with popularizing that form of gambling. Which horse was the second biggest long shot to win, when he went off at 50-1 in 2009?Only three fillies have won the Kentucky Derby. Which of the three had the same sire as the great Affirmed?The jockey Bobby Ussery celebrated winning the Derby aboard Dancer’s Image in 1968, but the celebration was short-lived. Why?The 1979 Derby was dominated by Spectacular Bid, but it was also the Animal House Derby, in the Nothing-Is-Over-Until-We-Say-It-Is sense. Which maiden, pictured fifth on the first turn above, became known for his funny-yet-frightening last-place finish?An earlier version of this quiz incorrectly stated the record set by Gallant Man in the 1957 Belmont Stakes. It was his time in the Belmont, 2:26 3/5, that was a record, not his eight-length winning margin.Advertisement