By THE ASSOCIATED PRESSMARCH 15, 2016
Pittsburgh’s Kris Letang scored the only goal of a shootout with a pretty backhand past the Islanders’ rookie goalie, Jean-Francois Berube, to lift the host Penguins to a 2-1 victory on Tuesday night.Marc-Andre Fleury stopped Frans Nielsen, Kyle Okposo and John Tavares in the shootout as Pittsburgh strengthened its hold on the first wild-card spot in the Eastern Conference.Fleury finished with 25 saves for the Penguins. Chris Kunitz scored his 14th goal of the season in his 800th career game.Berube made 33 stops in his third N.H.L. start, including several in the extra period. Okposo’s score at 14 minutes 35 seconds of the third sent the game to overtime.Advertisement“It’s not easy battling back in this building against a really good team,” Islanders defenseman Travis Hamonic said.AdvertisementCAPITALS 2, HURRICANES 1 Alex Ovechkin scored in overtime as Washington picked up its 50th win of the season and became the first N.H.L. team to clinch a playoff spot with a victory against visiting Carolina.Ovechkin scored his seventh game-winner of the season 2:38 into overtime. The Capitals had already clinched a playoff berth by picking up a point. It is Washington’s eighth playoff appearance in nine seasons.KINGS 5, STARS 2 Tyler Toffoli scored again a night after ending a long goal drought, and Los Angeles capped an impressive back-to-back with a win against host Dallas.The Kings won for the fourth time in five games and are up to 89 points, 2 behind Dallas and St. Louis atop the West and 4 points ahead of Anaheim in the Pacific Division.FLYERS 4, RED WINGS 3  Michael Raffl scored two goals as Philadelphia won a pivotal game in its playoff push, defeating visiting Detroit.The Flyers have 78 points and pulled to within 1 point of the Red Wings for the final Eastern Conference wild-card playoff berth.Get the big sports news, highlights and analysis from Times journalists, with distinctive takes on games and some behind-the-scenes surprises, delivered to your inbox every week.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.PANTHERS 4, CANADIENS 1  Vincent Trochek scored a goal and set up one by Jiri Hudler as Florida defeated host Montreal.AdvertisementFlorida has won three of its last four games to stay in the tight battle for first place in the Atlantic Division with Tampa Bay and Boston.SENATORS 3, WILD 2 Erik Karlsson scored at 4:29 of overtime, and host Ottawa rallied to beat Minnesota.The Wild have a 1-point lead on Colorado for the final wild-card spot in the Western Conference.MAPLE LEAFS 4, LIGHTNING 1  Ben Smith and Connor Carrick scored their first goals of the season as host Toronto defeated Tampa Bay. With the win, the Maple Leafs have won back-to-back games and picked up points in four of their last five games.A version of this article appears in print on March 16, 2016, on Page B15 of the New York edition with the headline: Islanders Fall in a Shootout; Capitals Clinch.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.