By REBECCA R. RUIZMARCH 16, 2016
Organizations reeling from scandal rarely ask the government to reimburse them for their employees’ crimes. More often, they pay penalties.But FIFA — the ruling body of global soccer, at the center of a sprawling corruption case in the United States — is out to reclaim tens of millions of dollars.On Tuesday, FIFA asked the United States Justice Department for a share of the hundreds of millions that the authorities stand to collect from the defendants who have so far admitted to participating in longstanding bribery and kickback schemes.More valuable to FIFA than the money — which in the case of court-ordered restitution often amounts to pennies on the dollar — is what fighting for it symbolizes, legal experts say. The claim seeks to cement FIFA’s place as a victim in the eyes of both prosecutors and the public and to telegraph the organization’s distance from generations of disgraced leaders, some of whom were ousted as recently as December.Advertisement“It’s very important for reputational rehabilitation,” said Serina Vash, a former federal prosecutor and executive director of the program on corporate compliance and enforcement at New York University’s law school.AdvertisementSome question, however, just how changed FIFA is. While the organization approved a broad set of reforms last month, it has yet to conclude an ambitious internal inquiry into the “endemic” corruption that American authorities suggested would not end with the firing of any single individual.“If the government thought money was going to be siphoned back to bad actors,” said Antonia M. Apps, a lawyer with Milbank, Tweed, Hadley & McCloy, “it would probably fight giving it back.”Enabling FIFA’s request is the United States government itself, which has characterized the organization as a victim of its leaders’ crimes. A basic premise of the Justice Department’s case is that soccer officials robbed FIFA and its confederations of their honest services. That prompted FIFA, in estimating the financial damage done by defendants in the United States case, to include not only bribe money routed away from soccer but also the salaries and bonuses paid to people who were supposed to be supporting the sport.The timing of Tuesday’s filing — which argued that FIFA had lost at least $28 million paid to 20 soccer officials over 12 years and also stated that certain costs could not yet be fully assessed — was unusual, experts said. In typical criminal cases, victims do not raise their hands to collect money until closer to when defendants are sentenced; in this case, no one has been.Filing early provides no advantage in increasing the likelihood of a request being granted by the government, Ms. Apps said.But FIFA, a Swiss-based nonprofit organization, is eager to project a new culture of vigilance. Last month, the organization elected a new president and promised to enact changes, including better financial controls. Since last spring, it has withheld tens of millions of dollars from two confederations overseeing soccer in the Americas that are central to the United States case.Samir A. Gandhi, a lawyer for Sidley Austin who is representing Concacaf, the confederation overseeing soccer in North and Central America and the Caribbean, confirmed on Tuesday that Concacaf, too, planned to file for a share of the money collected by the American authorities. But he said it was too soon to do so.AdvertisementFIFA’s lawyers have in recent months balanced the urge to be early in staking a claim to victimhood with the necessity of allowing time to pass to establish distance from a leadership group tied to scandal.Tuesday’s letter to the authorities — signed by four lawyers from Quinn Emanuel, an American firm representing FIFA — suggested another motivation for the early request: concern that the money promised to the government might, without stricter supervision, be spent. The lawyers asserted that Jeffrey Webb, a former president of Concacaf who has pleaded guilty in the case and promised to pay roughly $7 million, “continues his extravagant lifestyle,” having reportedly thrown a lavish birthday party for his wife at his Atlanta-area home recently.In assessing FIFA’s claim, the United States government faces complexities. Establishing FIFA as a victim is crucial to proving certain charges in the case, especially honest services fraud.Even so, the organization does not automatically qualify for a portion of the money rounded up by the United States, Ms. Vash said. Federal law specifies that victims who “knowingly contribute to, participate in, benefit from or act in a willfully blind manner towards the commission of the offense” are unable to collect money, and they must prove they have not been otherwise compensated for their loss.“The United States could continue saying that FIFA was a corrupted organization and a victim,” Ms. Vash said. “And they could still, consistently, say that FIFA was willfully blind such that the organization should not be able to recover money.”Get the big sports news, highlights and analysis from Times journalists, with distinctive takes on games and some behind-the-scenes surprises, delivered to your inbox every week.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.Ms. Apps said it was possible for prosecutors to re-evaluate FIFA’s victim status as their investigation carried on. “I don’t think the government’s hands are tied,” she said.The authorities are not expected to rule on FIFA’s request until after the defendants in the case have been sentenced, which may be years away. Asked about the claim this week, the United States attorney’s office for the Eastern District of New York declined to comment.Sarah P. Kelly, a lawyer with Nutter McClennen & Fish, said the government might ultimately award FIFA money with certain conditions, creating a fund managed by a trustee or with parameters for spending.Advertisement“The court would have the power to order exactly where the money was going to go,” Ms. Kelly said. “You could see the money earmarked for youth soccer or another worthy cause.”Such a stipulation would follow corruption cases like the United Nations oil-for-food case, in which the United States District Court for the Southern District of New York specifically designated restitution money for a development fund in Iraq.In the private sector, such requests for restitution may be rarer but are not unheard-of. Wall Street firms like Morgan Stanley have sought repayment for the cost of aiding in government prosecutions of insider trading.In cooperating with the authorities in both the United States and Switzerland over the last 10 months, FIFA has incurred significant costs, as it noted in its filing to prosecutors on Tuesday. “The damages are ongoing,” FIFA’s lawyers wrote.Those legal bills are not expected to wind down just yet, as investigations continue and as the organization still has the option of filing civil lawsuits against the people charged by the United States, another path to recovering money funneled away from FIFA.Any such suits brought against people fighting charges in the United States, however, would most likely be put on hold until the criminal matters were resolved with the Justice Department.“To date, FIFA’s been without an adversary,” Ms. Vash said. “But if they become a litigant, that will change.”A version of this article appears in print on March 17, 2016, on Page B9 of the New York edition with the headline: Seeking Millions, FIFA Has Bigger Aim .  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.