By ZACH SCHONBRUNMARCH 16, 2016
You already know Duke, Xavier, Butler and even Austin Peay.But when the N.C.A.A. men’s basketball tournament’s round of 64 begins Thursday, fans can begin familiarizing themselves with a host of less familiar, more playful names: Scoochie. Yogi. Tubby. Tum Tum.Middle Tennessee State has brought a Giddy, and Weber State will have a Dusty. Arizona’s gregarious assistant coach is a Harlem native nicknamed Book. If Texas Tech advances, some of the credit will surely go to Pooh.The history of basketball has always been colorfully interwoven with imaginative nicknames — monikers that could instantly summon wonder (Magic), prompt a smile (Pickles) or trigger a craving (Jellybean).For the most part, nicknames have disappeared from basketball, replaced by tired initials (L.B.J., CP3, K.D.), corporate shorthand (Melo) or nothing at all (Stephen Curry). Knicks fans tried to label the rookie sensation Kristaps Porzingis with a cool alias, but none took.That is why this year’s N.C.A.A. tournament seems more like a throwback, a nod to the days when nicknames were vibrant and organic, borne of playground taunts, backyard boasts or, worse, the nursery, from which many of the more unfortunate nicknames emerged. This year, the tournament offers a symphony that should please fans and onomasticians alike.AdvertisementDayton’s Dayshon Smith, better known as Scoochie, is a Bronx native stirring memories of when nicknames consistently rolled off the tongue, even if it was never clear how they got there in the first place. Smith, like many, has claimed ignorance regarding the origin of his nickname, blaming his grandfather for turning baby babble into a lasting sobriquet.AdvertisementAt least the name Scoochie is different. When his Flyers face Syracuse on Friday, Smith will be reunited with an assistant coach who once recruited him, Adrian Autry, who is said to have acquired the nickname Red because of his hair color, even though it had already been claimed by notable coaches like Red Auerbach and Red Holzman.Pete Gillen, a Brooklyn native and former coach at Xavier, Providence and Virginia, caught himself daydreaming when he brought up Smith’s name on CBS late Sunday night, chuckling quietly as he reminisced about the names from the playgrounds of his youth.“Batman, Bullhead, Sid, Shorty,” Gillen said, listing a few of his favorites in a phone interview Monday. “Joey Roastbeef. Joey Clams. Three-Finger Willie was pretty good.”Gillen added, “And, of course, there was Slice.”Yes, of course, Slice (legal name: Barry Rohrssen), now the associate head coach at St. John’s, whose campus is not far from the gym at St. Francis College, where his nickname was bestowed at a Five-Star basketball camp by one of its founders, Howard Garfinkel. Rohrssen was not a great shooter; he preferred cutting to the hoop. So Slice became his handle well before there was Twitter.“The really good names stay alive,” said Tom Konchalski, a longtime scout and the editor and publisher of High School Basketball Illustrated.“In New York, if you talk about the Hawk, everyone knows who that is,” he said, referring to Connie Hawkins, the former Brooklyn playground legend. Konchalski cited Dwayne Washington as a personal favorite, although he preferred Washington’s lesser-known nickname (Pacman, because he stole the ball so much) to his more common one (Pearl).
      The first day of the N.C.A.A. men's tournament is one of the craziest 10 hours in sports. Stay here for all the upsets, buzzer-beaters and Cinderella stories.
    Most of the nicknames in this year’s tournament were endowed by family members rather than basketball peers. Kevin Ferrell, a senior guard for Indiana, earned his playful moniker, Yogi, as a toddler because of his affection for the cartoon character Yogi Bear. Michigan’s Michael Joseph Albrecht, better known as Spike, was so named because of his obsession over baseball cleats he wore at age 5.Advertisement“Here I am, 20 years old, and people are still calling me Spike,” Albrecht said  in 2013.Indeed, some names are hard to shake. Texas Tech Coach Orlando Smith will forever be known in basketball circles as Tubby, though he has always remained relatively trim (the nickname was given because Smith adored bathing in a washtub as a toddler). Smith’s assistant Alvin Williamson still answers to Pooh because his aunt thought he resembled Winnie the Pooh.“Nobody knows my first name,” said Speedy Claxton, an assistant coach at Hofstra, who got his well-known nickname from a coach in an eighth-grade A.A.U. game. Now, Claxton said, he cannot go through an airport without a security agent asking why his passport reads Craig.“Sometimes the N.B.A. would make my check out to Speedy,” Claxton said, adding, “That’s how you know you have a real nickname — when people don’t realize you have a first name.”Nicknames, by historical definition, cannot be self-given, according to Cleveland Kent Evans, a psychology professor at Bellevue University in Nebraska and a former president of the American Name Society. He suggested that rap music and social media innovations like Twitter handles might be behind the resurgence of nicknames, but that their popularity had waned in general society because given names had become much more varied.“Forty or 50 years ago, when you had multiple Mikes and Johns and Jims everywhere, you needed nicknames just to keep them apart,” Evans said.Working-class people tend to use more nicknames than others, as a sign of camaraderie, and men are more likely to get nicknames than women, Evans said. What sort of impact a catchy nickname has on a person largely depends on the context of his social circle. A name like Tubby might not be as bad as it seems.“Even something which sounds pejorative or nasty outside your own social group, you can accept it and like it,” Evans said, “if it’s used with good humor by your own friends.”
            Get the latest tweets from @NYTSports, including breaking news, analysis and live updates.        Some names just have to be altered. The Arizona assistant coach Emanuel Richardson was nicknamed Pocketbook by his grandmother because she would catch him riffling through her purse. The name was eventually shortened on the basketball courts, where “book” became a synonym for “sprint.”Advertisement“To this day, my mom, my grandma, they still call me Pocketbook,” Richardson said. “I tell them, ‘If you want to still stay in this will, it had better be just Book.’ ”Claxton said his nickname used to make him feel special on the court, and he used it as a psychological advantage over opponents. “It definitely gave me confidence,” he said. “It’s cool having a nickname. I kind of loved it.”If that is the case, tiny Hampton, which faces top-seeded Virginia as a No. 16 seed Thursday, could be the most confident team in the tournament. Coach Edward Joyner Jr. goes by Little Buck, in deference to his father, who became known around Winston-Salem, N.C., as Buck. Also playing for the Pirates will be Pastor Don (Donald Ross) and Swaggy P (Gregory Hayden). Hampton’s leading scorer, Reginald Johnson Jr., is known as Check.“Check is an opportunity, never miss an opportunity, and I take advantage of everything,” Johnson said. “I gave that nickname to myself at the start of this season.”That might not pass Evans’s classic nickname guidelines, but it could stick anyway.“Life’s too short — have some fun along your journey,” Gillen said. “Like Scoochie — he’s a terrific player, and he’s got a great nickname. You don’t meet too many Scoochies.”An article on Thursday about nicknames in men’s college basketball misspelled the surname of the Indiana University guard who is called Yogi. He is Kevin Ferrell, not Farrell.Ray Glier and Peter May contributed reporting.A version of this article appears in print on March 17, 2016, on Page B9 of the New York edition with the headline: What’s in a Nickname? Ask Scoochie, Yogi or Tubby .  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.