By VICTOR MATHERMARCH 15, 2016
The fastest format of cricket, Twenty20, is seldom predictable. That was proved again in the opening game of the World Twenty20 championship Tuesday when heavily favored India managed to lose to unheralded New Zealand in Nagpur.India is hosting the event for the first time. Home-pitch advantage and the fanatical fans who have made cricket king on the subcontinent should be providing a big edge to a team that is ranked No. 1 in the world in Twenty20.India’s bowlers blitzed through New Zealand, limiting them to only 126 runs, a total India seemed sure to surpass. But India’s batsmen lost four wickets in the first five overs and managed just 79, stunning a stadium full of fans eager to celebrate a victory.
            This has been a exhibition on how not to play spin by the so called best players of spin in the world ..!!!!!!! #INDvsNZ #ICCWT20 Twenty20 international matches, lasting only about three hours, began in 2005 as organizers worldwide looked for ways to make cricket more exciting and relevant. By 2007, they were ready for a world championship, and no team has dominated it. Five different teams have won the five editions so far: India, Pakistan, England, West Indies and Sri Lanka.AdvertisementThe unpredictability of the format means that there may be another new champion this year. Australia has won four of the last five editions of the longer-format World Cup, and the team includes the world’s top-ranked batsman, Aaron Finch, and the top all-rounder, Shane Watson.AdvertisementSouth Africa has fallen short in so many tournaments — in 16 World Cups and World Twenty20s, it has never made a final — that it is often forgotten how much talent it has. The likes of Faf du Plessis and Quinton de Kock should put up some big totals that will be difficult for opponents to chase.Still, despite the opening loss, India has a formidable lineup and a cricket tradition like no other in the world. The omens are there: In 2007, India lost an early match to New Zealand in this tournament, but went on to win.A similar comeback after Tuesday’s debacle would be a surprising result right in line with Twenty20 history.We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.