By BEN SHPIGELMAY 30, 2016
PITTSBURGH — Every N.H.L. coach is, to some degree, a salesman. Instead of hawking insurance or knives, he peddles a less tangible commodity: belief. If this pack of alpha males does this and not that, if it just trusts him and the process, then glory will follow.The transformation that ushered the Pittsburgh Penguins to the Stanley Cup finals began on Dec. 12, when Mike Sullivan stood before them, hours after taking over, and summoned his powers of persuasion.In his booming baritone, Sullivan commanded the meeting. He conveyed his agenda in blunt terms. He saw a group that would dazzle for a period, maybe a game, before reverting to poor habits. He saw great players, stars like Sidney Crosby and Evgeni Malkin and Kris Letang, but not a great team. He wanted opponents to despise playing the Penguins, unable to contain their pace and skill, and they would soon enough, he told them.“The players were all at a point where we knew what we were doing wasn’t good enough, it wasn’t right, and we needed to buy into something,” said defenseman Ben Lovejoy, who added, “We were all at a point where we were going to do what we were told.”AdvertisementSullivan explained his ideal that day, and every day since. His candid approach connected with the disparate personalities in the Penguins’ locker room, where no one ever worries where he stands with Sullivan. Under his stewardship, they rampaged across the league, going 33-16-5 the rest of the season and 12-6 in the playoffs, where he has navigated a thorny goalie situation with aplomb. They clinched all three series at Consol Energy Center, where the joy ride continues in Game 1 on Monday night against San Jose.AdvertisementIt is the Penguins’ first finals appearance since 2009, when another coach promoted during the season from the organization’s affiliate in Wilkes-Barre, Pa., Dan Bylsma, guided them to a title. At the time, Bylsma was the youngest coach in the N.H.L., an ascending talent, much as Sullivan was when he was hired 13 years ago at age 35 to coach his hometown Boston Bruins.His two seasons straddled a lockout, and he could not coax a second playoff berth out of a roster gutted by injuries, free agency and trades. This series, he will have to contend with the impact of one such deal: Joe Thornton, the Sharks’ playmaking center.Sullivan’s experience in Boston taught him a lot about what he did not know. He recognized the importance of filling in those gaps by serving as an assistant, honing the craft for seven seasons, six of them spent with John Tortorella in Tampa Bay, New York and Vancouver.“If an opportunity presented itself like this one,” Sullivan said Sunday, “I would be more prepared for it.”Sullivan left his post in player development for the Chicago Blackhawks to work in Wilkes-Barre/Scranton, which has a reputation for being an excellent incubator for coaches, players and executives. He subjugated his ego to return to the minor leagues for the first time since 2002, when, a few months after retiring, he called Mike O’Connell, his first professional coach and then the Bruins’ general manager, to express his interest in coaching their top affiliate, in Providence, R.I.As O’Connell remembers it, he told Sullivan, “Mike, I like you a lot, and I don’t know if I really want to do this to you.” To which Sullivan replied, “Yes, you do.”Get the big sports news, highlights and analysis from Times journalists, with distinctive takes on games and some behind-the-scenes surprises, delivered to your inbox every week.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.“You’ve got to give people a chance sometimes,” O’Connell, a senior adviser with the Kings, said in a telephone interview.AdvertisementSullivan took such advantage that when the Bruins fired Robbie Ftorek with nine games remaining in 2003, O’Connell elevated him to serve as a top assistant. He began running practices and offering his thoughts on personnel, cultivating respect among his charges — many of whom he played against — by being firm but fair, demanding but not overbearing, an expert communicator. His career as a player — despite never scoring more than nine goals in a season, he retained enough value as a reliable defensive-minded forward to last 11 years in the N.H.L. — informed his coaching style.“Anything he’s asking you to do as a player, he’s done,” Mike Knuble, who played for Sullivan in Boston, said in a telephone interview. “If he’s asking you to block a shot, he made a career blocking shots. He did the dirty work in the corners. He walked the walk.”That credibility infused his dealings with the Penguins, who needed a strong voice to restore accountability. He learned, across his coaching stops, the magnitude of having a strong connection with the star players.“No matter what position or what the detail is, everything is important,” Crosby said.Sullivan leaned on veterans like Crosby, Matt Cullen and Eric Fehr to help reinforce his message, and he had the benefit of having forged relationships at Wilkes-Barre/Scranton with several young players who came to emerge as important contributors in Pittsburgh.When Sullivan decided to bench the rookie goaltender Matt Murray for Marc-Andre Fleury in Game 5 of the conference finals against Tampa Bay, he spent 10 minutes with Murray explaining his decision. Murray just walked out, satisfied.“He trusts us and we trust him,” the rookie wing Conor Sheary said of Sullivan.Sullivan demanded a commitment to defense while concocting tactical changes that maximized the Penguins’ greatest asset: their speed. Playing that style at both ends unlocked production from Crosby and the sniper Phil Kessel. But it also demands consistent effort from four lines, and when Sullivan sensed that their conditioning was lacking, he increased the intensity of their practices. He considers video review an essential tool, and when it is warranted, no one is spared from criticism.“No matter who you are up and down the lineup, he wants you playing defense, he wants you backchecking,” Sheary said after practice Saturday. “He’ll show you all these things and make sure you’re doing them. If you’re not, you’re going to hear from him.”In Sullivan’s meritocracy, he rewards responsible two-way players with ice time. Nick Bonino has averaged almost as much as Malkin in these playoffs, and at times Sullivan has elevated rookies like Bryan Rust and Tom Kuhnhackl to play alongside Crosby.Advertisement“He reads the game to get his best players on the ice at the right time, and I don’t think he had that in his bag of tricks back in 2003,” said the NHL Network analyst Brian Lawton, who played with Sullivan on the inaugural Sharks teams and served as vice president for hockey operations when Sullivan was at Tampa Bay. “I’m sure he understood the concept, but I just don’t think his senses as a coach were where they are today.”Sullivan has a penetrating glare and a rigid jaw line, and he is as serious, Lawton said, as any coach he has known. But Sullivan allowed himself to smile Saturday when asked about his influence — his salesmanship job, if you will — on a team that, improbable as it seemed five months ago, is four victories from winning the Stanley Cup.“When we play a certain way, we’re a very good team and we’re hard to play against,” Sullivan said. “And that’s how I see it.”A version of this article appears in print on May 30, 2016, on Page D6 of the New York edition with the headline: A Booming Call to Order in Pittsburgh Has Led to the Finals.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.