By THE ASSOCIATED PRESSMAY 3, 2017
NASHVILLE — Three years ago, David Poile, the general manager of the Nashville Predators, let go of Barry Trotz, the only coach the team had ever had, and hired Peter Laviolette to inject more offense into the lineup.The payoff has been the best start by any team in this N.H.L. postseason. Nashville is a win away from its first conference finals appearance in franchise history. It leads St. Louis, three games to one, in their Western Conference semifinal series, after a 2-1 victory on Tuesday night. Game 5 is Friday night at St. Louis.“It’s in our own hands, for sure,” goaltender Pekka Rinne said.The Predators are 7-1 in these playoffs, and the only undefeated team on home ice. They have gotten goals from 13 players, and are spreading the wealth: Seven players have scored a game-winner.The Predators are led by their top line of Ryan Johansen, Filip Forsberg and Viktor Arvidsson, who have combined for 21 points. The Nashville defensive corps has a league-high eight goals to go with 14 assists. Ryan Ellis leads all defensemen with 9 points and has the league’s longest playoff points streak since 1998 at seven games.AdvertisementCredit Laviolette’s aggressive offensive scheme, which lets everyone shoot at the net. He also has a knack for plugging players into the lineup at the right time.Advertisement“It’s a five-man game in all zones, and conversely the offense won’t work three-on-five,” Laviolette said of including defensemen in the attack. “If it’s just our three and five of their guys defending, we’re not going to create. There’s a fine line with that, but our guys do a pretty good job defending and taking care of that, and offensively five guys making sure we attack.”During the regular season, the Predators tied for the league lead with 12 players scoring at least 10 goals. They also tied San Jose for the most points (181) scored by defensemen, led by Roman Josi with 49.Get the big sports news, highlights and analysis from Times journalists, with distinctive takes on games and some behind-the-scenes surprises, delivered to your inbox every week.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.Laviolette has taken advantage of Nashville’s fast-skating blue liners, giving them the freedom to attack the net with the flow of the puck. They love to take advantage.“Everyone right now is really putting an emphasis on getting up ice and getting those opportunities,” defenseman Mattias Ekholm said, adding that Ellis, P.K. Subban, Yannick Weber and Matt Irwin were doing a great job. As a defense, he said, “we’re just trying to play our game and do it to our strength.”The final piece came last June when Poile stunned the N.H.L. by sending his captain and star defenseman, Shea Weber, to Montreal for Subban as part of an effort to add even more offense to the lineup. Subban had 40 points in 66 games during his first regular season in Nashville, and he has 6 points in eight games in these playoffs.Subban said the key to the defensemen scoring so well was the ability to make the smart read in a second. He added that the presence of the assistant coach Phil Housley, who is fourth among defensemen in career scoring, on the bench helped.“I feel very confident coming back to the bench to know that if we’re not sure about something or make a mistake that it can be corrected,” Subban said.AdvertisementThen there’s Laviolette’s knack for putting in a player at just the right time.Harry Zolnierczyk, a 29-year-old left winger, had only 4 points in 24 games during the regular season. Laviolette has already played Zolnierczyk in six games in his first postseason. He came through with his first playoff goal in a Game 2 victory over Chicago. He also had an assist and provided a key screen on Josi’s final goal in a 3-1 win in Game 3 against St. Louis on Sunday.Laviolette inserted the veteran Vern Fiddler into the lineup for the first game against St. Louis, and Fiddler responded with the winning goal. Cody McLeod, who also sat out against Chicago, scored the winner on Sunday.Subban credits players who have bought into what Laviolette wants to do.“We don’t care who’s First Star at the end of the night,” Subban said. “Whoever gets the recognition, it’s just about how we’re playing, and everybody pulling in the right direction, and we have that.”We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.