By AARON R. COHENMAY 28, 2016
As the 1986 Mets reunite this weekend at Citi Field, fans, too, are looking back on what was a dream season from start to finish. But for a small group of Mets fanatics working at Major League Baseball Productions that year, the season was an experience that surpassed any conceivable fantasy. After all, they got to go along for the ride.The group was part of a cadre of M.L.B. staff members assigned at the start of the season to produce a video chronicling the team’s campaign. The resulting project — a 60-minute documentary called “A Year to Remember” — ended up telling a story as dramatic and triumphant as any Hollywood movie. And behind the scenes, what unfolded was just as exhilarating.“When you worked at M.L.B. Productions, you got assigned to work on projects about different teams,” said David Israel, a lifelong Mets fan and an associate producer of the video who was just 24 in 1986. “You did your job, and you were happy to do your job, but you didn’t necessarily love it. But the bosses tried when they could to put you on teams that you loved because it would bring out the passion. And to work on a Mets highlight film, when they were winning, was the greatest.”Roy Epstein, another producer and fan, said: “I was two years out of college. My senior year in 1984, I was the guy who asked the sociology professor to delay the midterm because it was opening day. Then, two years later, I’m in the Mets’ clubhouse.”AdvertisementThe production group spent months filming the team, beginning during spring training in St. Petersburg, Fla., and continuing through the final out of the World Series at Shea Stadium. Along the way, the producers got to know the players and had a front-row seat to observe a club known as much for its compelling characters as its dominating play.“The Mets were very cooperative,” said Steve Stern, who was the writer of the film and a fan in the stands at Shea when the Mets won their first World Series championship in 1969. “Players liked doing that stuff. You just needed the right team for it — and they were the right team.”AdvertisementWhat resulted was a video that remains extremely popular with the club’s fan base, available on YouTube, frequently mentioned on fan blogs and still occasionally played at Citi Field during rain delays. And since 1986 was long before the days of the Internet and on-demand highlights, it has endured as a video museum of sorts, immortalizing regular-season games that would have otherwise been forgotten.“There are very few movies in that stratosphere for me,” said Charlie Stein, a lifelong Mets fan who was only 2 in 1986 but became intimately familiar with the team by watching the video over and over again as he grew up. “It’s one of the greatest pieces of media ever put together.”Whether or not that is hyperbole, the video is more than a straightforward chronicle of a 108-victory regular season (the most games the Mets have ever won) followed by thrilling victories in the National League Championship Series against the Houston Astros and the World Series against the Boston Red Sox.There are as many as a half-dozen music videos contained within the video, and a comic vignette featuring reliever Roger McDowell and infielder Howard Johnson explaining the intricacies of how to make the perfect hot foot, a prank popular with the team that involved setting a victim’s shoe on fire.“We shot the hot-foot segment during a long rain delay,” Epstein said. “They were rolling that thing for 45 minutes. You couldn’t get away with doing that today — using cigarettes, showing kids how to light a fire.”Perhaps the most memorable night of the regular season was Sept. 17, when the club clinched the N.L. East title.Advertisement“We were in the locker room during the celebration, and it was mayhem in there,” Epstein said. “McDowell is running around. I look at David Israel, and I say, ‘These guys are going to get hurt.’“It was crazy. And later that night, after the craziness, a bunch of guys went out onto the pitcher’s mound, and I remember Bobby Ojeda in a wet Mets T-shirt, with a cigar, shaking like he just did a polar bear plunge. I remember thinking, ‘Get this guy a towel! This is my season!’ ”A few weeks later, the producers were alongside the Mets in Houston when the N.L.C.S. began.“I was in the third-base camera position inside the dugout for Game 1,” Stern said. “Afterward, the cameraman said to me, ‘We’ve got a new rule. You cannot be here with us.’ ”It was, Stern said, “because I kept jumping up and down.’’“I was purely a fan, at this point,” he said. “I cared way more about winning the game than anything else. It was as unprofessional as it gets. The fact that the film got done is a miracle.”Production continued throughout the playoffs and the World Series, and then the pace of work increased after the Mets won it all. Bob Klug, who later became the director of “60 Minutes,” edited a mystical, ethereal opening sequence dramatizing the Mets’ epic Game 6 comeback in the Series.Stern, who later won three Peabody Awards for his work, including HBO’s “When It Was a Game” series, wrote a script that was narrated by the actor Larry Keith. And other staffers like Epstein worked on the musical montages that included the Duran Duran song “The Wild Boys,” for a sequence on the team’s table-setters, Lenny Dykstra and Wally Backman; Bob Seger’s “Like a Rock,” focusing on the team’s leaders, Gary Carter and Keith Hernandez; and Glenn Frey’s “You Belong to the City,” which celebrated the Mets as New York’s own.Today, producers might gasp at the licensing fees required to put popular songs like that in a video. In 1986, things were a bit different.“I’m pretty sure no one understood what licensing was back then,” Stern said. “It’s on the radio — why we can’t use it?”AdvertisementThe players evidently took notice as well.“Sometime later, I found out that Wally Backman had bought a boat and named it Wild Boys,” Epstein said.The production team worked through a lot of nights to finish the video in time for it to be released for the holidays. But before it could be completed, the Mets had to approve it in full, including a sequence celebrating the team’s predilection for base-clearing brawls.“We were in the meeting, showing the film to the Mets, and got to the part featuring the Ray Knight-Eric Davis fight,” Stern said, referring to the brawl that erupted in a Mets-Reds game in Cincinnati on July 22. After various players were ejected, the episode led to Gary Carter playing third base and McDowell and Jesse Orosco shuttling between the outfield and the pitcher’s mound, depending on which Cincinnati batter was at the plate.Get the big sports news, highlights and analysis from Times journalists, with distinctive takes on games and some behind-the-scenes surprises, delivered to your inbox every week.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.Making it all the more memorable was that the Mets won the game in the 14th inning on a three-run homer by Johnson.Stern said Al Harazin, an assistant general manager, was in the meeting and ending up agreeing that the sequence should be included in the video. “And Epstein gets up and high-fives Al Harazin,” Stern said.Thirty years later, the portrait of the team endures — for both the production crew and the fans who have viewed the video over and over again.“I’ve met high-level people in the entertainment business,” said Israel, who went on to produce such shows as “3rd Rock From the Sun” and “Grounded for Life.” “When they find out I was on the field, and in the clubhouse, I’m their hero. We talk about the film, and we talk about the season. We’re geeky kids all over again. It was pure joy working on it.”Meanwhile, for younger fans like the 31-year-old Stein, who is a bartender in Brooklyn, the video is almost as meaningful. He said he has staged screenings of it for friends.“It’s mandatory viewing for anyone I get close to,” he said. “I just started seeing a girl a few weeks ago. She was really bummed out about something, and I said, ‘Let me show you something that you’ll love — it’s the ’86 Mets highlight video.’Advertisement“Now it’s entered the lexicon of our relationship. It’s life-changing.”A version of this article appears in print on May 29, 2016, on Page SP4 of the New York edition with the headline: In Capturing Drama of the ’86 Mets, Videographers Were Left Captivated.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.