AdvertisementSupported byBy David WaldsteinPARIS — The tears are becoming habitual for Shelby Rogers. She stood on court for the second consecutive match, her racket at her feet and tears flowing down her cheeks, while she savored her latest stunning victory.Rogers had never been to the fourth round of a major tournament before Sunday, but once there she demonstrated all the composure of an experienced hand, smothering the 25th-seeded Irina-Camelia Begu, 6-3, 6-4, on Suzanne Lenglen Court for her fourth straight upset victory and a date in the French Open quarterfinals against Garbiñe Muguruza.With a No. 108 ranking and four straight wins on the rust-colored clay of Roland Garros, Rogers may be the most unexpected American hit in France since Jerry Lewis.“I keep reminding myself to play one point at a time and that this is just another tennis match,” an elated Rogers said after the match. “But that’s getting a little bit harder to do as the rounds get farther.”With each successive challenge, Rogers has produced an almost shocking victory, much to the dismay of No. 17 Karolina Pliskova, Elena Vesnina, No. 10 Petra Kvitova and now Begu.When she earned her spot in the fourth round by beating Kvitova in three sets, Rogers reacted to the winning point by dropping her racket and putting her hands to her face as tears leaked out.It was much the same on Sunday, although she had an easier time with Begu. The players were on serve in the second set, with Begu serving at 4-5. Rogers won the first point, then was faced with a high, bouncing ball that had drifted well wide to her backhand.Begu seemed to calculate that she had won the point, but Rogers pounced on it and hit a backhand around the pole for a winner. Begu looked anguished. Three points later, Begu hit long, and again, Rogers dropped her racket, put her hands to her face and cried.“One hundred percent tears all the time,” she said, laughing. “Sad, happy, hungry, reading a book, watching a movie. They flow very easily.”This time, during a postmatch interview, Marion Bartoli, the former player from France, provided a tissue, which gave Rogers the opportunity to beam.There was less emotion on display when No. 2 Andy Murray disposed of the last remaining American man, No. 15 John Isner, on a damp day in which matches were again delayed by rain. The soggy conditions slowed Isner’s thunderous serve, and after a tough first set, Murray won handily, 7-6 (9), 6-4, 6-3.“I don’t think the conditions had much to do with it,” Isner said. “I have lost to Andy on every surface.”Richard Gasquet, the No. 9-seeded Frenchman, delighted the fans on Philippe Chatrier Court by holding on to beat No. 5 Kei Nishikori, 6-4, 6-2, 4-6, 6-2. It was also a good day for Stan Wawrinka, last year’s champion and the No. 3 seed. He also needed a fourth set but beat No. 22 Viktor Troicki, 7-6 (5), 6-7 (7), 6-3, 6-2.The biggest upset on the men’s side belonged to Albert Ramos-Viñolas of Spain, who defeated the eighth-seeded Canadian Milos Raonic, 6-2, 6-4, 6-4. Ramos-Viñolas, 28, is ranked 55th in the world and has reached the fourth round at a major tournament for the first time.In women’s doubles, Venus and Serena Williams defeated Vitalia Diatchenko and Galina Voskoboeva, 7-6 (8), 4-6, 6-0, in a continuation of a match that had been suspended after the first set on Saturday. But only about two hours later, the Williams sisters took to the court again for their third-round encounter against Kiki Bertens and Johanna Larsson, who won, 6-3, 6-3.Ousted in doubles, the Williams sisters can concentrate solely on singles, where each is scheduled to play a fourth-round match on Monday. They are on the opposite side of the draw from Rogers and Muguruza, who have played each other just once. Muguruza beat Rogers in straight sets on hardcourts last year in Miami.But the red clay seems to be Rogers’s preferred surface. She grew up in South Carolina, not far from the site of the WTA tournament in Charleston, where the clay is green. But Rogers noted that the first time she played on red clay, at an International Tennis Federation junior tournament in Llanos de Curundu, Panama, eight years ago, she won twice.“Can I just say I won singles and doubles first time on red clay?” she playfully pointed out during her news conference. “I want to add that.”Still, for Rogers, 23, to get this far is a most unexpected achievement. She was the second-to-last player accepted into the main draw, but she has never played better. She has never won a singles title, and her best year-end ranking was 72 in 2014. Injuries hampered her play last year, and she fell to No. 146.Her previous best performance in 10 major tournaments was a third-round showing at the United States Open last year.Now her task grows more challenging as she enters the second week of a major tournament for the first time. Taking down the No. 4 Muguruza, one of the most complete players on tour when her game is honed, would be no easy feat.On Sunday, Muguruza defeated No. 13-seeded Svetlana Kuznetsova — a French Open champion in 2009 — 6-3, 6-4, and advanced to the French Open quarterfinals for the third straight year.“I’m ready to step up to the challenge,” Rogers said. “I have nothing to lose. I have no pressure. It’s just been a great experience here, and I want to keep enjoying it and keep pushing myself. I’m definitely outside of my comfort zone already. I keep telling myself, ‘You belong here, you belong here.’ ”Rogers may not feel any pressure, but Muguruza’s confidence is soaring. A finalist at last year’s Wimbledon, Muguruza has never been past the quarterfinals at the French Open.“This is where I have stopped in the past,” Muguruza said, “which means I’m extremely motivated to move on.”But the same goes for Rogers. She said that she had gone to her parents to hug them in celebration (tears still flowing, of course) after each match, and each time, they had told her the same thing: “You’re not done.”Advertisement