By RICHARD SANDOMIRJULY 25, 2016
COOPERSTOWN, N.Y. — The line of fans to see Mike Piazza and Ken Griffey Jr.’s Baseball Hall of Fame plaques early Monday snaked through the plaque gallery, up a ramp and almost to the A. Bartlett Giamatti Research Center. It would take nearly 90 minutes for some to see the gallery’s newest additions.But it was still an opportunity for fans who attended Sunday’s induction ceremonies to get close to the plaques that they had been able to see, briefly, only on video screens at the Clark Sports Center, where a gathering of about 50,000 had celebrated the players.The plaques, with Griffey’s and Piazza’s the first to be sculpted by Tom Tsuchiya, are popular objects. They usually draw a crowd hours after each induction when they are unveiled at the gallery wall and then attract even bigger crowds on Mondays before fans leave Cooperstown.“This is our first time at the Hall,” said Eric Barrans, who flew from Seattle with his father, Norm, and brother, Paul, to honor Griffey, the first Mariner elected to the Hall. “And maybe we’ll never come back. So we had to do this.”AdvertisementPiazza’s plaque will leave its spot Friday for a trip to the Flushing neighborhood of Queens, where it will be part of the retirement ceremony for his No. 31 on Saturday at Citi Field. Griffey’s plaque will be moved temporarily to Seattle on Aug. 3 for a weekend of events at Safeco Field in connection with the retirement of his No. 24. The plaques will return quickly to Cooperstown; they do not travel the world with their honorees the way the Stanley Cup does with members of the N.H.L.’s championship team.Get the big sports news, highlights and analysis from Times journalists, with distinctive takes on games and some behind-the-scenes surprises, delivered to your inbox every week.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.For Joyce Eblen, who grew up in Norristown, Pa., Piazza’s birthplace, viewing the plaque was an essential part of the weekend. She and her husband, Milt, who live in Myrtle Beach, N.C., celebrated their 44th anniversary here.AdvertisementBut her mind was clearly on Piazza.“Even if one of my sons was getting married, I’d be here,” she said after joining the line in the late afternoon, by which time it had shortened considerably.Piazza represents to Eblen nothing short of the fulfillment of the American dream, she said.“You can be the lowest draft pick possible and still make it to the Hall of Fame,” she said, referring to Piazza’s selection in the 62nd round by the Los Angeles Dodgers in 1988.Jessica McQuillan, 17, of New Hampton, N.Y., said that growing up in a family of Mets fans had led to her Piazza devotion and the need to see his plaque. But earlier in the day, she did something more personal than get a look at his plaque; she got his autograph and posed for a picture with him.“It made me cry,” she said. “He’s just such a nice guy.”Todd Suarez and his son, Tanner, who began playing catcher because it was Piazza’s position, came from Waynesville, N.C., because of their love of the Mets.Why the need to see Piazza’s plaque?“He changed the face of the Mets,” Todd Suarez said.A version of this article appears in print on July 26, 2016, on Page B11 of the New York edition with the headline: Day After Hall Ceremony, It’s Plaques That Attract.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.