AdvertisementSupported byBy Richard SandomirCOOPERSTOWN, N.Y. — Kylee Cotterell’s devotion to Mike Piazza is so deep that she got a signed Piazza jersey for her communion gift and, when she was 11, carried a life-size cardboard cutout of the former Mets catcher through the streets of Manhattan for 12 hours before packing it up for the flight home with her family to Boca Raton, Fla.“I just love him so much,” Cotterell, 26, said. “I thought one day we’d be married.”On Sunday, as she awaited Piazza’s induction into the National Baseball Hall of Fame on the lawn of the Clark Sports Center, Cotterell vowed to cry through the ceremony, much as she did on the day she learned of his election to the Hall.She did, but she was not the only one crying. Piazza and his fellow inductee, Ken Griffey Jr., wept through their speeches. They could not go more than a couple of minutes without choking up and wiping away tears. Piazza began sniffling early, as he talked about Griffey’s talent, a minor league batting coach, his Dodgers teammate Eric Karros, Mets fans and his influential father, Vince, who had a stroke a few years ago and has largely recovered.“We made it, Dad,” Piazza said, his voice cracking. “The race is over.”Afterward, the elder Piazza said: “What can I say? He got me all choked up.”Griffey also had difficulty reining in his emotions after looking at his three children earlier in the speech than he intended. Talking about his father, Ken Sr., moved him. They share more than a father-son bond, but intertwined baseball lives. Ken Sr. played for the Cincinnati Reds’ Big Red Machine era teams and the Yankees before joining his son with the Seattle Mariners in 1990 and 1991.“To my dad,” Griffey Jr. said, and momentarily cried. “Who taught me how to play the game, but more importantly how to be a man.”Hall of Famers are known to cry at their inductions but not all do. They’re usually expected to as they look out upon tens of thousands of fans and talk about the path they have taken. Bill Mazeroski, the Pittsburgh Pirates second baseman, wept so unabashedly during his speech in 2001 that he ended it after two and a half minutes.Piazza told reporters later, “I was just trying to get through it.”A crowd estimated at 50,000 filled the lawn at the Clark Sports Center, turning it into a Griffey-Piazza Woodstock (without the mud and nudity), with fans in folding chairs, chaise longues and on blankets wearing Griffey and Piazza jerseys.The fan passions appeared to be evenly split between fans of the players — Griffey being the first Hall of Famer to wear a Seattle cap on his bronze plaque and Piazza becoming the first Mets’ Hall of Famer to be enshrined since Tom Seaver in 1992. Seaver, who suffers from the effects of Lyme disease, was unable to attend.About 700 members of the 7 Line Army, a Mets fan group that schedules road trips for its members, boarded 13 buses to back Piazza. They slept overnight on the grounds of the nearby Ommegang brewery.Andrew Indart, who is known as the General within the group, said: “I was born in 1987, so I never got to watch Seaver pitch. It’s great to be here to see Piazza get in, and he’s our first position player in the Hall.”Fred Wilpon, the Mets’ principal owner, led a contingent from the team to support Piazza, who was traded to the Mets in 1998, signed a long-term deal and made an indelible mark on the history of the franchise, and New York, when he hit a home-run to win the Mets’ first game after the terror attacks of Sept. 11, 2001.“We’re all thrilled that he chose to go in as a Met,” Wilpon said before the ceremony. “And what’s great is that he’s really showing his enthusiasm.”The turnout was the most since more than 75,000 attended the inductions of Tony Gwynn and Cal Ripken Jr. in 2007. But there was a bit of sadness on a sun-drenched day without the usual threat of a thunderstorm. Rod Carew, who is soon to start the process of getting a heart transplant, needed the help of two men to walk to his seat on the stage, and Whitey Ford, 87, needed an escort from Joe Torre. Some other mainstays, like Hank Aaron and Joe Morgan, did not attend. Another usual attendee, Lou Brock, had a leg amputated late last year and did not travel here.There was, however, joy in the recounting of two major league careers: Griffey, whose brilliant career featured 630 home runs and a long highlight reel of spectacular catches, and Piazza, the 62nd-round draft pick who overcame skeptics who could not foresee he would become the greatest offensive catcher in baseball history.Piazza’s speech recalled an early encounter with Griffey (“You robbed me of a ball in the gap in instructional league”); getting batting tips at age 15 from Ted Williams; wondering how the slight, young Pedro Martinez could throw as hard as he did when both were being nurtured at the Dodgers’ academy in the Dominican Republic; and taking batting practice as a young Dodger off Sandy Koufax.He cited his religious faith as a bulwark in his life, quoted Pope Benedict XVI and Teddy Roosevelt and praised his father in Italian (giving thanks to “the country of Italy for giving me the gift of my father”). And when he recounted his 9/11 home run against the Atlanta Braves on Sept. 21, 2001, he lauded the heroism of the police, the firefighters and the first-responders who “knew they were going to die and went forward anyway.”Griffey recalled mentors like Rickey Henderson and Dave Winfield, teammates including Jay Buhner (“my brother from another mother”), and the perils of facing his teammate Randy Johnson in spring training “when he had no control.”And after returning to the fun of playing with his father (“I got to yell at him and tell him to get a hit”) and his pride in being a Mariner, he ended on a silent note: He put on a Mariners cap, backward, in the style of his younger self.Afterward, he said the gesture was not his idea, but Frank Thomas’s.“When we showed up here, Frank said, ‘You’ve got to do it!’”And he did, to the delight of Mariners fans like Marvin Brooks.“If not for Ken Griffey, I wouldn’t have given a butt about baseball,” said Brooks, who traveled from Baltimore and frequently jumped for joy during the induction. “My friends wanted to be like Mike, but I was wearing everything Griffey.”Advertisement