By JAMES WAGNERMAY 4, 2017
ATLANTA — The battered state of the Mets’ roster is well known. Past ailments, new injuries and underperformance have depleted the backbone of the team: the starting rotation.Jacob deGrom is the best able-bodied starter the Mets have now, and he was off to a strong start this year despite coming off a season-ending operation on his elbow in September. But he cannot carry the team alone.So when he struggled in Wednesday’s 16-5 win over the Atlanta Braves, the Mets’ offense picked up the slack. A home-run-loving lineup pounded out its highest run total of the season, thanks to nine doubles.The Mets have scored at least five runs in seven straight games, but they have three losses in that span. On Wednesday, the extra offense was enough to overcome deGrom’s struggles as he allowed a season-high five runs while walking five batters.AdvertisementEvery starting Met notched at least one hit — including deGrom, who had two, as well as two R.B.I.T. J. Rivera, Rene Rivera and Michael Conforto each had three hits, and Jose Reyes drove in five runs, matching a career high.After a wretched start, Reyes has improved significantly over the past week. Curtis Granderson, mired in a 1-for-30 slump, smacked two doubles. Neil Walker, who carried a .211 batting average into the game, added two hits.The Mets’ lineup is by no means settled. Yoenis Cespedes is on the disabled list with a hamstring strain, and the team would love further improvement from Reyes, Granderson and Walker.Get the big sports news, highlights and analysis from Times journalists, with distinctive takes on games and some behind-the-scenes surprises, delivered to your inbox every week.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.The Mets welcomed the utility man Wilmer Flores on Wednesday. He was supposed to make his return Thursday, but the Mets moved it up a day because of an injury to Travis d’Arnaud.D’Arnaud left Tuesday’s game early with a sore right wrist, a flare-up of an injury he sustained nearly two weeks ago. He felt better Wednesday, Collins said, but the Mets did not want to be caught short-handed on the bench.AdvertisementFlores had been out since April 20 with a staph infection in his right knee, an ailment that required intravenous fluids, antibiotics and a four-night hospital stay. “It was scary,” he said.Flores said doctors told him that he would need surgery if his infection did not improve by his second day in the hospital. But the medication reduced the swelling and eased the pain. “Everything is normal now,” he said.To make room on the roster for Flores, the Mets sent reliever Sean Gilmartin to Class AAA Las Vegas. That meant that Rafael Montero would start Friday’s game, Collins said, taking the place of the injured Noah Syndergaard, who will miss a considerable amount of time with a torn latissimus muscle.The Mets are still targeting a late May return for pitchers Steven Matz and Seth Lugo, who are recovering from elbow injuries. They hope Matt Harvey, Zack Wheeler and Robert Gsellman will round into form to help deGrom.Until then, the Mets’ offense may have to pull more than its usual weight.A version of this article appears in print on May 4, 2017, on Page B12 of the New York edition with the headline: New Cure for Ailing Mets: Taking 2 Bases.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.