AdvertisementSupported byEagles 21, Vikings 10By The Associated PressPHILADELPHIA — Minnesota’s offensive line could not block, Sam Bradford could not protect the football and the defense could not bail out the Vikings on Sunday as Minnesota lost for the first time this season, falling, 21-10, to the Philadelphia Eagles.Vikings Coach Mike Zimmer was especially critical of his offensive line, which will be without starting tackles Matt Kalil and Andre Smith for the rest of the season. Jake Long allowed two strip-sacks in his Vikings debut while rotating with T. J. Clemmings and Jeremiah Sirles.“We didn’t block anybody,” Zimmer said. “They were soft. They were overpowered. The safety beat the tackle one time and beat the back a couple times. It was basically man-on-man, and we got whipped.”The Vikings (5-1) hardly looked like an unbeaten team coming off a bye week. The Eagles (4-2), who ended a two-game losing streak, have a showdown for first place in the N.F.C. East at Dallas next Sunday night, and their next five opponents have winning records.Bradford returned to Philadelphia for the first time since his trade to Minnesota eight days before the season opener, which paved the way for Carson Wentz, this year’s No. 2 overall draft pick, to start. The Eagles pressured and harassed Bradford all game, sacking him six times and forcing his first three turnovers of the season.Bradford, who was 7-7 in his only season in Philadelphia, heard boos when he ran onto the field and never appeared comfortable. He overthrew a few receivers, made poor decisions and seemed more concerned with avoiding the fierce pass rush than keeping his eyes on downfield targets.“The way we played was unacceptable,” Bradford said. “We did a lot of things that we didn’t do the first five weeks. The things we did will prevent you from winning football games. We have to find a way to not turn the ball over. There were too many self-inflicted wounds.”Jim Schwartz, Philadelphia’s defensive coordinator, employed the blitz far more than usual, and it worked. What resulted was 19 hits on Bradford, six sacks, two recovered fumbles and one interception. Eagles safety Rodney McLeod finished with an interception, a sack and a forced fumble.“We knew traps would give him trouble,” linebacker Connor Barwin said, referring to Bradford. “We knew when he gets pressure, he likes to get the ball outside right away. And so we brought some of that pressure.”Bradford finished 24 of 41 for 224 yards and threw a 14-yard touchdown to Cordarrelle Patterson in the final minute.“I thought he missed some throws that he normally makes, but he got hit a lot,” Zimmer said.“It’s probably hard to evaluate his performance when it looks like a sieve,” Zimmer added, referring to Minnesota’s offensive line.Wentz also had a rough first half, throwing two interceptions after having thrown only one in his first five games. He also missed open receivers. But he settled in nicely and led a few scoring drives, one culminating in a 5-yard touchdown pass to Dorial Green-Beckham in the third quarter for an 18-3 lead.“That’s a great defense we played,” Wentz said. “I have to be smarter with the football. We found a way to win. That’s huge for us.”Both teams had a sloppy start. They traded turnovers on five consecutive series in the first quarter. The Vikings started two straight drives inside the red zone but squandered both chances.Blair Walsh hit a 48-yard field goal in the second quarter to give the Vikings a 3-0 lead, but Josh Huff broke loose for a 98-yard touchdown on the ensuing kickoff return. Huff sprinted up the right side, ran through Walsh’s attempted arm tackle at the 40, raced untouched to the end zone and capped it with a somersault.After the touchdown, Eagles Coach Doug Pederson took a point off the board when the Vikings were penalized for roughing kicker Caleb Sturgis. Philadelphia went for the 2-point conversion, and Wentz ran it in on a draw.“We felt like everyone was dead out there,” said Patterson, who finished with seven catches for 67 yards. “We couldn’t get anything going. We felt like we had momentum coming in. We were 5-0 and probably had a little bit of a big head, but things happen.”Advertisement