By KAREN CROUSEAPRIL 3, 2017
Gabriel Hjertstedt made history as a rookie on the PGA Tour, becoming the first Swede to win a tournament. In any other season, he would have stood out among his fellow first-year players. But it was 1997, when everyone — first-year players and veterans alike — became a footnote to Tiger Woods, whose four victories in his first full season as a professional included his record 12-stroke rout at the Masters.Twenty years later, it is easy to forget that when Woods, 21 at the time, showed up at Augusta National Golf Club for his major debut as a professional, the only person predicting that he would win 14 majors was his father, Earl. As Golf Channel’s Robert Damron recalled, the consensus was that too many good players populated the game to make possible the rise of another superlative one.“The feeling was that no one was ever going to dominate golf again like Jack Nicklaus had,” said Damron, whose first full season on the PGA Tour coincided with Woods’s.Woods would tear up that narrative with his performance at the 1997 Masters, but first he had to earn enough money in seven events to bypass the PGA Tour’s qualifying school at the end of 1996. That was hardly a given. At that point, only four players had proceeded to the tour without stopping at Q-School: Gary Hallberg, Scott Verplank, Phil Mickelson and Justin Leonard.AdvertisementArnold Palmer and Nicklaus had combined for three top-10s in their first seven starts as pros. Before Woods officially dropped out of Stanford, his best finish in a tour event as an amateur was a tie for 22nd.AdvertisementStuart Appleby, an Australian rookie in 1996, had struggled to make $100,000 in his first eight months, and he remembered wondering how Woods realistically expected to earn nearly double that in two.“I was naïve about how ready he was,” Appleby said.Before Woods’s first pro start, at the Greater Milwaukee Open at the end of the summer in 1996, Allen Doyle was summoned to the interview room for reasons that initially eluded him. Doyle was a 48-year-old rookie with one top-10 finish. Why did the throng of 100-plus reporters want to talk to him?“I’m thinking, ‘What the hell is the big story here?’” he said.Doyle, the latest of bloomers, had competed on United States amateur teams with the wunderkind Woods, and on occasion had beaten him. The reporters were seeking Doyle’s scouting report.He recalled, “I said, ‘Look, guys, I think I’m better than 60 percent of the guys out here, and he probably right now is better than me, so he’s probably better than 80 percent of the field.’”Woods beat 60 percent of the field that week, tying for 60th. He won his fifth start, in Las Vegas, and his seventh, in Orlando, Fla., to avoid Q-School. Appleby and Doyle did compete in the final stage of qualifying and were among the 49 players in the weather-marred tournament to earn their 1997 playing privileges.Doyle made history by becoming the oldest medalist at qualifying school. Appleby, spurred by a victory at the Honda Classic the next March, made history by becoming the first Q-School graduate to surpass $1 million in earnings the season after securing his card.But both milestones were buried in the avalanche of 1997 coverage devoted to Woods, who won a champions-only event at the start of the year, then shot a 59 in a practice round at his home course in Isleworth, Fla., the week before the Masters.Appleby also happened to play at Isleworth that day, and he remembered thinking what Woods’s playing companion, Mark O’Meara, said out loud: If Woods hit it anywhere near as well the next week, the rest of the Masters field was playing for second place.AdvertisementAt his Masters debut, Appleby finished 21st — 19 strokes behind Woods, who played the last 63 holes in 22-under after an opening nine at four-over-par 40 to become the first person of color to don the green jacket.“I think we all felt like we were watching a highlight reel at a tournament we weren’t participating in,” Appleby said.That week, golf’s savior was born.“That’s when it became obvious that Tiger’s not like the rest of us, that there is going to be another dominant player and it’s him,” Damron said. “Jack won the ’86 Masters at 46, and so you did the math: If Tiger won two a year every year, he was going to end up with 25, 26 major championships. It seemed like just a foregone conclusion.”Woods won four Tour titles in 1997. The Q-School class that he skipped accounted for three: Appleby; Hjertstedt, who won the B.C. Open in September; and Billy Ray Brown, who captured the Deposit Guaranty Classic in July.Hjertstedt, 45, won one more tour title before embarking on a second career as a coach, working with pros on their short games. Appleby, 45, a nine-time tour winner, continues to compete, with seven starts during this season. Doyle, 68, never won on the tour, but collected 11 titles on the Champions Tour, including four majors, before retiring.Their Q-School class was part of two PGA Tour major championships. Shaun Micheel won the 2003 P.G.A. Championship. And Paul Tesori, whose failure to make a cut in 12 tournaments in 1997 precipitated his switch to caddying, was on the bag of Webb Simpson during his victory in the 2012 United States Open.Tesori admitted he was overwhelmed when he got on tour in 1997. He started cramming on the course, practicing eight to 10 hours a day on the range. All his extra efforts got him was a torn rotator cuff.Advertisement“I never really recovered from that,” Tesori said.Woods would eventually be cut down by injuries that required multiple operations. A recent flare-up of a chronic back injury led to his withdrawal from this week’s Masters. But in the beginning, Woods possessed none of the physical infirmities or mental frailties that plagued his peers.“Tiger was never afraid,” Hjertstedt said. “When you played with him, you wanted to hang with him; you started pushing yourself more because of that. But if your game was just a little bit off, it was a disaster.”Woods pushed his competitors off the course, too. That first year, Hjertstedt said, he would slip into the hotel gym at 5 a.m. during tournament weeks to work out. “And Tiger would already be there,” he said. “He outworked everyone.”Doyle remembered teaming with Woods and others in 1994 to deliver the men’s World Amateur team championship to the United States for the first time since 1982. After the first round, Woods went to the range and was working on his swing until Doyle could not stand it any longer. He told Woods that he had been at the course for 10 hours, he was tired and he needed to get his 46-year-old body back to the hotel. Woods, then 18, dutifully wrapped up his hitting session.As Doyle watched Woods’s career progress, none of the successes, starting with the history-making turn at the 1997 Masters, surprised him. What set Woods apart from his peers from the start of his pro career was harder to gauge than his tape-measure drives.“He wasn’t the first guy who showed up in this or that sport that was a can’t-miss kid,” Doyle said. “A lot of those kids missed. What made Tiger different, I think, is the determination that he had that no way was he going to fail. He had something innate in him that made him almost will himself to succeed.”A version of this article appears in print on April 4, 2017, on Page B11 of the New York edition with the headline: 20 Years Ago, Record Win Heralded a Player ‘Not Like the Rest of Us’.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.