AdvertisementSupported byBy Stephanie MylesKEY BISCAYNE, Fla. — The way Roger Federer is playing tennis, it might seem as if it’s 2006.That year, at age 24, Federer won the Australian Open and the first two Masters 1000-level tournaments in Indian Wells and Miami, known as the Sunshine double. By the end of that season, Federer was 92-5 with 12 tournament victories, including three Grand Slam titles.Fast forward to Sunday, and Federer, 35, defeated his longtime rival Rafael Nadal, 6-3, 6-4, in the Miami Open final to cap the same early-season trifecta.Eleven years on, as he played his 11th singles match in 21 days, Federer had to coax his aching body to give all that it had.Federer said that he had told his coach, Severin Lüthi, before the match that “if I would’ve just played the Miami finals — no Indian Wells, no Australian Open — we would still be very happy right now.”He said that he reminded himself simply to play without pressure.“Just do it one more time and go out there and be brave on the big points, you know,” he said. “I think I was able to do that.”And despite three straight weeks of searing heat and high humidity, when the final shot from Nadal sailed long, Federer’s hands were still quick enough to redirect it high into the stadium bleachers as he looked to his supporters.But Federer’s fans will have to wait awhile to see him again. He said he would skip much of the approaching European clay-court season and would wait to “get on the clay” until about two weeks before the French Open, which begins on May 22. There are four big ATP clay events before then — in Monte Carlo, Madrid, Barcelona and Rome.“That’s the plan for now,” Federer said. “Then, yeah, hopefully I’ll play the French, but we’ll see how all of the buildup is going to go.”After all, he is not 24 anymore.“I have to pick my moments where I can peak and stay healthy,” he said. “Also, part of the situation was that my knee was really strange on the clay last year, so being away from the clay as much as possible maybe is a good thing.”Federer‘s career has been a model of scheduling restraint. He has rarely overplayed or chased ranking points or tournament prize money. He has always taken breaks when he felt he needed them.But with his victory in Miami, Federer will move to No. 4 in the world rankings from No. 6. He said that it was still a long way to No. 1, but the temptation of potentially challenging for the top ranking was in the back of his mind.By forgoing at least some of the clay-court events, a decision he said he had just made, Federer will prioritize other parts of the year that are more to his liking: the grass-court season (he will play tournaments in Stuttgart and Halle, Germany, before Wimbledon), the United States Open and the possibility of qualifying for the year-end championships.Federer currently leads the points race for a spot in the ATP World Tour Finals in London — by a significant margin.For Nadal, it was his fourth consecutive loss to Federer, but he still holds the career edge at 23-14. In the three years between the 2014 and the 2017 Australian Opens, they faced each other only once, in 2015, in Basel, Switzerland, Federer’s hometown. Federer won.They have now played each other three times in three months, and Federer has won them all.Nadal, asked to pinpoint any areas of Federer’s game that have changed since Federer returned from a six-month injury layoff, could not be specific.“He’s playing good, no? That’s all,” Nadal said. “He’s playing good and with high confidence. When a top player like him is playing with this high confidence and playing that good, then it’s tough to win.”Nadal added that, despite the score line, this was a much closer match, a “much closer level” than the 6-2, 6-3 defeat he endured at the BNP Paribas Open two weeks ago.And as Federer bypasses the clay season, Nadal is looking forward to his favorite part of the schedule.“I think I am close to what I need to be,” he said. “I am at a very high level of tennis, and I believe I am ready to win titles.”As for Federer, he said he was looking to be happy in all parts of his life and to stay healthy, even if that means pacing himself and taking a strategic break at times.“I would rather stay take a step back and then really come back with a lot of energy and happiness,” Federer said. “Then I can share that with everybody. Otherwise you’ll see me here, and you will see that all I want to do is get out of here.”He added, “I don’t want to be that guy. I really don’t.”Advertisement