By THE ASSOCIATED PRESSMAY 3, 2017
LeBron James scored 39 points, passed Kareem Abdul-Jabbar on the career playoff scoring list and pushed the host Cleveland Cavaliers to a 125-103 victory over the Toronto Raptors in Game 2 of their Eastern Conference semifinal series on Wednesday night.Just like a year ago in the conference finals, the Cavaliers are up, 2-0, on the Raptors, who were blown out for the fifth straight time in Cleveland in the playoffs, losing the games by an average of 24.2 points. Game 3 is Friday night at Air Canada Centre.James needed 25 points to pass Abdul-Jabbar, who was second with 5,762, and overtook him with a 3-pointer in the third quarter, during which he scored 17 as the Cavaliers opened a 26-point lead. James, who finished 10 of 14 from the field, trails only Michael Jordan (5,987).Kyrie Irving had 22 points and 11 assists, and Channing Frye scored 18 points for the Cavaliers, the defending champions, who are 9-0 in the playoffs since losing Game 4 of last year’s N.B.A. finals.AdvertisementJonas Valanciunas led the Raptors with 23 points off the bench. Toronto got only 5 points from the All-Star DeMar DeRozan, who did not make his first field goal until the first minute of the fourth quarter. Of bigger concern might be the status of guard Kyle Lowry, who sprained his left ankle in the third quarter and sat out the fourth.AdvertisementJAMES A BEER ENDORSER? A grab of a beer bottle during a game became a photo opportunity that LeBron James did not want.On Monday night, James jokingly swiped the bottle from a courtside server during the third quarter of the Cavaliers’ 116-105 victory against the Raptors. James acted if he were considering sipping it before handing it back. The exchange was posted all over social media, and James even kidded afterward that he wasn’t much of a beer drinker and would have taken a sip if it had been red wine.James now says that his agent and legal team are upset over Great Lakes Brewing Company’s use of his image with the bottle.On Tuesday, the brewery posted on Twitter a photograph of James holding its signature Dortmunder Gold beer with the caption, “G.O.A.T. with G.O.L.D.” The first set of initials stands for “greatest of all time.”James said in an article posted on Cleveland.com that the brewery “is trying to benefit off of me.” James is also aware that the brewery produced and sold a bitter “Quitness” ale when he bolted the Cavaliers for Miami as a free agent in 2010.A representative for James declined to comment. A voice mail message left with a spokeswoman for the brewery was not immediately returned.Get the big sports news, highlights and analysis from Times journalists, with distinctive takes on games and some behind-the-scenes surprises, delivered to your inbox every week.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.SPURS WIN BUT LOSE PARKER Kawhi Leonard had 34 points, 8 assists and 7 rebounds, and the San Antonio Spurs overcame the loss of Tony Parker to beat the visiting Houston Rockets, 121-96, and even their Western Conference semifinal series at one game apiece.AdvertisementParker did not return after hurting his left leg with 8 minutes 43 seconds remaining in the game. Spurs officials said Parker would have a magnetic resonance imaging test on Thursday morning, but Coach Gregg Popovich said after the game that “it’s not good.”Parker, who finished with 18 points and 4 assists in 26 minutes, fell to the court after missing an uncontested short jumper. He grabbed his left knee immediately upon landing and remained on the court for a few minutes. He tried to walk but had to be carried by teammates.Houston guard James Harden was limited to 13 points while shooting 3 for 17 from the field.The Rockets shot 11 for 34 on 3-point attempts after going 22 for 50 in their 126-99 victory in Game 1 on Monday night. They host Game 3 on Friday.The start was as frenetic as Game 1, but the Spurs kept pace this time. The teams shot a combined 15 for 25 in the opening six minutes, including 5 for 9 on 3-point attempts.Popovich started Pau Gasol in place of David Lee to give the Spurs another shooter in the starting lineup, and it paid off early. San Antonio shot 62 percent in the opening quarter.The Spurs finished at 54 percent, and LaMarcus Aldridge had 15 points after being held to 4 in the opener.FORMER PLAYER IS SHOT Brandon Roy, who played six seasons in the N.B.A., was injured in a shooting over the weekend, the authorities said.Los Angeles County Sheriff’s Lt. Joseph Williams said Roy and three others were at a party in Compton, Calif., when two men walked up and shot them. Williams said that all four victims were shot in the upper body but that their injuries were not life-threatening. No arrests have been made.AdvertisementRoy, 32, played for Portland and Minnesota and was the league’s rookie of the year in 2007.NENE IS FINED The N.B.A. fined Houston Rockets center Nene $15,000 for escalating a fight with San Antonio Spurs center Dewayne Dedmon in Game 1 of the Western Conference semifinals on Monday.The scuffle occurred at the end of the third quarter. Nene was ejected for grabbing Dedmon’s shoulder and pushing him away after Dedmon and Rockets guard James Harden got in each other’s faces.Dedmon was thrown out in the fourth quarter after arguing with officials during a free throw.Houston beat host San Antonio, 126-99, the Spurs’ worst loss in a series opener under Coach Gregg Popovich.A version of this article appears in print on May 4, 2017, on Page B12 of the New York edition with the headline: Pro Basketball; James and Cavaliers Continue to Roll.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.