AdvertisementSupported byBy Adam SchupakWho will wear the green jacket this year? These are some of the top contenders.When Johnson, the world’s top-ranked player, was asked how he felt about going into Augusta as the favorite, he answered: “How do I like it? I don’t care.” Johnson has won six times in his last 17 events since his United States Open victory, and each of his three most recent starts. He has also been trending in the right direction at the Masters: He finished tied for sixth and tied for fourth the last two years. Johnson ranks second this season in driving distance (316.2 yards) and third in proximity to the hole (32 feet), meaning he could potentially turn Augusta into a par 68.In Spieth’s three starts at Augusta, he has finished tied for second, first, and tied for second. The 2015 champ will have to face his demons at the par-3 12th hole, where he made 7 last year and wound up wasting a five-stroke lead on the closing nine. But Spieth is playing better than he was a year ago. He won the AT&T Pebble Beach National Pro-Am in a rout, and his smooth putting stroke has benefited from an improved long game. He is second this season in strokes gained: approach-the-green, up from 87th a year ago.McIlroy, No. 2 in the world, has recovered from a rib injury and has not finished below seventh place in his three PGA Tour appearances this season. If he wins the Masters, he will become the sixth golfer to complete the career Grand Slam. Six years ago, it looked as if the Masters would be his first win in a major, but he shot a final-round 80. He must avoid a blowup round in Augusta — he has seven rounds of 76 or higher at the Masters the last seven years.Day is golf’s version of a five-tool player, and he’s already had one arm in a green jacket at Augusta National. He finished tied for second in 2011, and led on the 16th tee in 2013 before making bogey and finishing third. Last year, he ranked as the best putter in the field, but he struggled with his approach shots. Will Day, the world’s No. 3 player, be sharp? He has logged only 18 rounds this year, and withdrew from the W.G.C. Dell Technologies Match Play to attend to his mother, who was having a lung cancer operation.Mickelson, who is nearly 47, will surpass Jack Nicklaus as the oldest Masters champ if he wins a fourth green jacket. He has not won since the 2013 British Open, but Augusta National brings out the best in his game. In addition to those three Masters titles, Mickelson, ranked 19th in the world, has eight other top five finishes in the event. Augusta’s wide fairways are kind to his inconsistent tee game, while his short game is as sharp as ever — he ranks No. 1 in strokes gained: around-the-green this season.It is part of Masters lore that no first-year player has won since Fuzzy Zoeller in 1979. But Rahm, ranked 14th in the world, may be capable of ending the Augusta rookie drought. A 22-year-old Spaniard, he won the Farmers Insurance Open this year and lost to Johnson on the 18th green in the finals of the W.G.C. Dell Technologies Match Play. His combination of length and deft touch around the greens makes him a legitimate contender.Advertisement