By THE ASSOCIATED PRESSAPRIL 3, 2017
The Rangers finally won at home again and accomplished something else to be proud of.Oscar Lindberg and Chris Kreider scored 2 minutes 9 seconds apart midway through the third period, and the Rangers held on to beat the Philadelphia Flyers, 4-3, on Sunday night for their first win at home in six weeks. The Rangers also reached 100 points in a third straight season for just the second time in franchise history.“It says a lot about how hard we worked,” center Derek Stepan said. “To be able to have the ability to get to 100 points as a team, not a lot of teams can say that. It’s something we’re real proud of. We worked very hard this season to get ourselves into the playoffs and to be able to get to that 100 point mark again.”Mika Zibanejad and Brendan Smith scored in the first period, and Henrik Lundqvist stopped 20 shots to help the Rangers win at Madison Square Garden for the first time since they beat Washington there on Feb. 19. The Rangers had gone 0-5-3 on home ice since.“We needed a game like that to feel good about ourselves,” defenseman Dan Girardi said. “That was a real good 60-minute game for us. We did a lot of good things: tracking back, we were able to stay up — all those things we kind of got away from at home.”AdvertisementThe game represented “a step in the right direction,” he said.The Rangers, who also had consecutive 100-point seasons from 1970-71 through 1972-73, are guaranteed to fall no lower than the first wild card in the Eastern Conference. They are fourth in the Metropolitan Division, trailing third-place Columbus by 6 points. The Rangers have three games remaining, and Columbus has four.Advertisement“It’s a tough league,” Lundqvist said. “It’s hard to win. It’s hard to be in a playoff race, but guys are committed.”Valtteri Filppula had two goals and Brayden Schenn also scored for Philadelphia, which was eliminated from postseason contention.“The reality is we’re on the outside looking in,” Flyers Coach Dave Hakstol said.Anthony Stolarz finished with 20 saves for the Flyers.Get the big sports news, highlights and analysis from Times journalists, with distinctive takes on games and some behind-the-scenes surprises, delivered to your inbox every week.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.Mats Zuccarello had three assists, the first Rangers player to reach at least 44 since Marian Gaborik did so in 2009-10.“He’s one of the most elite passers in the game,” Stepan said of Zuccarello. “This guy is an elite player, there is no doubt about it.”Leading by 2-1, the Rangers appeared to have put the game away halfway through the third. Lindberg scored from in front at 7:01 for his eighth goal of the season, and Kreider made it 4-1 with his 28th at 9:10.However, Schenn scored with 2:06 remaining, and Filppula’s second of the game — his fourth in his last five games — 51 seconds later moved the Flyers to a goal behind.Advertisement“We almost came back,” the Flyers captain Claude Giroux said. “A couple bounces just went their way.”Filppula gave the Flyers a 1-0 lead with his 11th of the season 33 seconds into the second as he curled around Rangers defenseman Marc Staal before lifting a backhander over Lundqvist.Zibanejad tied it with a power-play goal 3:24 later, firing an end-over-end shot from the top of the left circle over Stolarz’s stick.The Rangers were 1 for 4 on the man advantage and are 12 for 35 dating back to March 9. They also killed all three Philadelphia power plays.It took just 3:13 for the Rangers to strike again, as Smith’s backhander over Stolarz’s glove put them ahead, 2-1. The goal was his third of the season and his first since being acquired from Detroit on Feb. 28.“There’s no doubt that was a real smart play on his goal,” Rangers Coach Alain Vigneault said.We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.