By TYLER KEPNERMARCH 15, 2016
MESA, Ariz. —  There is no hiding it now. The Chicago Cubs, the most optimistic bunch of perennial losers you will ever meet, have built their foundation on Anthony Rizzo. He is their pillar, the player who holds up the party tent for a celebration 108 years in the making.“In a lot of ways, he’s the centerpiece for what we’re doing,” said Theo Epstein, the Cubs’ president for baseball operations. “He was the first significant player we acquired as a building block, and he has more than lived up to his end of the bargain, in every way.”Rizzo is the Cubs’ first baseman and leading run producer. He was born Aug. 8, 1989, exactly one year after the Cubs first played under lights at Wrigley Field, and one day before the birth of right fielder Jason Heyward.The Cubs signed Heyward, second baseman Ben Zobrist and pitcher John Lackey this off-season as they try to propel themselves to a title. They rose from 89 losses in 2014 to the National League Championship Series in 2015, when they were swept by the Mets. They started this spring as the Las Vegas favorites to win their first World Series since 1908.Advertisement“It was cool, especially over years past,” Rizzo said. “You’d see that we’re in on this guy, or we’re in on that guy, and you realize it’s all rumors until it happens. But the Heyward signing, and Lackey, and Zobrist — we’re there. We’ve got the pieces. We just need to fine-tune it all.”AdvertisementBefore Epstein could fine-tune the roster, he had to discard the rack of scratched CDs he inherited. No current Cubs were with the team in October 2011, when Epstein arrived from Boston, where he had presided over two championship teams. He traded for reliever Travis Wood that December, and for Rizzo two weeks later.The four-player deal with San Diego, which sent starter Andrew Cashner to the Padres, had its roots on a high school field in Florida in 2007. Jason McLeod, now the Cubs’ senior vice president for scouting and player development, ran the draft for the Red Sox that season. Rizzo’s high school had a catcher who was considered a better prospect, McLeod said, but the team liked Rizzo best.“So we started gearing our coverage pretending like we were there to see the catcher,” McLeod said. “Usually, when a left-handed hitter comes up, you go down the third-base side to scout him and watch him from the open side. Well, when Anthony would hit, we’d make sure we didn’t do that. We’d just kind of stand in the background. But we were really there to see him.”The Red Sox liked Rizzo’s athleticism — sneaky, Epstein described it, for a player who would grow to be 6 feet 3 and 240 pounds — and his ease in hitting to all fields. Sensing that the Detroit Tigers wanted to draft Rizzo in the sixth round, the Red Sox snagged him a few picks sooner, at No. 204 over all.That sounds low now, but Rizzo’s $325,000 bonus was well above market value, and he soon showed the Red Sox they had gotten a steal. Beyond his talent, McLeod said, Rizzo had a magnetic personality that drew teammates to him — not just American players, but those from Latin America, too. The team sent him to an instructional program in the Dominican Republic, where he empathized with the poverty he saw and asked about ways to help.Before long, though, Rizzo had his own battle to wage. At age 18 — while hitting .373 at Class A — he was found to have Hodgkin’s lymphoma. The Red Sox brought him to Boston for care.“I remember being at the hotel with him the day he was going to the hospital for his procedure,” McLeod said. “His parents were there, and his mom’s just in tears, and Anthony’s sitting there comforting her, like, ‘Mom, it’s going to be O.K., it’ll be fine,’ and I was like, ‘Man, what would I be like if I was 18?’ I was just so impressed and blown away with how he carried himself through that whole process, how he was trying to make everyone else feel comfortable.”AdvertisementBy September, Rizzo’s cancer was in remission, and he has since started a foundation to fund research and help cancer patients and their families. An annual checkup is his only reminder of the ordeal.“At the end of the day, it makes no difference if I get four hits or no hits,” Rizzo said. “Going through that and not being able to play baseball, once you have it taken away from you, you realize how much you love it even more. That’s why I never really take anything for granted.”Rizzo said he would always be grateful to the Red Sox for the way they helped him and his family. Alas, he was only a prospect then, and the team could not resist the chance to trade for Adrian Gonzalez, an established All-Star first baseman, in December 2010. Boston shipped Rizzo to San Diego as part of a package to get him.Gonzalez played well in Boston, but seemed miserable there and was traded to the Los Angeles Dodgers after Epstein left. Epstein does not regret the Gonzalez deal, he said, but recalled an emotional phone call with Rizzo that ended with a promise.“I did tell him, ‘Hey, we’re going to try to get you back,’ ” Epstein said. “I told him we’d be on the same side again at some point, just because he was a guy, I believed in everything about him. We had a special connection, and he was still a young man. I felt like our paths would cross again.“It was fun, when we traded for him with the Cubs, to remind him of that over the phone. He was like, ‘Oh, I remember.’ ”Getting Rizzo back required him to fall flat with the Padres in 2011. Rizzo played in 49 games for San Diego, hitting .141 with one home run. The Padres soon traded for another young first baseman, Yonder Alonso, making Rizzo expendable.Get the big sports news, highlights and analysis from Times journalists, with distinctive takes on games and some behind-the-scenes surprises, delivered to your inbox every week.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.Jed Hoyer, Epstein’s former assistant in Boston, had been the San Diego general manager when the Red Sox sent Rizzo there. When Epstein left Boston for Chicago, Hoyer joined him as the Cubs’ general manager. This time, Epstein said, Hoyer had questions about Rizzo, because he had seen him fail up close. But some of the best trades happen when a talented young player struggles in the majors, because his team starts to doubt him.Advertisement“I was like, ‘Jed, we saw him for three years in Boston — he’s going to be the guy he was in Double A,’ ” Epstein said. “If you’re too close to that, it’s hard to look past that.”Cashner has had mixed results in San Diego, with a 24-36 record and 3.50 E.R.A. In four seasons, his E.R.A.+ is 100, precisely league average. Rizzo, meanwhile, finished fourth in the voting for National League most valuable player last season, hitting .278 with 31 homers, and is instrumental in the clubhouse.Publicly, at least, he announced his presence as a leader in a July 2014 incident in Cincinnati. Fed up with high, inside heat from Cincinnati’s Aroldis Chapman — and irritated by chirping from the Reds’ bench — Rizzo fired his cap and glove to the ground before an inning and challenged the Cincinnati dugout, galvanizing the team.Starter Jason Hammel, who had just been traded to Oakland from the Cubs and has since returned, was not surprised by Rizzo’s display. He had already noticed him trying to lead.“A lot of the older guys at the time didn’t really respect it, because he had no time in the game, and just seeing that type of energy and demanding that other guys get better — you didn’t really see that from a young guy,” Hammel said. “But you could see that he really started taking ownership of being the guy that’s going to make a difference with the club. He’s stuck to that and only gotten better.”Rizzo gave voice to his leadership with a bold prediction in January 2015. The Cubs had averaged 95 losses a season during Rizzo’s first three years, but he vowed that the team would win the N.L. Central.Technically, Rizzo was wrong; the St. Louis Cardinals finished first with 100 wins, and the Pittsburgh Pirates finished second with 98, one more than the Cubs. But the Cubs eliminated both rivals in October, improved in the winter, and now seem poised to upend their sad history.There will be no more guarantees from Rizzo, who has already proved his point. These Cubs — his Cubs — know what to do.“Just play,” Rizzo said. “If we win 97 games, we’ll be all right.”A version of this article appears in print on March 16, 2016, on Page B10 of the New York edition with the headline: Cornerstone of Cubs’ Quest Plays First Base.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.