AdvertisementSupported byBy Zach SchonbrunCollege basketball coaches are often guarded about details concerning their programs. Practices are typically closed to the public. Coded keywords communicate plays to the players on the court. Many teams now go as far as to move their players off the bench and onto the court — and away from possibly nosy fans — before offering instructions during timeouts.Then there is Xavier, one of the best teams in the country entering this week’s N.C.A.A. tournament. The Musketeers’ playbook is available to anyone who asks for it — literally.With an openness that may be unmatched in Division I basketball, Coach Chris Mack and his staff at Xavier, in Cincinnati, regularly distribute an email newsletter — promoted right there on the team’s official website — to coaches across the nation and to countries around the world. And the newsletters reveal more than just motivational platitudes and marketing slogans. One is 81 pages long. Newsletter No. 174, from last spring, included 20 pages of diagrams explaining specific offensive plays that the Musketeers have run. Another billed itself as “the ultimate guide to packline defense.” A fourth offered a minute-by-minute breakdown of Xavier’s pregame routine.Practice scrimmages, a recipient learns, are often broken down into four-minute “wars.” Drills include favorites like “two-ball chase,” “sprint transition” and “perfection.” Workouts have names like 150 Killer, Celtic Drill, 5-Point Shot — even Pitino Series.What started in 2001 as a stapled handout to 800 Ohio-area high school coaches has grown into an email blast sent to nearly 30,000 coaches in 17 countries, spreading the gospel of Xavier with viral efficiency.Mario Mercurio, the team’s director of administration, knew the newsletters were catching on when he attended an eighth-grade basketball game coached by a friend a few years ago. Sitting behind the opposing team’s bench, he noticed that team’s coach was flipping through plays from the newsletter packet that Mercurio had sent out earlier that week.“I felt bad that he was doing this against my buddy’s team,” Mercurio said recently, “but I got a great laugh out of that.”While most college coaches host summer camps and instructional clinics to share their knowledge, and secrets are rare by the end of a 35-game season, it is still uncommon for a program to make some of its most precious proprietary information so public.Ricardo Hill, the coach at Walnut Hills High School, a successful boys’ program in Cincinnati, gets newsletters from other programs, but he said none compared to Xavier’s.“Not as in-depth,” Hill said. “Not even close.”Mack said: “We’re sort of full disclosure here.”Transparency has not appeared to hinder the Musketeers (27-5), who have spent 13 consecutive weeks in the top 10 and whose 26 regular-season wins were the most for the program since 2007-8, when the team reached the round of 8.There are many reasons for the success. But what might otherwise go unnoticed is that Xavier has a rewards system based on offensive rebounds per minute; gives players pop quizzes to determine the “three teammates you would want in the foxhole beside you”; and had its staff read Patrick Lencioni’s books on leadership.Such nuggets do not go unnoticed by the coaches on Xavier’s email list, which has grown so extensive it requires a third-party sender, MailChimp, to deliver all the weekly newsletters each summer.Hill, a recipient for six years, said that he regularly used plays he picked out of the packets and that he would have his players watch film of Xavier’s games to analyze how the Musketeers ran their sets. He said he assumed Xavier’s opponents did the same.“They have the confidence in themselves that they don’t care if someone gets it — they still have to stop it,” Hill said.Kansas, North Carolina, Virginia and Oregon are the top seeds in the N.C.A.A. men’s basketball tournament.Mercurio said that about half of the plays included in the packets were actually ones run by the opposing teams.“I haven’t told too many people that,” he said, chuckling.But the other half are plays that Mack and the coaching staff might have noticed watching an N.B.A. game on television, or plays that one might see Xavier running from time to time. Mack said he was not particularly concerned that opponents could take advantage of Xavier’s generosity.“It’s 2016 — we’re all open books,” Mack said. “It doesn’t take a whole lot of effort for a program to learn your plays and learn your drills.”In 2001, when the newsletter began, things were different. Mercurio, who started working at Xavier as a student in 1999, said the former assistant John Groce was the first to raise the idea of a newsletter to Xavier’s coach at the time, Thad Matta. The first newsletters were mailed, and only to Ohio-area high school coaches, ostensibly to help build relationships for recruiting.“We wanted something to separate Xavier,” Mercurio said. “It quietly markets Xavier, but it’s also a service.”Year by year, the list of recipients grew. When sending the packets by mail became too expensive, the e-newsletter was born. From there, it grew exponentially.“As soon as we hit send on that first email, different guys would respond saying, ‘Hey, this is great, here’s 50 email addresses, can you include them?’ ” Mercurio said.At one point, the program was surprised to receive an email from a girls’ coach requesting to add names to the list.“We didn’t even know how it broke the gender barrier,” Mercurio said. “But she emailed us back a bank of like 4,000 women’s coaches’ emails. It just grew and grew and grew.”The job of compiling the newsletter is handled largely by Mercurio, but Mack, a former girls’ high school coach, still likes dropping off articles and hand-scribbled notes to include each week.“Anything we feel that some high school coach out there might find some value to,” he said.Advertisement