By TYLER KEPNERMAY 27, 2016
Matt Harvey wore a batting practice cap and an undershirt to the mound on Friday at Citi Field, long before fans were allowed inside. The uniform will be different on Monday, and the stands will be packed. But the setting — on a diamond, with hitters up there to swing — mattered most.Harvey, the Mets right-hander whose E.R.A. has swelled to 6.08, faced teammates Alejandro De Aza and Matt Reynolds in his between-starts mound session. He faced hitters on the same mound a few days before his last start, too, but that game was another clunker: five innings, five runs and just one strikeout in Washington.The difference, in this session, was that Harvey threw fewer pitches. The Mets hope that will help his stamina against the Chicago White Sox on Monday.“Compared to when I faced him last week, his stuff looked good, it looked sharper, he looked more in command, and his fastball had a little more life,” said Reynolds, who also hit off Harvey in his last between-starts session. “He looks like he’s headed on the right track to getting back where he was.”AdvertisementHarvey did not talk to reporters, and the pitching coach, Dan Warthen, declined to comment. Manager Terry Collins did not watch the session but said Harvey was trying to fix a mechanical flaw.Advertisement“The second time through the order, we’re seeing things he’s doing on the mound that are keeping him from having the ability to make the pitches he needs to make,” Collins said. “We’re seeing a velocity drop, and there’s a reason for that. We’re seeing lack of command of his breaking ball; matter of fact, he said his feel for the breaking ball goes all of a sudden.Get the big sports news, highlights and analysis from Times journalists, with distinctive takes on games and some behind-the-scenes surprises, delivered to your inbox every week.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.“It’s about muscle memory more than anything, and so we’re trying to get that to be where, hey look, you don’t think about it, you just do it, just stay with what was working early in the game. When runners get on base, all of a sudden you see some things that are changing. It’s all about trying to get him to relax and trying to get him to just pitch his game.”Collins said Harvey had to use his lower half better and find a more consistent arm angle. A scout who attended Harvey’s last game — and was granted anonymity so he could freely discuss another team’s player — said Harvey might be throwing across his body too much, which could affect his command.The Mets insist that Harvey is healthy, and Collins said he is not telegraphing his pitches.“We’ve exhausted the pitch-tipping idea, because we’ve certainly studied film, and I’ve got two guys that are very, very good at picking that stuff up,” Collins said. “So that’s not the key. The key is he’s not making pitches. The two pitches he made to Zimmerman and Rendon the other day were completely against where to locate it, and yet he did.”Ryan Zimmerman and Anthony Rendon hit homers off changeups, two of the three home runs Harvey allowed on Tuesday. Daniel Murphy hit the other off a fastball that had lost a couple of miles an hour from earlier in the game.Harvey has not pitched more than six innings in a game this season, and has allowed a .509 opponents’ batting average the third time through the batting order.In the 2015 regular season, Harvey had a .255 opponents’ average the third time through the order, and lasted more than six innings in 16 of his 29 starts. It was Harvey’s comeback season after Tommy John surgery, and he pitched 216 innings through the end of the World Series. The Mets believe that he still may be feeling the impact of that workload.“He knows how to pitch,” Reynolds said. “He’s Matt Harvey. He’s done it before and he’s going to continue to do it. He’s just got to get out of this little funk that he’s in, and he’ll be fine.”A version of this article appears in print on May 28, 2016, on Page D2 of the New York edition with the headline: Harvey, E.R.A. at 6.08, Rehearses for Next Start.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.