By BRAD SPURGEONMAY 27, 2016
Bringing cockpit protection to Formula One is a hot topic, with various proposals continuing to divide the series as a July 1 deadline to make a decision looms.The divisive issues include design aesthetics and engineering concerns, as well as basic notions about the tradition and spirit of the series and just how much risk should be preserved. Formula One also does not want to introduce a new protective system that ends up creating more problems than it prevents.Behind the controversy and soul-searching are strong voices like that of Gary Anderson, a former team technical director, who has reminded everyone that the goal of saving lives has to come before aesthetics.“I’m sure if you asked a driver from the 1980s if he had to re-live a major accident from his career in a car to the same safety levels of that period or one to today’s safety standards, he would choose the latter,” Anderson wrote this month in Autosport magazine.Advertisement“And perhaps these people should sit down with John Surtees to talk about safety,” he added, referring to the only man who was world champion in both Formula One and motorcycle racing. “Surtees is a legend of motorsport who has taken more life-threatening risks than most, but ask him about losing his son Henry from a head injury and if he thinks anything that could be done, should be done.”AdvertisementThree designs for the new system are likely to be considered by the International Automobile Federation, or F.I.A., the sport’s governing body, which wants to introduce the change on the cars next season: a heart-shaped protection above the driver’s head, or “halo”; a large windscreen that leaves the cockpit open; and a cockpit that is a completely covered, as on a fighter jet.Unlike the closed cockpits in most other racing series, Formula One has traditionally had open cockpits, with the driver’s helmet clearly visible. There are those who believe that should not change. There is also the issue of danger as a Formula One character trait. How safe should the series be?In contrast to Anderson’s safety-first point of view is that of Lewis Hamilton, the Mercedes driver who is the reigning world champion.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.“When I get in my car I know that there is a danger,” he said. “That’s been the same since I was eight years old, and that’s a risk that I am willing to take. And that’s the risk that every single driver who has ever got in a car has been willing to take.”He added that it was also the reason people were “in awe” of what Formula One drivers do, risking their lives in a dangerous situation.He questioned, therefore, eliminating the risk factor. “What’s the point if anyone can do it?” he asked.The F.I.A., meanwhile, wants to avoid introducing a system that would create other dangers. At the first race of the season, the Australian Grand Prix in Melbourne, the Spanish driver Fernando Alonso had an accident in which his McLaren rolled over many times and landed upside down. He extracted himself from the car instantly, but some observers later wondered whether he would have been able to do so if there had been a halo over the cockpit, possibly clamping him in.A decision must be made quickly if it is to be introduced next season, when a new set of technical regulations will radically change the design of the cars.“It’s a real problem,” said Pat Symonds, the technical director of the Williams team. “In the wind tunnel we are developing without anything on there, and in C.F.D. we are looking at the implications of both the canopy and the halo device,” referring to computational fluid dynamics.Advertisement“But I think we’ve got an idea of what the effects are, and they are quite dramatic,” he added. “There are some things, particularly in some of the cooling, that you won’t be able to do anymore because of the effect.”A version of this special report appears in print on May 28, 2016, in The International New York Times.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.See More »