By BEN SHPIGELMAY 2, 2017
J. T. Miller charged into the Ottawa Senators’ zone late in the second period Tuesday night, and he controlled the puck as he whirled at the top of the circle to shake one defender, and he controlled it as he juked past another, and he controlled it even as he fended off a check and zoomed toward the net. The puck lingered along his stick blade for a good five seconds as he wove through a discombobulated defense, and he gave it up only when he was ready, not because anyone had dislodged, it or had even come close.Miller’s pass resulted in a goal for the Rangers — and of course it did, because his team, after opening an Eastern Conference semifinal series with two narrow defeats, played in a 4-1 win as if it had spent the past three days reliving its foibles and vowing never to repeat them.“There is no question, I think, that we were the better team tonight,” goaltender Henrik Lundqvist said.The evidence was indisputable: goals from all four lines, crammed in the first two periods; defensive commitment and accountability; and a brand of hockey — speedy but not reckless, physical but not undisciplined — that had eluded the Rangers for stretches in Ottawa. Not only did they neutralize Erik Karlsson, the Senators’ star defenseman, but they managed to exploit him, scoring their final three goals with him on the ice. The last of those, Oscar Lindberg’s tally off that feed from Miller, punctuated a victory that possessed restorative powers.Advertisement“I don’t think we should change a lot,” Lundqvist said. “There’s a lot of things that we should feel really good about.”AdvertisementChief among them is their newfound standing in the series, still tilted in Ottawa’s favor, but with the Rangers having avoided a course toward oblivion — only four times in N.H.L. history had a team won a best-of-seven series after dropping the first three games.Despite losing the first two, including a six-goal, double-overtime fiasco in Game 2, the Rangers derived confidence from their play. Gifted two days between games, they recharged — mentally and physically, Coach Alain Vigneault said — and proclaimed themselves both ready and desperate.The rhetoric emanating from the dressing rooms before Tuesday’s game revolved around a singular theme: luck. The Senators profited from it, believing they were fortunate to have won. The Rangers lacked it, believing their performance had merited a split.Get the big sports news, highlights and analysis from Times journalists, with distinctive takes on games and some behind-the-scenes surprises, delivered to your inbox every week.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.Mika Zibanejad, who assisted on Mats Zuccarello’s opening goal, said only that there were “a lot of words” that could describe how the Rangers needed to play. One possibility, however simple: better.Even if the Senators anticipated the Rangers’ desperation, they could not counter it.“I think our players knew,” Ottawa Coach Guy Boucher said, “but to know and to feel is two different things.”Instead of chasing the puck, the Rangers started with it, and they swarmed in Ottawa’s zone. Nine shots pelted Craig Anderson in the first nine minutes, with still others skittering wide, and they were superb chances: one-timers from the slot, wristers from the circle and rebounds near the crease. The Senators had bemoaned the five goals they ceded in Game 2, but their defensive lapses remained unresolved.With room to skate, the Rangers seized control, first on the ice, and then on the scoreboard. They went ahead at 5 minutes 31 seconds when Zuccarello, stationed low between the circles, converted a nifty centering pass from Zibanejad. On the pass, Zibanejad circled the net and fended off the 6-foot-6 rookie defenseman Ben Harpur, who had the reach, but not the speed, to keep up.AdvertisementThe Rangers abused him later in the period, when Zuccarello wheeled the puck around the boards, behind the net, in the general direction of Michael Grabner. It evaded Anderson, who left the crease to play the puck, and also Harpur, who could have stopped it, or advanced it, but did neither. Grabner wrapped around and tucked the puck into the net at 13:24.“They were fast, and we were behind on everything,” Boucher said. “Behind on our thinking, behind on our execution, behind on our physicality, behind on everything.”The Rangers led by two goals for the first time since Game 2, which they bungled in the final 3:19 of regulation before losing in double overtime. Every playoff, it seems, Lundqvist entitles himself to a dud, a game when he surrenders rebounds or does not track the puck well or move with grace, and the result reflects it. His six goals allowed matched a playoff worst.But almost always, Lundqvist regroups for the next game. In front of him, the Rangers’ defense cleared screens, reducing the potential for deflections, and allowed him to see the shooter. Rarely tested, Lundqvist most likely never noticed his lone blemish — by Jean-Gabriel Pageau, who scored four goals in Game 2, off a no-look, behind-the-back pass from Bobby Ryan — until it was behind him.“We made sure that if they were going to get anything,” said Lundqvist, who had 26 saves, “they had to earn it by working really hard.”By then, though, the Rangers led by three goals. In 20 minutes’ time, they would trail the series by one game.A version of this article appears in print on May 3, 2017, on Page B10 of the New York edition with the headline: Rangers Regain Their Footing at the Garden and March Back Into the Series.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.