By ANDREW DASJULY 26, 2016
Ivan Gazidis became Arsenal’s chief executive in 2009, but before that he spent more than a decade as one of the founding executives of Major League Soccer, eventually rising to deputy commissioner. That makes his return to the United States this week with Arsenal, which was invited to play Thursday in the M.L.S. All-Star Game, a special moment. “It’ll be a great and slightly weird experience for me,” Gazidis said. “I’ll be watching two teams that I love and respect, and I’ll want them both to win.”This season, like all seasons at Arsenal, will begin with high expectations. While Arsenal has finished in the English Premier League’s top four for 20 consecutive seasons — an astonishing run in one of the world’s most competitive leagues — last year’s runner-up campaign was viewed as yet another disappointment, and it did little to mollify fans eager for the club’s first league title since 2004. In an interview last week, Gazidis discussed winning, pressure and what he wants his team to look like even after he and his manager, Arsène Wenger, are gone.Arsenal rightly wins praise for its consistency and its long run of top-four finishes. But the club came up short in the Premier League race again last season, finishing second. Do you need to win the title again soon to appease the fans, or is that kind of consistency something you can be just as proud of?We need to win the major titles, and we feel that pressure every day. And so for us, there is a sense of disappointment and frustration that last season we finished in second place. Second place isn’t what we’re aiming for. We’re aiming to win it.AdvertisementAchieving consistency provides us with the opportunity to compete at that level and try to win it every year, and that’s obviously a good thing. But that’s not our objective. Our objective is to win the major trophies, and to put the club in a position where it can consistently compete for the major trophies. And I would add, very importantly for us, to do it in a way that’s consistent with our club values.AdvertisementWe believe, fundamentally, in giving a chance to young players. We believe, fundamentally, in playing aggressive, attractive football. We believe, fundamentally, that we should conduct ourselves as a football club in the right way, in a way that makes our fans proud. So I would say, winning is imperative, but for us it’s not enough to win. We have to win in the right way. And that’s an even higher, more ambitious goal, but that’s something we’re convinced that we can do.Despite ending a long trophy drought with F.A. Cup titles in 2014 and 2015, your manager, Arsène Wenger, takes a lot of grief for not winning the one title that everyone wants. Yet the club, at least publicly, has never wavered in its support for him. Is that a true representation of what’s happening in the boardroom?We don’t have any sense of nostalgia. Our support for Arsène Wenger is not based on the history of what he’s done for our football club, as extraordinary as that is. We’re very focused on the future. This is one of our core values is that we’re progressive and always moving forward. So what’s happened in the past is far less relevant to us as what’s happening as we look forward.And our support of Arsène has been strong, because we see someone who’s devoted to the club, who’s top class in the way he conducts himself, and in the way he has a positive vision for what football is and what it can be. Now, sometimes we get accused of being naïve; I don’t view that as naïveté. I think winning football, and winning it with style and grace, are core values for Arsenal, and Arsène is somebody that we believe can deliver that.He remains massively engaged. He continues to think about not just short term but the long-term development of the club. He’s excited about the future, and we’re excited about our future with him.Wenger has been at the club 20 years this fall, and his tenure is really remarkable in the modern era of soccer. Do you have a regular conversation with him about how long he wants to keep doing this?There are two different things here. One is the issue about when the time will be right for the club and for Arsène to say the time is right to make a transition. And that’s a conversation that I keep private between myself and Arsène that’s periodic.AdvertisementBut I think more important than that is the fact that the actions that we take, the decisions that we make, are all the same irrespective of the time frame that we might be looking at in terms of a transition. Let me give you an example: this year we’re investing over 20 million pounds in developing our facilities: our training ground for young players and our academy and the main training ground. Those are investments that are being made for the long-term future of the football club, for the next 10, 15, 20 years. And we’re making those decisions in exactly the same way, and Arsène is actively involved in them, even though he probably won’t see the fruits of all of those investments.We would not be successful if we simply went out into the transfer market and tried to outgun our competitors. We’re run in a self-sustaining way, and a way that we believe in, because we believe it gives us certainty for the future, and enables us to plan our future with confidence. That means we can’t afford to make huge mistakes in the transfer market. We can’t afford to outgun competitors that have far more money to splurge on transfer fees than we do. So we have to be very careful, very selective about how we do things.Do you feel a sense of validation of that philosophy when rivals like Manchester United and Chelsea stumble as they try to make transitions, or try to spend their way out of problems and find that they can’t?Validation comes with winning major trophies. So no, I don’t feel validated by consistency. I will feel validated when we’re able to win, and win by being true to our values and by playing great football. I think it’s a very high ambition for us — winning, and winning the right way — but we’re going to continue to strive toward that.You said an interesting thing recently in a meeting with supporters: “Money is not going to be as important, because everybody has money now.” Can you explain what you meant by that?Get the big sports news, highlights and analysis from Times journalists, with distinctive takes on games and some behind-the-scenes surprises, delivered to your inbox every week.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.That’s one of the developments we’re seeing with the Premier League, as the television revenue grows dramatically, and it’s very equally shared among the clubs. In the past, the big clubs could financially bully the smaller clubs — it would be unthinkable that a smaller club would be able to hold on to its best player if Manchester United or Arsenal came knocking at the door. That dynamic is changing. And so the constraints within the Premier League are less and less about pure finances, and more and more relatively important become things like how well you identify players, how well you develop players, what kind of sports science you have, your analytics, your psychology. All of these support areas around what we do increasingly become bigger differentiators, because the money is not enough to blast the best talent toward you.Arsenal hasn’t been extraordinarily active this summer. What kind of Arsenal team can fans expect when they tune in to Thursday’s All-Star Game?Well, we’ll have our new signing, Granit Xhaka, with us, and obviously that’s a major investment for the club. He’s just reported for training, because he was at the European Championships, and so it’s not really clear what game time he’ll get — this is literally his first week with the club. In terms of the squad, I think people will understand that the players that went to the latter stages of the European Championships won’t be traveling with us, but everybody else will. But it’s a strong squad, and a serious part of our preseason.AdvertisementWe’re still active in the market, as are most other clubs, and if we find opportunities that our manager believes can improve our squad and add something to it, we’re certainly going to take those steps. But in terms of this week, I don’t think there will be any radical surprises.One player United States fans have an interest in is Gedion Zelalem, who played on loan at Rangers in Scotland last year. Any updates on his status for this season?We don’t know yet. Gedion is still very much a developing talent, somebody that has some great attributes but still has a ways to go in his development. He’s come off a good experience for him at Rangers; playing week in and week out in competitive games has been healthy for his development. But what we’re doing now, with Gedion and with a number of the other young players that we have in the squad, is assessing them, taking a look at them in preseason. They will certainly get some playing time and have the chance to impress. And it will be after a few weeks of preseason that we’ll begin to make decisions about what the next steps are for the next phase of their development.You go back to the early days of M.L.S., but you’ve been out of it for a long time. What are your thoughts on what it has grown into?I’m amazed at the development and just delighted, and I’m very, very proud to have played a small part in it. But candidly, since I left in 2009, the league has leapt forward again. When we started the league in 1994 or 1996, when we were starting out, I don’t think we could have been optimistic enough to envision where Major League Soccer is today.It’s deeply connected to the global game now, part of the global conversation. Its fan base is as connected, as passionate, as engaged, as informed, as sophisticated as fans of the game anywhere in the world. And it’s on an incredible trajectory.Now really the next phase of its growth is going to be, with such a solid platform, to make sure that the level of play continues to develop. And in the end, that’s going to be based on how well American players can develop. That’s going to be the pipeline of talent for M.L.S., and the foundation of its success.This interview has been edited and condensed.We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.