By REBECCA R. RUIZJULY 17, 2016
A two-month inquiry into allegations of state-sponsored doping in Russia, released Monday, confirmed a Russian whistle-blower’s claims. The inquiry, commissioned by the World Anti-Doping Agency, focused on Dr. Grigory Rodchenkov’s detailed account of cheating at the 2014 Sochi Olympics.Who is Dr. Grigory Rodchenkov?He is the former director of Russia’s antidoping lab who oversaw drug testing at the 2014 Sochi Olympics. He resigned last November after another investigation accused Russia of doping that was coordinated by government officials and Dr. Rodchenkov. Dr. Rodchenkov did not fully cooperate with that inquiry, and after its results were published, he fled to the United States, fearing for his life in Russia, he said.When did he speak out, and what did he say?In Los Angeles in May, he told The New York Times that Russia had seen hosting the Olympics as an opportunity to control the antidoping lab results and allow athletes to use performance-enhancing drugs throughout the competition.He said that at Sochi, he had carried out orders from the country’s sports ministry to “win at any cost,” protecting top Russian Olympians who were on steroids from getting caught. At least 15 Russian medalists at Sochi used banned substances, Dr. Rodchenkov’s records indicated.AdvertisementHow did the scheme that he detailed work?Dr. Rodchenkov said he had received spreadsheets from the Russian sports ministry that named top athletes who were part of the doping program. In the months leading up to the Olympics, he said, those athletes collected their clean urine and provided it in containers — soda bottles and baby formula bottles, for example — that were stockpiled in a freezer.AdvertisementAt Sochi, Dr. Rodchenkov said, he spent most nights, from around midnight on, replacing urine samples tainted by performance-enhancing drugs with clean urine from the same athletes, somehow breaking into the supposedly tamper-proof bottles that are the standard at international competitions. He did so with the help of members of Russia’s intelligence service, he said.For hours each night, the small team worked in a shadow laboratory lit by a single lamp, passing bottles of urine through a hand-size hole in the wall, to be ready for testing the next day, Rodchenkov said.How could the tamper-proof bottles have been breached?Dr. Rodchenkov said he never saw the bottles being opened, and whether it is possible to successfully break into the Berlinger-brand bottles has certainly figured into the investigation that is to be reported on Monday.“Magicians were on duty,” he said, claiming that he had seen locked bottles disappear through the hole in the wall and return about an hour later, unlocked and with their caps intact.Get the big sports news, highlights and analysis from Times journalists, with distinctive takes on games and some behind-the-scenes surprises, delivered to your inbox every week.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.He theorized that the method the Russian intelligence service used to break into the bottles had something to do with the toothed metal rings that lock the bottles when the cap is twisted shut. In the months leading up to the Games, he said, a man that Dr. Rodchenkov believed to be working for the intelligence service collected hundreds of those rings from the Moscow lab, he said.Aren’t doping samples anonymous? How did he know whose urine was whose?Each urine sample is coded with a unique seven-digit number. Dr. Rodchenkov said that athletes had taken pictures of their sample forms, including the code, and texted them to the ministry, offering forbidden insight into the samples.Is there any other way to prove what he said?Dr. Rodchenkov said that he had added table salt to some of the urine samples he tampered with to make the specific gravity — a chemistry measurement recorded on the samples — match the specifications of the original tainted samples.AdvertisementHe has encouraged investigators to examine Russian athletes’ urine from Sochi — which is still being stored in a laboratory in Lausanne, Switzerland — to test for excessive levels of table salt, and to examine the glass bottles for telltale scratches around their necks, where the interlocking metal rings sit.Who conducted the investigation?Richard McLaren, a Canadian lawyer, led the inquiry, which was commissioned in May by the World Anti-Doping Agency. Mr. McLaren was also part of a three-person independent investigation that, last year, accused Russia of widespread, government-supported doping.What will happen next?Any decision to discipline Russia would rest with international sports federations and the International Olympic Committee.Last month, the global track and field authorities barred Russian athletes from the Rio Games. WADA has indicated that it could recommend barring the entire Russian delegation.Over the weekend, several national antidoping organizations and athlete groups made it clear that they were preparing to ask the I.O.C. to bar the entire Russian Federation from the Games. The organizations discussing taking that extraordinary step included the antidoping agencies of the United States, Canada, New Zealand, Japan, Spain and Switzerland.How will Russia react?Vitaly Mutko, Russia’s minister of sport, dismissed the significance of the McLaren investigation, which did not consult with him during its inquiry and which, along with WADA, does not have the power to do anything beyond issue recommendations to the I.O.C. and sports federations.Russia is challenging the ban imposed on its track and field team, and further legal action may follow if additional disciplinary measures are imposed. The Court of Arbitration for Sport in Switzerland is set to have a hearing this week regarding the ban on Russia’s track team, and a decision on that could come as soon as Wednesday.A version of this article appears in print on July 18, 2016, on Page D6 of the New York edition with the headline: Dissecting the Russian Doping Inquiry.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.