By FILIP BONDYJULY 24, 2016
HARRISON, N.J. — The match was decided quickly, another one-sided derby with more yellow cards than suspenseful moments. But the hostility between coaches during and after the Red Bulls’ 4-1 victory over New York City F.C. on Sunday is likely to linger and feed this growing soccer rivalry.“Stop crying, stop complaining,” N.Y.C.F.C. Coach Patrick Vieira said he had told his Red Bulls counterpart, Jesse Marsch, when Vieira was sent off by the referee during a first-half water break. “Jesse’s team was playing well, but he was frustrated. I feel sorry for him.”Vieira, tossed for leaving his coaching area, was infuriated that Marsch had criticized M.L.S. referees during the week before this match with claims that officials favored superstars like David Villa, Andrea Pirlo and Frank Lampard. Marsch was fined by the league for his complaints, but Vieira was certain that the respected referee Mark Geiger and the two sideline assistants, C. J. Morgante and Adam Wienckowski, had been affected by those remarks during Sunday’s game.“Influencing the referee during the week had a massive part in the game,” said Vieira, who is likely to be fined for his postmatch comments. He said that Marsch had “got what he wanted.”Advertisement“There was a plan,” he said. “It’s not appropriate on the week there’s a derby.”Asked which calls he was questioning, Vieira said there had been many.Advertisement“I’m talking about all of them,” he said. “The referees all read the newspapers. Look at the first three, four offsides we had. There was no way that was offside.”Regardless of any whistles, the Red Bulls utterly dominated this match from the outset. Marsch had figured that the 90-plus-degree heat would work in his team’s favor, that the Red Bulls were young, that they played at a relentlessly fast pace, and that those veteran N.Y.C.F.C. legs would surely fade in the second half.That was the plan, but suddenly there was no need to wait so long for the collapse. The Red Bulls jumped all over their confounded opponents from the start, scoring three goals by the 41st minute.In the process, Marsch’s high-press side rescued considerable pride and purpose from its meandering season. N.Y.C.F.C. entered this match having won five of its last six games, with the best road record in the league. But the Red Bulls can now claim to own this series again, having captured five of six matches since N.Y.C.F.C. came into existence last season, with an 18-5 aggregate score line.The Red Bulls scored early and often as the N.Y.C.F.C. back line, never the club’s strong point, lost structure and ceded open lanes under pressure. Bradley Wright-Phillips took a cutback pass from Sacha Kljestan in the box and beat goalkeeper Josh Saunders in the 20th minute for his first goal in nearly a month.A few minutes later, Ronald Zubar leapt above two N.Y.C.F.C. defenders to hammer a header past Saunders off a corner. When Frederic Brillant was called for an awkward hand ball in the box, Kljestan converted the penalty kick for a 3-0 lead. Wright-Phillips scored again, his 11th goal of the season, in the 70th minute after breaking alone into the box and outsmarting Saunders with some fancy footwork.Only an uncommon 30-yard rocket from N.Y.C.F.C.’s Thomas McNamara in the 43rd minute prevented an even bigger romp.AdvertisementBy the time Vieira was tossed during the water break at the 30th minute, the usually mild-mannered coach had already gone to war with a few Red Bulls fans behind his bench, telling them to “shut up” while using an expletive.“He didn’t want to shake my hand in the hallway, but I’ve seen that before from him,” Marsch said of Vieira. “I thought Geiger was fantastic, not just because we won or because of what I said. He had a very clean game.”This is rapidly becoming one of the best sports rivalries in the New York area. N.Y.C.F.C. stands atop the Eastern Conference with 33 points, while the Red Bulls are second with 31. There was quite a sense of occasion on Sunday. As the goals piled on, Red Bulls fans chanted, “You’re not singing anymore” and “Who’s your daddy?” at the visiting N.Y.C.F.C. contingent.Tempers flared throughout the game, producing eight yellow cards, two for N.Y.C.F.C. defender Ethan White, in addition to Vieira’s expulsion.A frustrated Villa was whistled several times for being offside and missed a couple of solid opportunities. He said he had nothing to say about the refereeing or Marsch’s statements. Lampard, however, was more vocal.“You like to think the referees are big and strong enough not to listen to that stuff, but maybe sometimes they do,” Lampard said. “Patrick felt the decisions were going against him. Their manager made calculated statements to try and influence the referee. Simple as that.”After the game ended, there was a prolonged on-field celebration by the Red Bulls — perhaps an answer to what happened on July 3 after N.Y.C.F.C. defeated the Red Bulls at Yankee Stadium, 2-0, when Villa posted a photo on Twitter of the entire team rejoicing in the locker room.“Now that we’re building history and you’re seeing hatred, that’s what makes derby matches,” Marsch said.Get the big sports news, highlights and analysis from Times journalists, with distinctive takes on games and some behind-the-scenes surprises, delivered to your inbox every week.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.A version of this article appears in print on July 25, 2016, on Page D5 of the New York edition with the headline: Red Bulls Reclaim Control of Rivalry While Coaches Feud in the Background.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.