By CHRISTOPHER CLAREYAPRIL 1, 2017
HELSINKI, Finland — Javier Fernández was standing in the interview area on Saturday afternoon after the men’s competition at the World Figure Skating Championships.Behind him on a television screen, his friend and training partner Yuzuru Hanyu was receiving his gold medal. Fernández, a two-time world champion from Spain, was using his right hand like a puppet to explain why he was not standing there instead.“It’s like somebody is telling you in your ear, ‘Oh, my God, they are doing so well out there,’” he said, moving his fingers near his right temple to mimic the voices in his head. “‘Oh, my God, you are coming, the last one! Are you sure you want to do it? He got a personal best. Do you want to do it? Are you going to be able to win?’”Hanyu at his best can do this to a man, even to a friend, and although it had been more than two years since he had peaked at a major championship, he was there from start to finish in Saturday’s free program.AdvertisementSkating first in a particularly strong and deep final group of six, Hanyu, a young and lithe Japanese star, rose to the occasion and stayed there, landing his opening quadruple loop and then expertly navigating all the other currents and shoals of his seriously difficult program.AdvertisementHis 223.20 points broke his own world record in the free program, giving him a total of 321.58. He needed nearly every point: His diminutive 19-year-old compatriot Shoma Uno took the silver medal with 319.31 points and would probably have beaten him if not for a stumble out of a triple lutz. Jin Boyang of China, also 19, won the bronze with 303.58 points. Fernández was fourth with 301.19.“Yuzu just went to another place today, and you can’t put yourself there,” said Tracy Wilson, who assists Hanyu’s Canadian coach, Brian Orser. “You just put yourself into the training and hope you end up there.”An Olympic and world champion at 19 in 2014, Hanyu is now back atop his sport at age 22 as he heads into next year’s Winter Olympics in Pyeongchang, South Korea.The Canadian ice dancers Tessa Virtue and Scott Moir, who came back this season after a two-year break, also returned to the top on Saturday, winning the gold medal by a narrow margin over the two-time defending world champions, Gabriella Papadakis and Guillaume Cizeron of France. The siblings Maia and Alex Shibutani won the bronze, the only American medal in any discipline in Helsinki.Moir stumbled coming out of a step sequence, which contributed to the Canadians’ second-place finish in the free dance, behind their French training partners. But their big lead heading into Saturday gave them enough of a margin to win their third world title and first since 2012.Hanyu had lost the last two world titles to Fernández and watched a wave of younger skaters raise the bar technically. But he decided to embrace his new challenges and risks this season, becoming the first skater in history to land a quadruple loop.Others have followed, and although Hanyu was far from flawless in the short program on Thursday — finishing fifth behind the leader, Fernández — he came through when it mattered more on Saturday afternoon, in front of a capacity crowd in Hartwall Arena that included many Japanese fans. They rewarded him by covering much of the ice with roses and Winnie-the-Pooh dolls (he likes Pooh) after his performance.Advertisement“After the short program, I was quite depressed, so deeply depressed,” Hanyu said. “But I think my fans and the team believed in me, so I think that’s why I was able to pull off this performance today.”He was alone on the ice, however, and was also the one who, according to Wilson, made the big decisions that led to Saturday’s victory.Get the big sports news, highlights and analysis from Times journalists, with distinctive takes on games and some behind-the-scenes surprises, delivered to your inbox every week.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.“When something is taken away from you, that is so motivating,” she said of his runner-up finishes at the last two world championships. “To be just 19 and Olympic champion, you’re learning lessons on the fly. And he’s remarkable in how he’s learned and in his strength of character in going after it and staying with it. Even with adding the quad loop and doing four quads, we talked to him about it and asked: ‘Do you really need it? Why not the quad loop with three quads and then add in?’“And his answer was: ‘This is why I do this. I want to push the sport. I want to push myself.’”Also, at this rapidly advancing stage, it is a matter of push or be pushed. Hanyu’s new and younger rivals are expanding the boundaries of figure skating, making serial quadruple jumps a prerequisite to success.Hanyu gave credit in particular to Jin, the powerful Chinese teenager, but also talked about what might come next.“Scientifically, someone told me that five rotations in the air is a possibility, but the I.S.U. don’t even have scores for that,” Hanyu said, referring to quintuple jumps and the sport’s governing body, the International Skating Union.He said he still hoped to land the only remaining unconquered quadruple, the quadruple axel, although he is not sure he will ever try it in competition.Advertisement“The reason we have so many types of quad today is because of Boyang,” Hanyu said. “No doubt he’s the one who pushed us all because he did the quad lutz and a classic, clean performance and we realized you can do the quad lutz. It’s humanly possible. So he’s responsible for pulling us all up to the level we’re at today.”Not all the teenagers thrived under the pressure in Helsinki. Nathan Chen, a 17-year-old American who has been the most prolific lander of quads this season, fell on two of them in his free program on Saturday, including his opening quad lutz. He hit the ice hard enough that the sound was audible in the third row despite the music.Chen, who fell on a triple axel in the short program, said that his month-old boots were not providing him sufficient support but that his only spares were “brand new” and that he considered it too big a risk to wear them.“I need to make sure in training I have a whole bunch of new pairs that are interchangeable,” said Chen, who had enough resilience and technical difficulty to finish sixth over all in his first world championships.Jason Brown, the other American man in the competition, finished seventh. Their combined result was just enough to give the United States the maximum three men’s entries for the 2018 Olympics.That should be quite a competition: a mix of generations and styles with the quad, for better or worse, the leitmotif.There will be the older skaters like Fernández, 25, and Patrick Chan, the thoughtful Canadian who, at 26, finished fifth on Saturday with a resurgent performance. There will be the new wave, and there will be Hanyu.“If he skates a clean short and a clean long, I might think he might be unbeatable,” Fernández said of Hanyu.A few moments later, Hanyu arrived in the interview area, hugged Fernández, removed the shiny new gold medal from his own neck and placed it around Fernández’s.AdvertisementBut there was no doubt on Saturday about where it really belonged.A version of this article appears in print on April 2, 2017, on Page SP2 of the New York edition with the headline: Hanyu Wins World Title With Record Free Skate.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.