By KAREN CROUSEJULY 21, 2017
SOUTHPORT, England — Jordan Spieth, who shared the first-round lead at the 146th British Open with two others, was among the final 10 threesomes to tee off on Friday, allowing him ample time to watch the second-round telecast and plot his strategy.He took particular note that on the par-5 15th hole, the best place to miss the green was long.Spieth and the other late starters absorbed the full fury of the one-two punch that is Royal Birkdale and Mother Nature. Playing in an intermittent downpour, Spieth was even par for the day when he arrived at the 15th. After a so-so drive, Spieth wanted to use a 3-wood for his second shot. His caddie, Michael Greller, advised laying up with a 3-iron and relying on his sharp short game for a possible birdie.Twice a season, Greller can exercise his authority and veto a club choice by Spieth, who counts on Greller to be the voice of caution. He ended up deciding not to overrule Spieth at the 15th after hearing him out. Spieth explained his reasoning: “I said, ‘Look, I hit this cut out of the rough here, as long as it’s not in that left bunker, greenside, anywhere else is an easier opportunity to make birdie than being 60 yards off from the green.’”Spieth’s shot came to rest on the green, and he made the putt for an eagle that moved him briefly to seven under for the tournament. He finished bogey-par-par in a driving rain for a one-under 69 and a 36-hole score of six-under 134, two strokes better than Matt Kuchar (71) and three ahead of Ian Poulter (70) and Brooks Koepka (72).AdvertisementOf the first 19 players on the leaderboard, only Spieth, Rory McIlroy (68), Gary Woodland (69), Jamie Lovemark (69) and Chan Kim (68) bettered par in the second round.McIlroy teed off in the morning, and after his round, he predicted that any number around 70 “is going to be a great score.”McIlroy added, “The back nine is playing really, really difficult.”Spieth covered the back nine in two-under and proclaimed himself well pleased.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.“I would have gladly stayed on the couch — I was watching the coverage this morning — for even par,” he said.AdvertisementOne of Spieth’s playing competitors was the defending champion, Henrik Stenson, who carded a 73 for a 36-hole total of two over while battling the course, the elements and dark thoughts related to a burglary of his rental home that occurred during Thursday’s round.The thieves stole a suitcase containing his clothes and took other valuables, including jewelry. Nobody was home at the time of the break-in.“It was kind of surreal to find out that my suitcase and all my clothes were gone,” said Stenson, who had a pile of dirty clothes that the burglars left behind that he laundered before the second round so he would have something to wear.“They were clearly targeting me because they were there when I was out playing, and they figured out the house was empty when I was away and they stole all my gear,” Stenson added.At least they could not take the claret jug that is awarded to the winner. Stenson gave that back on Monday. Spieth will spend the weekend trying to make it his.A version of this article appears in print on July 22, 2017, on Page D5 of the New York edition with the headline: Overcoming the Course and the Elements, Spieth Forges Ahead.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.