AdvertisementSupported byBy Victor MatherIt was fairly clear early on that the superstar freshman Ben Simmons was not going to be playing in the N.C.A.A. tournament in his one season of college basketball. Louisiana State was ranked 21st in the preseason Associated Press poll, but the Tigers struggled from the start and were not quite good enough for a berth.As it turns out, Simmons will not be playing in the postseason at all. L.S.U. declined to play in the traditional second-tier tournament, the N.I.T., and also passed on the other scheduled postseason events, the College Basketball Invitational, the CollegeInsider.com tournament and the new Vegas 16.In all, 150 teams will suit up for postseason play, but Simmons and L.S.U. will not be among them.“We will be able to utilize this time to get better and start preparations for next season,” L.S.U. Coach Johnny Jones said in a statement. “We fell short of the mark of getting to the N.C.A.A. tournament; I take full responsibility for this team and will do the things necessary to make sure we are able to reach one of our main goals at L.S.U. in the future.”The team said an injury to the senior Keith Hornsby, a talented guard who is the son of the musician Bruce Hornsby, had factored into the decision.The Tigers played somewhat better in the second half of the season and finished 19-14, tied for third in the Southeastern Conference. But they were stomped by top-seeded Texas A&M, 71-38, in the semifinals of their conference tournament in what is virtually certain to have been Simmons’s last collegiate game.The 6-foot-10 Simmons averaged 19.2 points a game and is likely to be one of the top picks of the N.B.A. draft, along with Brandon Ingram of Duke.It does not take much to get into a postseason tournament, just a winning record. But with so many slots available, and several other teams declining berths, some of the tournaments may be having trouble filling their fields. As of Monday evening, the CollegeInsider.com tournament had announced 26 teams instead of its planned 32, and the Vegas 16 announced a field of eight instead of 16.Evansville, Northwestern, Kansas State and Penn State were among the other teams that said they had declined postseason invitations to one or more tournaments and chose instead to end their season.Privately run tournaments like the College Basketball Invitational and the CollegeInsider.com event tend to make financial demands on teams as well, asking them to pay to host a game, though some or all of that can be defrayed by ticket sales.The postseason events have a variety of formats. The 32-team N.I.T. is the most like the N.C.A.A., with eight seeded teams in each of four brackets and its final four at Madison Square Garden.The College Basketball Invitational has 16 teams and the novelty of a best-of-three final. The CollegeInsider.com tournament does not announce the matchups of each round until the previous round is completed. The Vegas 16 is played over four days at the Mandalay Bay in Las Vegas.These events offer a send-off to seniors and a chance for teams to get a consolation trophy. Teams like High Point, Houston Baptist and Grand Canyon are still playing basketball. But Simmons and L.S.U are not.Advertisement