By BEN SHPIGELMARCH 14, 2016
Given the teams that expressed interest in Matt Forte, he could have played with some of the N.F.L.’s best quarterbacks: Tom Brady, Aaron Rodgers or Tony Romo.New England, Green Bay and Dallas, as well as Tampa Bay, which is led by the promising No. 1 draft pick Jameis Winston, pursued Forte to varying degrees during free agency. So did the Jets, whose quarterback situation remains unresolved.Forte acknowledged there was some apprehension about signing with a team without a quarterback, but that ultimately did not deter him.“I also think that much about the organization and the team dynamic right now,” he said Monday during a conference call.AdvertisementOne of the N.F.L.’s most productive running backs over the past eight seasons, Forte signed a three-year deal with the Jets last week. Before free agency began, his former Chicago Bears teammate Brandon Marshall raved to him about Ryan Fitzpatrick, and Forte said he hoped his decision would entice Fitzpatrick to return as the Jets’ quarterback.Advertisement“I would expect and hope it would be him, just to build off what they had last year,” Forte said.Fitzpatrick and the Jets remain locked in a stalemate that does not appear to be nearing an end. The Jets do not have any urgency to budge from their offer because competition has yet to emerge for him.Get the big sports news, highlights and analysis from Times journalists, with distinctive takes on games and some behind-the-scenes surprises, delivered to your inbox every week.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.Forte attracted suitors because of his consistency and versatility. He ran for fewer than 900 yards (898) last season for the first time in his career, and only because he missed three games with a knee injury. According to Pro Football Reference, he has caught the most passes by a running back, 487, since he entered the league in 2008.Only Chris Johnson and Adrian Peterson have more carries during that time, but Forte, 30, said he felt strong and healthy.“After the season, I took three weeks, and I was feeling really good after those three weeks,” Forte said. “Usually it takes almost two months to feel good after the season.”From conversations with coaches, Forte said he expected to be used as an every-down back, though the Jets are likely to integrate Bilal Powell and their other free-agent signing at running back, Khiry Robinson.The Bears informed Forte a month ago that they would not re-sign him, a move that surprised him. He thought they would at least extend an offer.AdvertisementSoon after, he encountered Marshall at a conference in Denver. Forte told him the teams he thought would be interested, and Marshall began recruiting him to the Jets, who had another former Bears teammate, tight end Kellen Davis.“At that time, I didn’t really think that the Jets actually would be the front-runner,” Forte said. “But as it got closer and closer, I started thinking about how it would actually be a good fit.”Once free agency came, Forte said, the Jets ended up being “the perfect fit” for him.We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.