By THE ASSOCIATED PRESSMARCH 13, 2016
Charl Schwartzel had two big birdies as he closed with a four-under-par 67 after making up a five-shot deficit. All he needed was a par on the first hole of a playoff Sunday at Innisbrook to beat Bill Haas and win the Valspar Championship in Palm Harbor, Fla.Schwartzel’s two-putt par on the 18th hole in a playoff gave him his third victory worldwide in six starts dating to December.Haas, who never trailed over the final 27 holes of regulation, hit his tee shot into the trees in the playoff, came up short into a bunker and blasted long out of soft sand to 20 feet. He missed the par putt, and Schwartzel tapped in for his first United States win since the 2011 Masters.The loudest cheers belonged to Lee McCoy, a senior at Georgia, who grew up next to Innisbrook and made good on his first sponsor’s exemption. Playing alongside Jordan Spieth, McCoy shot a 69 to finish alone in fourth. It was the best finish by an amateur in a PGA Tour-sanctioned event since Justin Rose, then 17, tied for fourth at the British Open in 1998 at Royal Birkdale.AdvertisementMcCoy would have earned $292,800 had he been a pro. “It’s surreal to say the least,” he said.Spieth fell behind early, never caught up and closed with a 73 to tie for 18th, seven shots behind.AdvertisementSchwartzel, of South Africa, was the only player who put any sustained pressure on Haas, and he made his move with a 65-foot birdie putt on the par-3 13th. He got up and down from a bunker for birdie on the 14th, made a tough par save from the edge of a bunker on the 16th and rolled in a 25-foot putt on the 17th.He posted a seven-under 277.Haas had a two-shot lead with three holes to play and had made tough par saves to stay in front. It finally caught up with him when he made bogey from the bunker on the 16th, and he closed with two pars for a 72.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.Schwartzel and McCoy were the only players to break par from the last nine groups.Steve Stricker was two shots out of the lead until he made a double bogey on the par-5 11th and never recovered. Graham DeLaet of Canada, starting the day one shot behind and seeking his first PGA Tour victory, made no birdies in a round of 75.Ryan Moore hit the ball great but could not figure out the greens, which were slower than usual. Moore was one shot back of the lead at the turn, but he closed with 12 straight pars for a 71 to finish third.AUSTRALIAN TAKES THAI TITLE Australia’s Scott Hend won the Thailand Classic in Hua Hin, closing with a four-under 68 for a one-stroke victory over Thailand’s Piya Swangarunporn.Hend finished at 18-under 270 at Black Mountain in the event, sanctioned by the European and Asian tours. Piya had a tournament-record 63.SOUTH KOREAN WINS IN CHINA Lee Jung-Min won the World Ladies Championship in Hainan, China, beating her fellow South Koreans Lee Seung-Hyun, Kim Bo-Kyung and Ji Han Sol in rainy conditions at Mission Hills.Lee Jung-Min closed with a six-under 66 for a nine-under 279 total on the Olazábal Course in the event, sanctioned by the European, Korean and Chinese tours. She also won the team competition with Ko Jin-Young at 12 under. Kim finished with a 69, and Ji and Lee Seung-Hyun each shot a 71.A version of this article appears in print on March 14, 2016, on Page D10 of the New York edition with the headline: Schwartzel Catches Haas and Prevails in a Playoff.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.