AdvertisementSupported byMixed Martial Arts7 PhotosView Slide Show ›Aaron Joel Santos for The New York TimesBy Joe CochraneBANGKOK — When the local fight legend Dejdamrong Sor Amnuaysirichoke walks into a packed arena here Friday, he will find much that is familiar, including the roar of his fans and the rhythmic “sarama” music that is an integral part of traditional Muay Thai kickboxing in this country.But there will be one major difference: His fight will be the main event of the first major professional mixed martial arts event in Thailand, which for years had unofficially banned the sport in an effort to protect Muay Thai.The fight night at Bangkok’s 11,000-seat Impact Arena, organized by the Singapore-based promotion One Championship, will culminate with Dejdamrong defending his M.M.A. strawweight title (52.3 to 56.7 kilograms, or about 115.3 to 125 pounds) against Yoshitaka Naito of Japan.The nine-fight event, which also will include performances by two of Thailand’s most popular music groups, is sold out. It is being viewed as a test of both the popularity and the acceptability of M.M.A. in this country, whose sports authority in 2012 vowed never to support such an event because it was too violent and would smear the character of the popular domestic sport of Muay Thai.Thailand’s Ministry of Interior and its Ministry of Tourism and Sports, however, have both endorsed Friday’s event, according to One Championship, much to the delight of local M.M.A. fans.“My father’s generation is a bit skeptical, and are afraid that M.M.A. will change Muay Thai,” said Nuttadaj Vachirarattanawong, whose family-run company has been promoting Muay Thai fights for 40 years. “But my generation welcomes it. It’s good for Muay Thai, and for the Thai fighters.”M.M.A. is a full-contact sport that combines boxing with wrestling, jujitsu, taekwondo, Muay Thai and other disciplines, with attacks allowed both standing and on the ground. Fighters try to knock out opponents or force them into submission by using a variety of holds. In Muay Thai, fighters can use punches, kicks, elbows and knees from a standing position only; tackling or striking an opponent on the ground is forbidden.Mixed martial arts, which once was called “human cockfighting” by United States Senator John McCain, has become an entertainment juggernaut and is one of the fastest-growing sports in the world. Last month, New York ended its ban on mixed martial arts — the state was the last holdout in the United States — and the promoter of one of the sport’s biggest brands, the Ultimate Fighting Championship, said it would hold its first show in the state in November at Madison Square Garden.Nearly four years ago, the Sports Authority of Thailand said it would never support M.M.A. events, claiming the sport violated the country’s boxing laws. Officials with the sports authority, which falls under the Ministry of Tourism and Sports, said the sport was “too brutal.” Critics of the unofficial ban said that Thai sports officials, under pressure from Muay Thai promoters and gyms, were trying to shield the sport from competition for ticket sales and television broadcast rights.“It’s all about money,” said Vachara Vacharaphol, chief executive of Triple V Broadcast Company, which in March signed a one-year deal with One Championship to televise M.M.A. fights in Thailand.“They felt that if M.M.A. comes in, it will take away from their business,” Vachara said. After seeing One Championship fights being held with great fanfare in nearby Singapore, Malaysia, Indonesia and Myanmar, Thai officials ultimately caved to public demand, Vachara said.“It’s a global trend,” he added. “They can’t resist it.”Chatri Sityodtong, the chairman of One Championship, said that one or two large-scale M.M.A. events per year in Thailand would make no financial impact on Muay Thai, since its fights are held daily at venues large and small across the country and are broadcast live every weekend on Thai television.Chatri, a former Muay Thai fighter and M.M.A. trainer and coach from Thailand, said that in the end, mixed martial arts would end up promoting Muay Thai globally because competitors needed to possess strong kickboxing skills.“I think people were confused five years ago about what M.M.A. is, and whether it was harmful to Muay Thai,” he said. “We want to showcase Muay Thai, which has played an integral part in me being able to escape poverty and bring my family out of poverty with me.”Muay Thai has been viewed as the sport of the masses in Thailand, and many fighters come from poor, rural areas. A top Muay Thai competitor fighting in Bangkok can earn around 200,000 baht, or $5,700, in prize money for a bout, but the best fighters with One Championship can earn hundreds of thousands of dollars per fight.M.M.A. officials said their sport could prolong the careers of Thailand’s Muay Thai fighters, who usually retire when they are in their early 30s. For example, Dejdamrong, 37, a three-time national champion with more than 200 victories in Muay Thai, had been in semiretirement as a kickboxing instructor in Singapore before he took an interest in jujitsu and started a new career as a mixed martial artist in 2014. He is 6-0 and won his strawweight belt a year ago.“It was difficult at first because I didn’t know the ground game, but I got comfortable after a while,” he said. “Some Thai people think M.M.A. is dangerous, but when they finally see it, they will realize it’s not more dangerous than Muay Thai.”Not everyone agrees. Sakon Wannapong, the governor of the Sports Authority of Thailand who publicly announced the unofficial ban on M.M.A. in 2012, said that he remained opposed to M.M.A. because it was not a recognized sport in Thailand and remained too violent.“I understand that they have invested a lot of money into this event,” he said. “I don’t want to spoil their fortune, but I won’t support it. One word: never.”Such opposition has not dampened the determination of Thai M.M.A. fighters like Shannon Wiratchai, who is on the card for the May 27 event. Unlike many Thai fighters, he grew up learning judo and karate, not Muay Thai.“At my age, Muay Thai was considered a low-class sport,” Wiratchai, now 27, said. “I think M.M.A. will help promote Muay Thai, but Thai fighters need to improve because of the changing style of M.M.A., and not just rely on Muay Thai.”Poypiti Amatatham contributed reporting.Advertisement