By SEWELL CHANAPRIL 19, 2016
A 21-year-old Swiss snowboarding champion was killed by an avalanche in the Swiss Alps on Tuesday morning.The athlete, Estelle Balet, died while filming a movie on Le Portalet, a mountain above the village of Orsières, in southwestern Switzerland, near the country’s border with France and Italy, according to the police in the canton of Valais.Ms. Balet was following another snowboarder, who was not injured, when she was struck by the avalanche, the police said. Emergency workers were summoned shortly after 8 a.m., and Air Glaciers, an air ambulance service, arrived on the scene and extracted her from the snow. Efforts to revive her were unsuccessful.Ms. Balet had special safety equipment, including an airbag, and she was wearing a helmet at the time of the accident, the police said. An investigation is underway.AdvertisementExtreme skiing and snowboarding, especially in areas away from marked trails, can be particularly dangerous.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.Ms. Balet was a champion in freeriding, a style of snowboarding that occurs on natural terrain, without a predefined course. It eschews jumps, rails, half-pipes and other features of traditional competitive skiing, and it is generally considered more dangerous.“Estelle Balet was a naturally gifted shining star and demonstrated remarkable talent as she quickly became a household name on the Freeride World Tour, bringing home her second title as World Champion just a few weeks ago in Verbier,” the Freeride World Tour said in a statement.AdvertisementTwo days ago, Ms. Balet had posted an image of the Alps on Facebook and wrote: “Pretty awesome to get to snowboard with such a view! Can’t wait for more filming next week.” The film project was called “Exploring the Known.”A version of this article appears in print on April 20, 2016, on Page B12 of the New York edition with the headline: Sports Briefing | Snowboarding; Champion Dies in Avalanche.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.