By RICHARD SANDOMIRJUNE 15, 2016
In an unusual act of cooperation between rival networks, Craig Sager, TNT’s vividly attired N.B.A. sideline reporter, will be on ABC’s broadcast for Game 6 of the N.B.A. finals from Cleveland on Thursday night. He is scheduled to cover the Golden State Warriors.Sager has never worked the sideline for an N.B.A. finals because TNT’s rights do not go past the conference finals. The opportunity to work for ESPN, which produces the games for ABC, comes as Sager continues to be treated for acute myeloid leukemia, which recently returned after being in remission. Admired for his idiosyncratic work at Turner Sports, he has become an inspiring presence around the league and will receive the Jimmy V Perseverance Award next month on the annual ESPYs awards show, which will be shown on ABC.“I feel good,” he said in a telephone interview. “My energy is there. I’m able to do my job with no complications.”ESPN began its internal discussions about inviting Sager to work on the finals about six weeks ago.Referring to ESPN/ABC’s lead announcing team, Tim Corrigan, ESPN’s senior coordinating producer for the N.B.A., said: “My first conversation was with Jeff Van Gundy, and then with Mike Breen, Doris Burke and Mark Jackson. Everybody said, ‘We’ve got to do that.’”AdvertisementWith no objections from ESPN executives, Corrigan approached Turner during the Western Conference finals, which were carried by TNT. He added: “When I talked to Craig, he said, ‘I don’t want to interrupt anything you’re doing.’ And I said: ‘Interrupt? We’re thrilled to do it.’”AdvertisementBut Sager was available only for Game 6 because of his chemotherapy at M.D. Anderson Cancer Center in Houston, where he ended his most recent eight-day course of treatment on Monday, and because he will be in Florida with his family for Father’s Day on Sunday, when a possible Game 7 is scheduled.Corrigan said the discussion had never gotten to whether Sager would work more than one game.“Our thing was he had to do a finals game, and we didn’t want to disrupt anything regarding his health,” he said.Get the big sports news, highlights and analysis from Times journalists, with distinctive takes on games and some behind-the-scenes surprises, delivered to your inbox every week.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.Under very different circumstances 10 years ago, CBS Sports asked ESPN if it could borrow the analyst Dick Vitale during the N.C.A.A. men’s basketball tournament. ESPN, for the first time, refused to let Vitale call the tournament’s games, believing his value was in its studio.“Sometimes things stand between networks,” Corrigan said. “But this couldn’t have gone any smoother.”But Sager almost lost his chance at working in Cleveland, interviewing Golden State Coach Steve Kerr or his players during and after Game 6, because the Warriors had taken a commanding lead over the Cavaliers last week.“As the series got to 3-1,” Sager said, “I thought, My God, this might not get to Game 6. So maybe it won’t happen. Then I watched Game 5 intensely and found out there would be a Game 6.”He said that his doctors were pleased with his progress with the chemotherapy and that it had not affected his organs or tissues.Advertisement“I’m in a clinical trial,” he said. “Eight days of chemo every three weeks. I just finished the fifth cycle, and there’s no recipe for how long it will go on. It’s month by month.” After Game 6, he said, “I’ll go home to Atlanta for some platelets and then to Florida for the weekend.”Sager is renowned for his colorful wardrobe, which has only one rival in N.B.A. peacockery: Walt Frazier’s outlandish clothing on MSG Network.For Game 6, Sager said: “I can’t bring out something I’ve already worn. So I went shopping yesterday and was quite pleased with what I found. I want to make sure people say, ‘Man, he looks good.’ I want to look lively.”He is scheduled to appear on another network, NBC, during the Summer Olympics from Rio de Janeiro, where he will be on the sideline for the United States men’s basketball games. He is arranging for twice-weekly blood transfusions.A version of this article appears in print on June 16, 2016, on Page B14 of the New York edition with the headline: TNT’s Sager Will Join ABC for Game 6 Broadcast.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.