By RICHARD SANDOMIRAUG. 5, 2016
NBCUniversal’s broadcast of the Summer Olympics from Rio de Janeiro is showing a media giant more than ever straddling two approaches — old-style television and live video streaming — to attract viewers to its prized sports property.The moment, which NBC had been building up to over the past decade, represents how traditional broadcasters are trying to hold on to viewers who still gather around their TV sets for big events while also seeking out millennials who are tethered to their smartphones and tablets.In all, 11 NBC networks will carry more than 2,000 hours of coverage, 260 of them on the broadcast network. The Rio Games are NBC’s ninth consecutive Olympics and its 12th since 1988; only CBS has interrupted that run, showing the Winter Games in 1992, 1994 and 1998.But in what is likely to be the most-streamed sports event ever, NBC will also offer 4,500 hours of coverage online, more than it has ever unleashed. As many as 40 live streams will be available simultaneously — a far cry from a decade ago, when the sole event streamed by NBC was the gold-medal men’s hockey game at the Winter Games in Turin, Italy. It was a tiny glimpse at a vastly different future.AdvertisementThe flood of streaming — which will be engineered mainly from NBC’s in-house operation in Stamford, Conn. — arrives as more people are watching live sports on mobile devices and as streaming has become an essential part of how sports programming is distributed.Advertisement“People realize how easy it is to watch now,” said Rick Cordella, senior vice president and general manager for digital media at NBC Sports Group. “In Rio, the quality of the video will be better, and the bandwidth will be better. Everything in streaming technology has improved.”NBC has discovered in its research that the more devices consumers have, the more Olympic events they watch, and that they are likely to use them while watching the Games on television. More important, the research found, streaming all day does not hurt viewership of the critical, lucrative broadcast in prime time — a notion that once worried NBC executives accustomed to protecting the evening program.“The unvarnished streaming during the day acts as a barker channel,” said Alan Wurtzel, the president of research and media development for NBCUniversal. “People see an amazing thing and call their friends — ‘Did you see what Michael Phelps has done?’ — and they watch at night.”Only one event remained off the table for live streaming at NBC: the opening ceremony. That spectacle on Friday night was both streamed online and televised by NBC on a one-hour delay, giving NBC’s producers a chance to remove what they deemed to be the chaos and the duller parts.“Doing an entertainment show on a tape delay is frankly a service to the viewer, which I know people might not like to hear,” Mark Lazarus, the chairman of NBC Sports Group, said in an interview before the broadcast.Lazarus did not rule out carrying an opening ceremony live in the future, but he did not sound optimistic. “We’re a commercial business,” he said. “We have shareholders, and we have to find a way to get commercials into our shows.”NBC seems to have found a way for now. Friday’s broadcast received a fair amount of criticism on social media for what viewers considered an abundance of commercials. In just over an hour — from the start of the opening ceremony to the beginning of the Parade of Nations — NBC went to eight separate commercial breaks that totaled 18 minutes 45 seconds.AdvertisementIn its goal to bring as many viewers as possible, especially younger ones, to the television screen, NBC is also working with BuzzFeed and Snapchat to produce original content. Steve Burke, chief executive of NBCUniversal, said: “We have to make sure the Olympics continue to appeal to young people. People in my generation have all these memories of the Olympics, but is an 18-, 25- or 34-year-old going to show up? We have to make sure they do, and the way to do it is to stream and have a presence on Snapchat and everywhere else.”Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.Still, deep into the streaming era, prime time remains NBC’s primary focus. Even in a fractionalized television universe that is almost unrecognizable compared with that of the 1970s and 1980s, when Roone Arledge guided the pioneering Olympic productions at ABC Sports, the prime-time broadcast is still where a critical mass of viewers congregates for major events and where advertisers spend copiously for commercial time.On Thursday, NBC reported that it had sold $1.2 billion in advertising for the Rio Games, about 75 percent of which was targeted at prime time. Almost 10 percent of the revenue is from streaming, which is up by a third from the 2012 Summer Olympics in London.“It’s an all-time record for any Olympics,” said Seth Winter, executive vice president for advertising sales at NBC Sports Group.Sam Manchester will guide you through the 2016 summer Olympics in Rio de Janeiro.Hey. It’s Sam from the NYT Sports desk. I’m at the Olympics in Rio (so you don’t have to be :)). Grab a limited spot and I’ll text you updates, answer your questions and share the behind-the-scenes stuff nobody else gets.Thanks! Talk to you soon.The prime-time show is a still-breathing creation of Arledge’s era — slickly produced entertainments that blend sports that viewers generally watch little of in non-Olympic years with features and profiles. NBC’s productions are more elaborate than ABC’s were, but the formula is similar.The prime-time hosts have always taken center stage, from Jim McKay at ABC to Bob Costas at NBC, guiding viewers from event to event, conducting interviews and wrapping up the night’s action. Costas, who is 64, is starting his 11th prime-time hosting stint in a run that began at the 1992 Summer Games in Barcelona, Spain. His long run of consecutive broadcasts ended in Sochi, Russia, when an eye infection kept him out for six days.But he may leave the post fairly soon, having given up hosting the opening ceremony two years ago. One possible candidate to succeed him is Mike Tirico, a versatile anchor who recently joined NBC from ESPN. Another is the host of NBC’s Premier League studio program, Rebecca Lowe, whose British background would give the Olympic anchor post an international feel.Lazarus said there was no timetable for the end of Costas’s run.“That day will come for sure,” Lazarus said. “After these Games, we’ll sit down and talk about his thoughts and plans. We’re very clear with each other that there will be a discussion and that he’s getting to be where he’s starting to think about what’s next for himself and his family. He’ll make that call.”Streaming is the antithesis of the prime-time broadcast — a constant flow of events without fanfare, designed for devotees of individual sports and for those who cannot wait to see if their favorite sports make it into the evening slot. Indeed, the prime-time broadcasts usually juggle the sports that will generate the most audiences, like gymnastics, swimming, diving, beach volleyball and track and field. If less popular sports like archery and badminton find their way to television, it is usually on one of NBC’s cable networks or on NBC during daytime hours.AdvertisementNBC’s wariness about streaming showed itself in various ways over the years. In 2008, NBC streamed 25 sports from the Beijing Summer Games — but not sports like gymnastics, beach volleyball, track and field or swimming, which were deemed too important to be seen before prime time. NBC grew even more protective during the 2010 Winter Games in Vancouver, British Columbia, when hockey and curling — sports that rarely visit prime time — were the only ones streamed, ensuring that viewers saw no skiing, figure skating or luge in advance of NBC’s broadcast.There were no such restrictions on the number of sports streamed at the 2012 London Games, but live video of major sports like swimming, diving, gymnastics and track and field was unavailable online for replay until after prime time.The unfettered streaming — save for the delayed opening ceremony — suggests that NBC is finally using its rights to their fullest.“The world has changed from the day when the whole game was about getting the highest possible audience on TV from 8 to 11 o’clock,” said Ed Desser, a sports media consultant. “What NBC is doing is owning all the pieces of the product and exploiting it as much as possible.”A version of this article appears in print on August 6, 2016, on Page D1 of the New York edition with the headline: From a Trickle to a Flood.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.See More »