By THE ASSOCIATED PRESSAUG. 15, 2016
Alex Rodriguez may soon get a call from his hometown team. The Miami Marlins, who are contending for their first playoff berth since 2003, are in the market for a power hitter to replace the injured slugger Giancarlo Stanton, who was placed on the disabled list Sunday with a strained groin and will probably miss the rest of the regular season.Miami is discussing whether to reach out to Rodriguez, said Michael Hill, the team president of baseball operations. Rodriguez, who grew up in South Florida and still lives there, played his final game for the Yankees on Friday.“We’re going to look at everything,” Hill said. “There has been information out there about his situation. I have no idea what his interest level is to continue playing. He has something set up to move into the Yankees front office; I don’t know where his head is on that.”Stanton, this year’s home run derby winner, leads the Marlins with 25 homers and 70 R.B.I. while batting .244. Justin Bour is sidelined with an ankle injury, creating a void at first base that Rodriguez could help fill.AdvertisementThe Marlins improved to 61-56 by beating the visiting Chicago White Sox, 5-4, on Sunday. Left fielder Christian Yelich ended the game by throwing out Carlos Sanchez, who was trying to score from second on a two-out single.Advertisement“This team has played too well for too long,” Hill said. “We’re right in the thick of this thing, and we’re going to do everything in our power to help in any way we can.”Rodriguez, 41, was batting .200 this season and said he is unsure whether he will play again. He needs only four homers to become the fourth player to hit 700, but he has rarely played in the field since 2013, complicating any role he might have with a National League team.BETTS HITS THREE HOMERS Mookie Betts hit three home runs and drove in a career-best eight runs to power the host Boston Red Sox to a 16-2 rout of the Arizona Diamondbacks. Betts also hit three home runs against Baltimore on May 31.Betts had two chances to hit a fourth homer on Sunday, but he lined out to right and grounded out.Dustin Pedroia collected five hits and Rick Porcello became the first Red Sox pitcher in 70 years to open a season 12-0 at Fenway Park, improving his overall record to 16-3.AROUND THE MAJORS Bryce Harper hit a run-scoring double after missing five games with a neck injury, Tanner Roark won his fourth straight start and the host Washington Nationals defeated the Atlanta Braves, 9-1.  Troy Tulowitzki and Russell Martin hit back-to-back home runs and Edwin Encarnacion added his 33rd home run of the season as the host Toronto Blue Jays beat the Houston Astros, 9-2.  Ryan Braun hit two homers, doubled and drove in six runs as the host Milwaukee Brewers beat the Cincinnati Reds, 7-3.  Michael Fulmer pitched a four-hitter in a 7-0 victory, the Detroit Tigers’ second straight shutout of the host Texas Rangers.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.Arsenal’s second-string defense, which had Rob Holding, 20, and Calum Chambers, 21, making Premier League debuts because of injuries, was torn to pieces by fluent passing and clinical finishing in a 4-3 loss to Liverpool.Theo Walcott put host Arsenal ahead in the 31st minute, but Philippe Coutinho scored right before halftime and Liverpool raced to a 4-1 lead after the break with classy goals by Adam Lallana, Coutinho and Sadio Mane. Alex Oxlade-Chamberlain and Chambers also scored for Arsenal.Also Sunday, Manchester United began its new era under Coach José Mourinho with a 3-1 win at Bournemouth.AdvertisementJuan Mata opened the scoring five minutes before halftime and the captain Wayne Rooney scored on a header in the 59th before Zlatan Ibrahimovic rifled home a shot from 25 yards in his first Premier League game. Adam Smith later scored Bournemouth’s consolation goal.AROUND SOCCER Alexandre Lacazette scored a hat trick for Lyon, which beat newly promoted Nancy, 3-0, in Ligue 1. Nice beat Rennes, 1-0, with a goal by the 17-year-old Malang Sarr.  Bayern Munich defeated Borussia Dortmund, 2-0, in the German Super Cup in Berlin to get Coach Carlo Ancelotti off to a winning start. Arturo Vidal and Thomas Müller scored in the second half.  Luis Suárez and Munir El Haddadi scored in the second half to give Barcelona a 2-0 win at Sevilla in the first leg of the Spanish Super Cup. The return leg is on Wednesday at Camp Nou.Ryan Moore won the John Deere Classic for his fifth PGA Tour title, closing with a four-under-par 67 for a two-stroke victory over Ben Martin in Silvis, Ill.Moore, who opened the event with three straight 65s, finished 22 under at TPC Deere Run, playing the final 46 holes without a bogey and making only two in 72 holes.Jordan Spieth chose not to defend his title because he did not think it would be appropriate in light of his decision to skip the Rio Olympics.U.S. SENIOR OPEN DELAYED The final round of the United States Senior Open was postponed because of heavy rain, giving Miguel Ángel Jiménez another night to sleep on the third-round lead. He was three under on Jack Nicklaus’s boyhood course, Scioto Country Club, outside Columbus, Ohio. Gene Sauers was a stroke behind.A version of this article appears in print on August 15, 2016, on Page D2 of the New York edition with the headline: Marlins Consider Rodriguez as Stanton Fill-In.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.