By THE ASSOCIATED PRESSAUG. 14, 2016
Philadelphia Eagles quarterback Carson Wentz has a hairline fracture in his ribs and there is no timetable for his return.The No. 2 over all pick in the draft, Wentz was hurt in Thursday’s preseason opener against the Tampa Bay Buccaneers and sat out Saturday’s practice.At first Coach Doug Pederson said that Wentz needed treatment and would return to practice Sunday and resume his backup quarterback duties behind Sam Bradford in the next preseason game. Pederson said Wentz’s ribs were nothing more than sore.But the Eagles released a statement hours later that said a CT scan revealed a hairline fracture in his ribs. “We do not know an exact timetable for his return, but we hope to have him back before the end of the preseason,” Pederson said.AdvertisementWentz completed 12 of 24 passes for 89 yards in the Eagles’ opener. He led North Dakota State to its fifth consecutive title in the Football Championship Subdivision last season. He passed for 1,651 yards and 17 touchdowns during his senior year, which was shortened by a wrist injury.RAMS WIN IN LOS ANGELES RETURN  Dez Bryant of the Dallas Cowboys caught a 10-yard touchdown pass, but the Los Angeles Rams earned a win in their homecoming when Sean Mannion threw a 9-yard touchdown pass to Aaron Green with 1:54 remaining for a 28-24 comeback at the L.A. Coliseum on Saturday.Bryant had two receptions for 28 yards, including a leaping catch on the sideline against cornerback Coty Sensabaugh for 18 yards. He played one series before leaving the game. Rams running back Todd Gurley and defensive end Robert Quinn also did not play, as a crowd of 89,140 saw Cowboys wide receiver Lucky Whitehead score on a 101-yard kick return to welcome the N.F.L. back to Southern California after a 22-year absence.Jared Goff, the top overall draft pick, struggled after replacing Case Keenum early in the second quarter, completing 4 of 9 passes for 38 yards and an interception.Randal Grichuk hit a grand slam that capped a six-run burst in the eighth inning and the St. Louis Cardinals stopped the Chicago Cubs’ 11-game winning streak, prevailing by 8-4 at Wrigley Field.AdvertisementAfter a run-scoring wild pitch and a bases-loaded walk with two outs in the eighth put the Cardinals ahead, 4-2, Grichuk connected.Brandon Moss and Jedd Gyorko also homered for the Cardinals.Addison Russell hit his 14th homer for the Cubs, who lead the Cardinal by 13 games in the National League Central.Alex Reyes (1-0) pitched three scoreless innings of relief to get the win.Luke Weaver, the Cardinals’ 22-year-old starter, gave up two runs on four hits in his major league debut. He was lifted for a pinch-hitter after four innings and 85 pitches.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.Carl Edwards Jr. (0-1) allowed five runs while getting only two outs for the Cubs.NATIONALS CUT PAPELBONThe Washington Nationals have cut reliever Jonathan Papelbon, who rarely pitched after the National League East leaders recently traded for a new closer, Mark Melancon.Papelbon was released Saturday. The Nationals needed a roster spot to promote the right-hander Reynaldo Lopez to start against the Atlanta Braves.“There wasn’t a real fit anymore,” Nationals Manager Dusty Baker said. “Didn’t know where to use him.”Papelbon, ninth on the career saves list with 368, threw only two and two-thirds innings after his final blown save on July 26. The Nationals got Melancon a few days later from the Pittsburgh Pirates.The 35-year-old Papelbon, suspended by the Nationals last September after grabbing the league’s most valuable player, Bryce Harper, by the throat during a dugout skirmish, is now a free agent and can sign with any team.The Nationals are responsible for the remainder of his $11 million salary this year.AROUND THE MAJORS“They were out there. We couldn’t get them in,” Pittsburgh Pirates Manager Clint Hurdle said after an 8-4 loss to the Dodgers in Los Angeles on Saturday. The Pirates left the bases loaded in the first two innings, and went on to tie a franchise record for stranded runners (18) last reached in 1951.  Russell Martin hit a go-ahead, three-run home run in the sixth, Aaron Sanchez pitched seven innings to get his first win in three starts and the host Toronto Blue Jays beat the Houston Astros, 4-2, stopping the Astros’ winning streak at four.  Colorado Rockies starter Tyler Anderson plunked the Philadelphia Phillies’ Maikel Franco on the leg, leading the benches to clear in the Phillies’ 6-3 home victory. Both Anderson and Rockies Manager Walt Weiss were ejected.AdvertisementRyan Moore shot two more rounds of six-under-par 65 to take the third-round lead in the John Deere Classic, finishing at 8:25 p.m. in nearly dark conditions in Silvis, Ill.After opening Thursday with a 65, Moore barely got on the course Friday in the tournament, which finally got back on schedule Saturday when the players raced to finish.“It was a long day,” Moore said. “It was a lot of golf holes I played today, so to play that solid all day long, I’m very encouraged about it. I think that was 34 holes I played today. It will be nice to get to sleep a little bit tomorrow and be well rested and just ready to get after it again tomorrow.”Morgan Hoffman and Ben Martin each shot 62 to pull to a stroke behind at 17 under.JIMENEZ TAKES LEAD AT U.S. SENIOR OPEN The Spaniard Miguel Ángel Jiménez, 52, was on top at the United States Senior Open in Columbus, Ohio. He finished off a one-under-par 69 in gusty wind and rain to take a one-stroke lead.A version of this article appears in print on August 14, 2016, on Page SP15 of the New York edition with the headline: Eagles Quarterback Carson Wentz Has Rib Fracture.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.