By THE ASSOCIATED PRESSAUG. 18, 2016
The oft-injured Victor Cruz is not giving up on his hope to play for the Giants.The 29-year-old wide receiver remained optimistic Wednesday despite being sidelined the past few days by a groin injury.The latest injury has many wondering whether Cruz is starting another phase of getting close to playing and then having a setback. He missed all of last season with a calf injury and was limited to six games in 2014 by a knee injury.Cruz participated fully when the Giants opened training camp late last month, but his workload was dialed back after a week as a precaution. He did not play in the preseason opener on Friday against the Miami Dolphins.Giants General Manager Jerry Reese recently said he wants to see Cruz play in two preseason games.BILLS’ DAREUS IS SUSPENDED Buffalo Bills defensive tackle Marcell Dareus acknowledged talk is cheap.AdvertisementAnd this time, he said he means it when discussing how he will respond to being suspended for violating the N.F.L.’s substance abuse policy for a second consecutive year.Advertisement“I really don’t have much to say. Words really don’t mean anything now,” Dareus said after practice. “It’s all action. And that’s what I’m going to do. I’m going to come back and do the best I can.”Dareus said the suspension, for the first four games of the season, resulted from missing a drug test. He added he was first notified about the disciplinary action on Saturday, following the Bills’ preseason-opening 19-18 loss to the Indianapolis Colts.Under N.F.L. rules, missing a test is the same as testing positive.Dareus is a two-time Pro Bowl selection and has been a starter since the Bills drafted him with the third overall pick in 2011.Carlos Martinez took a no-hitter into the sixth inning, Jeremy Hazelbaker and Brandon Moss hit home runs and the St. Louis Cardinals beat the host Houston Astros, 8-2, on Wednesday.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.The Cardinals have won four straight and have a slim hold on the second N.L. wild-card spot over the Pittsburgh Pirates and Miami Marlins.Martinez (11-7) pitched seven innings of three-hit ball, allowing a run while striking out seven. He retired 15 of the first 16 batters before giving up a leadoff double to Teoscar Hernandez in the sixth.Eight Cardinals batted in the three-run third, highlighted by Stephen Piscotty’s two-run single and Yadier Molina’s R.B.I. double. Hazelbaker bashed a 3-2 pitch from Fister in the fourth for his first home run since July 29. Moss blew it open in the seventh with a three-run homer off Tony Sipp.The Cardinals have 49 home runs since the All-Star break to lead the National League.AROUND THE MAJORS Brad Miller hit his third homer in two days and the Tampa Bay Rays beat the visiting San Diego Padres, 2-0, on Wednesday to complete a three-game sweep.  D. J. LeMahieu kept tormenting the visiting Washington Nationals with two hits, Gerardo Parra drove in four runs and the Colorado Rockies beat the Nationals and Stephen Strasburg, 12-10.  Andrew McCutchen had two hits, including a two-run homer, pinch-hitter Matt Joyce had a key two-run single and the Pittsburgh Pirates rallied from a four-run deficit to complete a three-game sweep of the free-falling Giants with a 6-5 victory in San Francisco.AdvertisementThe ex-Besiktas and Fiorentina striker Mario Gomez will return to the Bundesliga, joining VfL Wolfsburg, the club said.Gomez, 31, spent last season on loan at Besiktas, where he was the Turkish league’s top scorer with 26 goals. He reportedly will cost Wolfsburg about $7.8 million.Gomez scored of 29 goals in 68 appearances for Germany, including two in Germany’s run to the Euro 2016 semifinals. He decided not to stay in Turkey given its political unrest.A version of this article appears in print on August 18, 2016, on Page B14 of the New York edition with the headline: Victor Cruz Hopes to Return to Giants.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.