By THE ASSOCIATED PRESSJULY 20, 2017
PHILADELPHIA — Jozy Altidore could not believe what had just occurred while skirmishing for position ahead of a corner kick: El Salvador defender Henry Romero bit the back of his left shoulder, then twisted his nipple.Altidore maintained his composure, and then made light of the incident after the game.“My girl’s mad at me,” said Altidore, an American forward. “She’s mad at me. She’s mad at Romero, ‘cause she’s like, ‘Only I can bite you, only I can grab your nipples.’ ”
            El Salvador player #4 bites Jozy Altidore. #USAvSLV #GoldCup pic.twitter.com/g1WpS96eTb Amid the biting, twisting and talking, the United States advanced to a Concacaf Gold Cup semifinal against Costa Rica with a 2-0 win behind goals from Omar Gonzalez in the 41st minute and Eric Lichaj in first-half stoppage time.But the ugly match, interrupted by 45 fouls, will be remembered primarily for the mark on Altidore’s shoulder left by the teeth of Romero. Gonzalez said after the game he was also bitten on the back of his left shoulder, by Darwin Cerin in the 81st minute.Advertisement“I was a bit shocked,” Gonzalez said.United States Coach Bruce Arena said he wasn’t surprised.“There’s a history of that in our sport,” he said. Luis Suárez of Uruguay was given a four-month suspension for biting Italy’s Giorgio Chiellini during the 2014 World Cup.AdvertisementA furious Altidore shoved Romero, then grimaced and fell to the ground but remained in the game.“It’s never happened before, but in Concacaf, it never ceases to amaze me,” Altidore said. “You got to keep your cool.”The Canadian referee Drew Fischer, a Major League Soccer regular, did not penalize Romero for incident, which occurred in the 57th minute.“I can’t fault the referee,” Arena said. “Those things are not easy to see on the field.”The disciplinary committee for Concacaf, the governing body for soccer in North and Central America and the Caribbean, has leeway to impose punishment.“These things always happen in football,” El Salvador Coach Eduardo Lara said through a translator, although it was unclear whether he knew that the bites had occurred.The Americans, who started five veterans who had been added for the tournament’s knockout phase, overcame shaky defensive play and poor passing to advance to a semifinal against Costa Rica — which defeated Panama earlier Wednesday — in Arlington, Tex., on Saturday.Arena changed all 11 starters for the second straight game and at 7-0-5 set a record for the longest unbeaten streak at the start of a United States coaching tenure, topping Bob Bradley’s 10-0-1 run in 2007.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.The United States improved to 6-0 against El Salvador in the Gold Cup, having won in the quarterfinals by 4-0 in 2002 and by 5-1 in 2013. The Americans are 17-1-5 over all against the Salvadorans, the only loss coming in an exhibition in San Salvador in 1992.Altidore, forward Clint Dempsey, midfielders Michael Bradley and Darlington Nagbe, and goalkeeper Tim Howard were all added to the lineup for the United States.AdvertisementAn announced crowd of 31,615 at half-filled Lincoln Financial Field was evenly split with supporters of both teams.Howard was called on to save the United States in the third minute. Rodolfo Zelaya ran onto a poorly struck pass by Lichaj and, instead of striking the ball with his first touch, tried to go around Howard. Howard slid in and batted away the ball with his left hand.Zardes, off a feed by Dempsey, broke in alone in the 17th minute and put the ball in the net, but he was ruled offside by the linesman Ainsley Rochard — although replays showed Zardes was even with the last defender when Dempsey made the pass.Nagbe, moved from a flank to a central midfield role on his 27th birthday, started to stabilize the match for the United States with possession and passes, but the Americans did not break through until late in the first half.Bradley took a free kick from about 35 yards and sent a low liner into the middle of the penalty area. The 6-foot-5 Gonzalez out-jumped Cerin about 8 yards from the goal and directed the ball with his head through the arms of goalkeeper Derby Carrillo. After scoring once in his first 40 international appearances, Gonzalez has two goals in his last three.Lichaj, trying to play his way up the United States depth chart, was played in by Dempsey and beat the sliding defender Ivan Mancia to score on an angled shot from 6 yards.Dempsey made his 135th appearance, moving past Jeff Agoos into sole possession of third on the United States list; he trails only Cobi Jones (164) and Landon Donovan (157). Dempsey needs one goal to equal Donovan’s American record of 57 national team goals.A version of this article appears in print on July 20, 2017, on Page B12 of the New York edition with the headline: Soccer; U.S. Earns an Ugly Victory Over El Salvador.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.