By REUTERSJULY 19, 2016
World Wrestling Entertainment was sued by Jimmy Snuka and dozens of other retired male and female wrestlers seeking to hold the organization responsible for neurological injuries that they claimed to have sustained by participating in its bouts.The complaint was filed on behalf of more than 50 plaintiffs who have performed with the W.W.E. or its predecessors since the 1970s, including Joseph Laurinaitis and Paul Orndorff.The complaint accused the W.W.E. and Vince McMahon, its chairman, of intentionally classifying wrestlers as “independent contractors” rather than employees, as a way to avoid liability under applicable worker protection laws.The lawsuit seeks compensatory and punitive damages, as well as improved medical monitoring.The W.W.E., in a statement, called the lawsuit another attempt to hold it liable by a lawyer who had two earlier lawsuits dismissed and added that “we’re confident this lawsuit will suffer the same fate.”AdvertisementAROUND THE MAJORS The Minnesota Twins fired General Manager Terry Ryan and later lost to the Detroit Tigers, 1-0.  • Jose Fernandez tied a career high with 14 strikeouts, and Martin Prado hit a solo homer in the 11th inning to give the visiting Miami Marlins a 3-2 victory over the Philadelphia Phillies.  • Zack Cozart, Joey Votto and Eugenio Suarez all homered in the fourth inning as the host Cincinnati Reds beat the Atlanta Braves, 8-2.  • The Kansas City Royals rallied in the eighth inning to beat the visiting Cleveland Indians, 7-3.  • The Cardinals hit three home runs and defeated the visiting San Diego Padres, 10-2. (AP)Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.The four-time Pro Bowl running back Arian Foster signed a one-year, $1.5 million contract with the Miami Dolphins.AdvertisementInjuries have limited Foster to 25 games in the past three years, and he played in just four games last season. (AP)CORNERBACK TILLMAN RETIRES The longtime Chicago Bears cornerback Charles Tillman announced his retirement on Monday after 13 seasons.The 35-year-old Tillman was known for his ability to jar footballs loose.Tillman announced his retirement Monday on Twitter, posting a video on YouTube of him knocking things out of people’s hands, including a doughnut his daughter was eating. (AP)A version of this article appears in print on July 19, 2016, on Page B10 of the New York edition with the headline: Retired Wrestlers Sue W.W.E. for Neurological Injuries.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.