AdvertisementSupported bySports BriefingBy The Associated PressDexter Fowler is headed from the World Series champions to their biggest rival.Fowler, a center fielder who helped the Chicago Cubs end their long championship drought last month, completed an $82.5 million, five-year contract with the St. Louis Cardinals on Friday.“It was an honor just to be considered to be in the Cardinals’ organization,” Fowler said. “You play against the Cardinals — I’ve been playing against them for eight years now — and they always come out fighting.”Fowler, 30, hit .276 with 13 homers and a .393 on-base percentage and landed in his first All-Star Game.RODNEY SIGNS WITH DIAMONDBACKS The right-handed reliever Fernando Rodney and the Arizona Diamondbacks completed a $2.75 million, one-year contract that allows him to earn an additional $4 million in performance bonuses.Rodney agreed to the deal this week, and it was completed Friday after he passed a physical.Rodney was an All-Star this year for the third time, saving 25 games in 28 chances with San Diego and Miami, which acquired him on June 30. While he had a 0.31 E.R.A. for the Padres and was perfect in all 17 chances, his E.R.A. climbed to 5.89 in 39 games with the Marlins.Rodney, 39, has 261 saves and a 3.69 E.R.A. in 14 major league seasons.BREWERS PROSPECT SUSPENDED The Milwaukee Brewers right-hander Phil Bickford, the 18th overall pick in baseball’s 2015 amateur draft, has been suspended for the first 50 games of next season after a second positive test for a drug of abuse under the minor league drug program.Bickford, 21, is on the roster of Milwaukee’s Class A affiliate, the Carolina Mudcats of the Carolina League. He signed with the San Francisco Giants and was traded this year to the Brewers along with catcher Andrew Susac for the left-hander Will Smith.Bickford was 7-7 with a 2.93 E.R.A. in 22 starts and one relief appearance for three Class A teams this year, striking out 135 in 120 innings.Major Applewhite was hired to replace Tom Herman as coach at Houston.It is the first head coaching job for Applewhite, 38, who served as Herman’s offensive coordinator the last two seasons. Herman recently left after two years with the Cougars to become the coach at Texas.As an assistant at Texas in 2009, Applewhite was disciplined for what the university called inappropriate conduct with a student trainer on a bowl trip.The discipline was not revealed until 2013, and Applewhite’s case is a central element in a sex and race discrimination lawsuit filed by the former women’s track coach Bev Kearney, who was forced out after it was revealed that she had had a relationship with one of her athletes. She said that Applewhite, as a white male, had received favorable treatment.Kansas forward Carlton Bragg Jr. was charged with battery after being accused of pushing his girlfriend down a flight of stairs.Bragg, a 20-year-old sophomore from Cleveland, struck the woman and pushed her during an argument, according to the district attorney’s office in Douglas County, Kan. Bragg pleaded not guilty. His next court date was scheduled for Dec. 27.Jim Marchiony, the associate athletic director at Kansas, said that the university was aware of the situation and that “once we have the facts, we will act accordingly.”Right wing Cal Clutterbuck and the Islanders have agreed to a five-year contract extension through the 2022-23 season. Clutterbuck has two goals and seven assists in 25 games this season. An alternate captain, he is in his fourth season with the team.Police officials overseeing the sex abuse scandal in British soccer said that 83 potential suspects had been identified and linked to 98 clubs.Officers across Britain are sifting through 639 referrals received by both police agencies and a help line established last month when former players started going public to say they had been abused by coaches while on youth teams.Although 98 clubs have been affected, the National Police Chiefs’ Council said that did not mean all of them were under investigation. The unidentified clubs are from across all levels of the game, “from Premier clubs through to amateur,” the council said.HOFFENHEIM STILL UNBEATEN Hoffenheim retained its unbeaten record in the German Bundesliga, battling Eintracht Frankfurt to an 0-0 draw in an ill-tempered match in which Eintracht defender Timothy Chandler was sent off.There were virtually no chances on either side, but plenty of fouls and dirty play. Chandler was sent off in the 83rd minute after a melee, apparently for grabbing the neck of Hoffenheim striker Sandro Wagner.MÁLAGA TIES AT HOME Málaga’s chance to set a club record for consecutive home victories was ruined by a 1-1 draw with Granada in the Spanish league.Midfielder Ignacio Camacho put the host team ahead in the first half when he headed Roberto Rosales’s cross off the post and into the net. Málaga controlled the match until Artem Kravets scored a header from Alberto Bueno’s free kick in the 81st minute.The defending champion Evgenia Medvedeva began the defense of her Grand Prix final title by thrilling the crowd in Marseille, France, with a world record score in the short program.Medvedeva, a 17-year-old Russian, landed all of her jumps cleanly as she recorded 79.21 points, beating the three-time world champion Mao Asada’s 78.66 at the 2014 worlds.Medvedeva leads Kaetlyn Osmond of Canada (75.54) and Satoko Miyahara of Japan (74.64).The Russian pair of Evgenia Tarasova and Vladimir Morozov earned their season-best score in the free skate to win the pairs event for the first time, scoring 135.25 to win with a total of 213.85.The former Olympic champions Tessa Virtue and Scott Moir of Canada led in the ice dance after a commanding 80.50 in the short program.Advertisement