AdvertisementSupported bySports BriefingBy The Associated PressDominic Thiem upset top-ranked Andy Murray, 6-2, 3-6, 6-4, at the Barcelona Open in Spain on Saturday to advance to the final against Rafael Nadal, the defending champion.Nadal returned to the final by beating Horacio Zeballos, 6-3, 6-4, after Thiem had dispatched Murray.Nadal, a nine-time champion on Barcelona’s clay, said he “wasn’t surprised” that Thiem prevailed, securing his first win over Murray in three attempts.“Thiem is a specialist on clay, one of the best in the world,” Nadal said. “It will be a tough match for me, but I am just happy to be back in the final.”The Devils won the N.H.L. draft lottery, vaulting over four teams including last-place Colorado and the Las Vegas expansion team for the right to the first pick.The Philadelphia Flyers and the Dallas Stars made huge jumps to secure the second and third picks. The seven-round draft will be held in Chicago on June 23 and 24.PENGUINS EXTEND SERIES LEAD Phil Kessel scored twice, Sidney Crosby set up two goals, and the Pittsburgh Penguins chased Braden Holtby on the way to a 6-2 victory over the Capitals in Washington, taking a commanding two-games-to-none lead in their second-round series.Anthony Rizzo hit a two-run homer, and Miguel Montero and Ben Zobrist had solo shots, helping the Chicago Cubs rebound from a series-opening loss with a 7-4 victory over the Red Sox in Boston.The former Red Sox right-hander John Lackey (2-3) gave up four runs in six innings, ending his string of losses in three straight starts.THREE-HIT SHUTOUT FOR PIRATES’ NOVA Ivan Nova (3-2) pitched a three-hitter, and the Pittsburgh Pirates beat the Marlins, 4-0, in Miami. John Jaso homered and drove in two runs for the Pirates, who have won three straight.AROUND THE MAJORS Matt Kemp homered three times and drove in five runs, helping the surging Atlanta Braves pound the host Milwaukee Brewers, 11-3. Justin Smoak had three hits, including a two-run homer, and the host Toronto Blue Jays beat the Tampa Bay Rays, 4-1, ending a three-game losing streak. With a seventh-inning home run, Carlos Gomez hit for the cycle for the second time in his career, and Yu Darvish allowed two runs in six innings as the Texas Rangers beat the visiting Los Angeles Angels, 6-3.Barcelona and Real Madrid maintained their neck-and-neck title race in the Spanish league as both teams won, staying even on points at the top of the standings.Luis Suárez scored twice, and Lionel Messi set up another goal to give Barcelona a 3-0 victory at its crosstown rival Espanyol. After Cristiano Ronaldo missed a penalty kick, Real Madrid needed a late strike by Marcelo to secure a 2-1 win at home over Valencia.Barcelona is ahead of Madrid on head-to-head record, thanks to its win at Madrid two rounds ago. But Madrid has four matches left, compared with three for Barcelona, and can secure its first Liga title since 2012 if it wins all of them.RED BULLS WIN AT HOME Kemar Lawrence scored his first goal of the season in the 71st minute, and the Red Bulls defeated the Chicago Fire, 2-1, in Harrison, N.J. The win was the Red Bulls’ third in a row. Bradley Wright-Phillips scored in the 38th minute for the Red Bulls.N.Y.C.F.C. TOPS COLUMBUS Jack Harrison scored twice, the 19-year-old Yangel Herrera had an assist and his first Major League Soccer goal, and New York City F.C. beat the Columbus Crew, 3-2, on the road.BAYERN MUNICH SECURES FIFTH STRAIGHT TITLE Bayern Munich clinched a record fifth successive Bundesliga title with a 6-0 victory over host Wolfsburg. Leipzig had opened the door for Bayern earlier on Saturday when it was held to a scoreless draw by host Ingolstadt.SUNDERLAND WILL BE RELEGATED Sunderland’s 10-season stay in the Premier League will end thanks to a 1-0 loss to visiting Bournemouth on a goal by Joshua King in the 88th minute. The loss, combined with Hull’s 0-0 draw with host Southampton, sealed Sunderland’s fate.Anthony Joshua survived the first knockdown of his young career, coming back to drop Wladimir Klitschko twice and stopping him in the 11th round to retain his heavyweight titles.Before a crowd of 90,000 at Wembley Stadium in London, Joshua knocked Klitschko down twice in the 11th. Joshua was landing punches to Klitschko’s head on the ropes late in the round when the referee stopped the bout.Jonas Blixt and Cameron Smith extended their bogey-free run to three rounds in the new team format at a windy Zurich Classic in Avondale, La., posting a four-under-par 68 to widen their lead to four strokes.The teams of Kevin Kisner and Scott Brown and Nick Watney and Charley Hoffman were tied for second.JAPANESE GOLFER LEADS IN TEXAS Haru Nomura of Japan shot a one-over 72 on another windy day in the L.P.G.A. North Texas Shootout in Irving, extending her lead through three rounds despite a late double bogey.Nomura was at eight-under 205, two strokes ahead of Cristie Kerr, the two-time Texas winner Inbee Park and the 17-year-old amateur Eun Jeong Seong.Sebastian Vettel of Ferrari stormed to the pole position for the Russian Grand Prix in Sochi, ending a run of 18 poles for Mercedes.Jamaica swept the final two relays to split six races with the United States, the first time the Americans did not win the U.S.A. vs. the World competition at the Penn Relays in Philadelphia. The United States had won the first 17 annual meetings between the two countries at the Relays.Advertisement