By THE ASSOCIATED PRESSAPRIL 27, 2017
For only the third time in its 135-year existence, Tottenham is enjoying an eight-match winning run in the Premier League after edging past Crystal Palace, 1-0, on Wednesday. Those runs in the 1950-51 and 1960-61 seasons propelled Tottenham to the title. Whether Tottenham lifts the trophy this time still depends on Chelsea dropping points in the five games remaining.It took a thunderbolt from Christian Eriksen at Selhurst Park to trim Chelsea’s lead back to 4 points. The creator of the 78th-minute breakthrough was the top scorer Harry Kane, who knocked the ball into the path of Eriksen, who unleashed the dipping shot from around 25 yards.“It meant a lot,” Eriksen said. “We struggled in some parts of the game and didn’t have many big chances, but luckily we scored the half-chance we got. And luckily we are still in the race.”Tottenham quickly recovered from Saturday’s F.A. Cup semifinal loss to Chelsea to continue its pursuit of its west London rival. “They showed great character and personality after a very disappointing weekend,” Tottenham Manager Mauricio Pochettino said of his team. “The team is showing we are ready this season to fight.”AdvertisementNext up for Tottenham is Arsenal. Victory in the north London derby would guarantee Tottenham a finish above its neighbor for the first time in 22 years.AdvertisementARSENAL EDGES LEICESTER Arsenal moved within 4 points of a Champions League place with a 1-0 victory over Leicester. Nacho Monreal’s late shot flew in off Leicester defender Robert Huth in the 86th minute to settle the meeting of last season’s top two clubs, whose fortunes have nose-dived in the Premier League this season.PREMIER LEAGUE PLAYER BARRED The Premier League midfielder Joey Barton, 34, was banned for 18 months after placing 1,260 bets on soccer over the last 11 years, including games he had played in. Barton started his career at Manchester City and went on to play for Newcastle, Queens Park Rangers, the French team Marseille and the Glasgow club Rangers. He has been at Burnley since January.TWO MORE GOALS FOR MESSI Lionel Messi followed up his remarkable performance against Real Madrid with another two goals as Barcelona trounced Osasuna, 7-1, to remain at the top of the Spanish league. Second-place Real Madrid kept pace by defeating Deportivo La Coruña, 6-2, even without Cristiano Ronaldo and several other regular starters.P.S.G. ADVANCES TO FRENCH CUP FINAL Paris St.-Germain advanced to the French Cup final with a 5-0 win over a Monaco team filled with fringe players. P.S.G., which had already won the domestic League Cup with a 4-1 victory over Monaco, will face Angers in the French Cup final May 27.WORLD CUP WILL HAVE VIDEO REPLAYS FIFA has confirmed that video replays will be used at the World Cup for the first time in 2018. FIFA President Gianni Infantino had already said he wanted the technology to be used at the 2018 Cup, in Russia, and he has now ended any doubt. Speaking in Santiago, Chile, Infantino said “at the 2018 World Cup we will have video referees, because so far the results are very positive.”Get the big sports news, highlights and analysis from Times journalists, with distinctive takes on games and some behind-the-scenes surprises, delivered to your inbox every week.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.The International Football Association Board, the game’s lawmaking body, is in its second year of trials with various versions of video assistant referees. Infantino said “we are going to help the referee to not make any mistake, or commit less mistakes, and we are going to give a bit more of justice to football.”Eric Thames, the major League home run leader, scored twice before leaving with an injury, and Orlando Arcia homered and drove in three runs, leading the Milwaukee Brewers to a 9-4 win over the visiting Cincinnati Reds to complete a three-game sweep.AdvertisementRyan Braun snapped out of a 5-for-22 slump with a two-run double and a single off Reds starter Rookie Davis (0-1), and Jett Bandy had three hits and two R.B.I., helping the Brewers improve to 6-1 against the Reds this season.Thames, who leads the majors with 11 homers, appeared to be favoring his left hamstring as he stretched before the Reds batted in the eighth.WHITE SOX SWEEP ROYALS Avisail Garcia and Leury Garcia homered to back the run-starved starter Jose Quintana, and the White Sox beat the Kansas City Royals, 5-2, in Chicago to complete a three-game sweep.Chicago won its fourth straight, while Kansas City dropped every game on a seven-game trip.Quintana (1-4) had a season-high 10 strikeouts in six innings. He allowed five hits and two runs — one earned — and walked two. Quintana received only four runs of support in his first four starts combined.The defending champion Rafael Nadal cruised past Rogerio Dutra Silva of Brazil, 6-1, 6-2, to reach the third round of the Barcelona Open.Top-seeded Andy Murray also advanced, but without having to play, as Bernard Tomic withdrew before their second-round match because of a lower-back injury.Nadal, making his debut at the newly named Rafa Nadal center court in Barcelona, had a slow start to the second set against Silva, the 69th-ranked Brazilian, but recovered by winning the final six games to secure the victory.The fifth-ranked Nadal is a nine-time champion at the clay-court tournament. He is coming off his 10th title at the Monte Carlo Masters.The Green Bay Packers have signed the veteran offensive lineman Jahri Evans as they look to fill a hole up front left by the departure of the free-agent right guard T. J. Lang. Evans, 33, joins the Packers following 11 seasons in New Orleans, where he played 169 regular-season games since being drafted in the fourth round in 2006, the most played by an active N.F.L. offensive lineman in that span.AdvertisementThe Vancouver Canucks have named Travis Green their new coach. Green spent the last four seasons coaching the Canucks’ top farm team, the Utica Comets of the American Hockey League. He replaces Willie Desjardins, who spent the last three seasons in Vancouver. Desjardins was fired after the Canucks finished the season 29th in the overall standings.A version of this article appears in print on April 27, 2017, on Page B10 of the New York edition with the headline: Soccer; Tottenham Wins Again to Keep Pressure On.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.