By BILLY WITZJULY 20, 2017
SEATTLE — The symmetry was too hard for Todd Frazier, the grown-up freckle-faced kid from Toms River, N.J., to ignore.When Frazier was called up by the Cincinnati Reds in 2011, he was given the uniform No. 21 — the same number worn by Paul O’Neill, the fiery outfielder who helped the Reds win the 1990 World Series before he was traded to the Yankees and won four more.Though Frazier is a third baseman, and was not necessarily a Yankees fan as a child, there was a reason O’Neill was one of his favorite players then.“You could see it in his face, how determined he was to do good,” Frazier said. “That’s kind of how I am — I want to do as good as possible. I might not hit a water cooler, but it’s the intensity I always bring to the games, too.”AdvertisementSo when Frazier joined the Yankees on Wednesday after being traded from the Chicago White Sox, he figured he would call O’Neill to ask for his blessing to wear his old number instead of the No. 29 that had been placed in his locker. It seemed like the perfect welcoming gift.AdvertisementBut by the time Frazier arrived here Thursday with the rest of his new teammates, he had given up. He will stick with No. 29 after getting a lesson in the politics of the Yankee way.There are no beards or long hair — something another Frazier, Clint, learned the hard way after being ordered to cut his long locks this spring.Another freedom that is restricted is the choice of uniform numbers, which can be meaningful to players as a way of distinguishing themselves, much like hiking their pants to their knees or wearing a flat-billed cap.The Yankees have retired the uniform numbers of 22 players, 10 more than the next-most-retiring franchise, the St. Louis Cardinals. Also, unofficially off the books appear to be No. 0, which has never been worn by a Yankee, and the No. 21 that belonged to O’Neill until he retired 17 seasons ago.The Yankees did give out No. 21 briefly, at the start of 2008, to third baseman Morgan Ensberg and reliever LaTroy Hawkins, but it was not long before they gave it back. Both players were hearing catcalls from fans — Ensberg returned the number in spring training after getting an earful in exhibition games.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.Hawkins got an especially inhospitable greeting from Yankees fans once the season started: They chanted O’Neill’s name when he was introduced. Nobody seemed to appreciate the nobility of his choice — he wanted to honor the memory of Roberto Clemente. By the end of April, though, Hawkins had switched to No. 22.The choice of uniform numbers is a touchy enough subject that the clubhouse manager Rob Cucuzza, who hands out uniforms, said Thursday that he could not talk about it.So, it is hard to know exactly why Frazier was denied. Is it fan reaction?Is it because Frazier will be a free agent at the end of the season, and the Yankees are unlikely to commit to a long-term deal?Advertisement(It may be worth noting that Ensberg and Hawkins were released by the middle of June 2008 — never to wear Yankees pinstripes or No. 21 again.)Frazier said that when he expressed his interest in No. 21, after the Yankees’ loss in Minneapolis on Wednesday, a couple of his new teammates had talked to him about it. “So, 29 it is,” he said.“It would have been cool to have the number he wore in Cincinnati here, but it makes total sense,” Frazier added. “It’s not going to bother me either way.”Frazier said he would have to do some research into who had worn No. 29. Most recently, it was Tyler Clippard, who slumped over the last month and was off-loaded to the White Sox in the trade for Frazier, David Robertson (who was given his old No. 30) and Tommy Kahnle (who was given No. 48).Before that, it was utility player Dustin Ackley, who was injured and released at the end of last season. And before that, it was reliever David Carpenter, who flopped and was released by the Yankees two months into the 2015 season. It also belonged to the infamous Kei Igawa for parts of three seasons, from 2007 to 2009.Perhaps the most accomplished Yankee to have worn No. 29 is Catfish Hunter.Of course, in a perfect world, Frazier may lose his new number to his manager, Joe Girardi, who has a tradition of wearing the number of World Series titles the Yankees are chasing. Alas, he has been stuck with No. 28 for nearly a decade.An article in some editions last Friday about the restricted choices for uniform numbers that new Yankees players face misstated the given name of the player LaTroy Hawkins wanted to honor by wearing No. 21. He was Roberto Clemente, not Robert.A version of this article appears in print on July 21, 2017, on Page B9 of the New York edition with the headline: New Yank  Gets No. 29, And Lesson In Protocol.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.