AUG. 28, 2017
The Russian figure skater Yulia Lipnitskaya retired at 19 after a battle with anorexia. Lipnitskaya’s mother, Daniela, told Russia’s Tass news agency Monday that her daughter informed Russian skating officials of her retirement in April after three months of treatment for the disorder.Lipnitskaya won gold in the team event at the 2014 Winter Olympics in Sochi, Russia, when she was 15, becoming the youngest Olympic skating champion since 1936. However, she won no medals in the individual competition, where she had been considered a potential champion.Lipnitskaya bounced back with silver at the world championships in April 2014, her last major event.She became a symbol of the Sochi Olympics for many Russians, especially after President Vladimir V. Putin praised her performances. But she struggled to cope with fame. She complained in November 2014 that she had lost her freedom and felt “constant stress” when trying to live up to her fans’ expectations.Cincinnati Bengals linebacker Vontaze Burfict missed the first three games last season because of his hit to Antonio Brown’s head in the playoffs. He will miss the first five this season thanks to another rattling hit, this time in a preseason game. The N.F.L. has suspended Burfict, the Bengals’ defensive leader, for leveling Chiefs running back Anthony Sherman in violation of its player safety rules, the latest in Burfict’s history of egregious hits that have drawn fines and suspensions.Advertisement STAFFORD AGREES TO EXTENSION Quarterback Matthew Stafford agreed to a five-year contract extension with the Detroit Lions. Stafford was entering the last season of his $53 million, three-year contract. He stood to get quite a raise and perhaps a deal richer than the $125 million, five-year contract the Oakland Raiders gave Derek Carr this summer. He helped the Lions reach the playoffs last season for the third time in six seasons.AdvertisementJETS NAME MCCOWN THE STARTER Josh McCown will start at quarterback in the Jets’ regular-season opener at Buffalo, beating out Christian Hackenberg and Bryce Petty. Coach Todd Bowles announced his decision, ending a strange training-camp competition.McCown, 38, was the assumed starter the moment he signed a one-year, $6 million deal in March, and that never changed despite the fact he has played in just one series in a preseason game. Hackenberg, a second-round pick last year, had an increase in practice snaps and had started the last two games. But he struggled mightily and made no real push to win the job. Petty was considered the third option, and was solid in the preseason but left Saturday’s game against the Giants with a sprained knee.GIANTS DEFENSIVE END BARRED FOUR GAMES The Giants backup defensive end Owa Odighizuwa has been suspended without pay for the first four games of the regular season for violating the N.F.L.’s policy on performance-enhancing substances. Also, with his fellow defensive tackle Jay Bromley suddenly nursing an injured left knee, Dalvin Tomlinson, a second-round draft pick out of Alabama, will probably line up beside Damon Harrison in the season opener in Dallas on Sept. 9.BRONCOS LOSE LYNCH TO SPRAINED SHOULDER Just one week after calling off their five-month competition, the Denver Broncos may have to carry three quarterbacks on their 53-man roster after losing the backup Paxton Lynch for several weeks to a sprained right (throwing) shoulder sustained in Denver’s 20-17 preseason win over Green Bay on Saturday night.DEPLETED BILLS SIGN A QUARTERBACK The Buffalo Bills signed Keith Wenning to address their injury-depleted quarterback position entering their final preseason game. Buffalo turned to Wenning because the starter, Tyrod Taylor, and the third-stringer, T. J. Yates are being evaluated for concussions sustained Saturday in a 13-9 preseason loss at Baltimore.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.Max Scherzer overpowered Giancarlo Stanton, Howie Kendrick hit a three-run triple and the Nationals beat the Miami Marlins, 11-2, in Washington. Scherzer (13-5) allowed one run and five hits and had 10 strikeouts in his return from the 10-day disabled list. Jayson Werth had a two-run homer off Jose Urena (12-6) in his first game with the Nationals since he sustained a left foot contusion June 5.JONES STARS AS ORIOLES WIN FIFTH STRAIGHT Adam Jones hit a milestone home run, Welington Castillo had three hits and two R.B.I., and the Orioles beat the Seattle Mariners, 7-6, in Baltimore for their fifth straight victory. Jones’s solo home run in the fifth gave him 25 for a team-record seventh consecutive season.RED SOX END FOUR-GAME SKID Christian Vazquez had four hits, including a two-run homer, Eduardo Nunez added a solo shot and the Boston Red Sox beat the Blue Jays, 6-5, in Toronto, snapping a four-game skid.The Rangers will retire Jean Ratelle’s No. 19 and the Philadelphia Flyers will retire Eric Lindros’s No. 88 this season. The Rangers will raise Ratelle’s number to the rafters before their Feb. 25 game against the Detroit Red Wings, and the Flyers will honor Lindros before their Jan. 18 game against the Toronto Maple Leafs.AdvertisementRatelle played parts of 16 seasons with the Rangers and is second on their franchise goals list with 336 and third in assists with 481 and points with 817. Lindros, who won the Hart Trophy as most valuable player in 1995, was inducted into the Hockey Hall of Fame last year.A version of this article appears in print on August 29, 2017, on Page B10 of the New York edition with the headline: Figure Skating; After Anorexia Battle, a Champion Retires at 19.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.