AdvertisementSupported byYankees 11, Blue Jays 5By Billy WitzTORONTO — Everywhere you looked Wednesday night, there were examples of what kind of night it was for the Yankees.There was the third base coach, Joe Espada, crumpling to the artificial turf as he waved a runner home. (He was tended to from a trainer but remained in the game.) There were the Yankees’ needing five throws to execute (barely) a 5-2-6-2-6-1 rundown between third and home. There was Ronald Torreyes being thrown out at home standing up, Jeremy Giambi-style. And there was Masahiro Tanaka (rightly) getting the hook with a three-run lead, nobody out in the fifth and having surrendered only two hits.The Yankees walked away with a 11-5 victory against the Toronto Blue Jays, but it was an arduous, laborious slog that seemed to have only one redeeming quality: It kept the Yankees four games behind first-place Boston in the American League East.As for any signs that the Yankees are emerging from their post-trade-deadline funk, it would require some pinstripe-colored glasses to see that.For an offense that has struggled to score over the last week — and for a lineup that lost Clint Frazier as a late scratch because of an oblique injury — the Yankees were handed a gift in the form of Toronto’s emergency starter, Nick Tepesch, who had been released by five organizations over the previous 14 months.Gary Sanchez, Todd Frazier and Didi Gregorius pelted Tepesch for solo home runs, and the Yankees finally pulled away against a depleted Blue Jays bullpen. Toronto’s six relievers included Taylor Cole, whose one-inning major league debut Wednesday was a forgettable experience as he gave up four runs and six hits and took a smash from Gregorius off his foot.But aside from Garrett Cooper’s four hits, there was little artistic about the night, beginning with the Little League-esque rundown in the second inning that ended with Gregorius throwing to Tanaka, who tagged Kevin Pillar just before he reached home with a dive.Tanaka, given a 6-2 lead, surrendered a solo home run to Jose Bautista to begin the fifth, then walked Josh Donaldson on four pitches — his fifth walk of the night. This was enough for Manager Joe Girardi to turn to the bullpen. The Blue Jays then crept within 6-5 in the sixth when Chad Green gave up a run-scoring double to Ryan Goins and Tommy Kahnle yielded a run-scoring single to Donaldson.The Yankees began to pull away in the eighth, but it was not altogether painless. When Torreyes singled up the middle to drive in two runs, Espada appeared to roll his ankle as he was shuffling along the third-base line to wave home Cooper. He stayed on the turf for a moment until he was attended to by a trainer and Girardi, and then hobbled back to his position.In a little more than 24 hours here, the Yankees have lost Clint Frazier, have had Todd Frazier (Wednesday) and Sanchez (Tuesday) hit by pitches on their elbow and hand, and had C. C. Sabathia leave Tuesday’s start after three innings with a knee injury.Sabathia learned Wednesday after having a magnetic resonance imaging test on his degenerative right knee that there was no further damage. And while it is uncertain whether he will pitch Sunday night against the Red Sox, it might qualify as the best news of the day for the Yankees.Advertisement