JULY 8, 2017
The F.B.I. and the Army investigated complaints from four women that the Hall of Fame basketball coach Bob Knight groped them or touched them inappropriately during a visit to a United States spy agency in 2015, an investigation that concluded a year later without charges, The Washington Post reported Friday.One of the women, whose name The Post did not disclose, told the newspaper that Knight had groped her buttocks shortly before he gave a speech to staffers at the National Geospatial-Intelligence Agency at its headquarters in Springfield, Va. The woman also filed a discrimination complaint against the agency and the Defense Department in which she claimed she had been pressured to drop the matter, The Post reported.A lawyer representing Knight, James Voyles, acknowledged to The Post that F.B.I. agents had interviewed Knight at his home in Montana last year and said the investigation had been dropped shortly afterward.“There is absolutely no credible evidence to support this, in our opinion, these allegations,” Voyles said, adding that the F.B.I. agents had “reported to their superiors that there was no basis for any further action, period.”AdvertisementCELTICS TRADE BRADLEY TO PISTONS The Detroit Pistons traded forward Marcus Morris to Boston for guard Avery Bradley and a second-round draft pick in 2019. Bradley averaged 16.3 points per game last season for the Celtics, but Boston is adding the All-Star forward Gordon Hayward. Morris averaged 14 points for Detroit.AdvertisementBradley was the longest-tenured member of the Celtics. Picked 19th over all in the 2010 draft, he developed into one of the league’s best defenders, making the All-Defensive second team in 2013 and first team in 2016. The Pistons lose Morris, who has been a steady veteran and a mainstay in the starting lineup over the past two seasons.Rory McIlroy missed the cut at the Irish Open for the fourth time in five years, leading the four-time major winner to express concerns about parts of his game ahead of the British Open.McIlroy shot a one-over-par 73 in his second round over the links at Portstewart and was one over for the tournament, which he is hosting to benefit his foundation. He was 14 strokes behind the leaders, Benjamin Hebert and Daniel Im. “My short game is not sharp enough, and I’m making silly mistakes,” McIlroy said.Jon Rahm, playing in the same group as McIlroy, shot a 67 for third place, a stroke off the lead.COLOMBIAN HOLDS GREENBRIER LEAD Sebastián Muñoz shot a three-under 67 to lead Ben Martin and Hudson Swafford by three strokes after the second round of the Greenbrier Classic in White Sulphur Springs, W.Va.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.Muñoz, a 24-year-old Colombian, continued his solid play after an opening-round 61. He heads into the weekend at 12-under 128.Davis Love III, seeking to become the oldest-ever winner on the PGA Tour at age 53, shot a 69 and is at eight under, along with the defending champion Danny Lee and Russell Henley. Henley tied the day’s best round with a 64.Seattle second baseman Robinson Cano, Tampa Bay pitcher Chris Archer and Toronto reliever Roberto Osuna are among seven replacement players selected for Tuesday’s All-Star Game in Miami. Houston reliever Chris Devenski, Minnesota reliever Brandon Kintzler and Detroit outfielder Justin Upton were also added to the A.L. roster. Los Angeles Dodgers pitcher Alex Wood was added to the N.L. All-Stars.Rangers defenseman Kevin Klein has retired after playing parts of 12 seasons in the N.H.L. Klein, 32, played in 627 games with the Rangers and the Nashville Predators, totaling 38 goals and 116 assists.AdvertisementThe Rangers acquired him on Jan. 22, 2014. During his tenure in New York, Klein led Rangers defensemen in even-strength goals (22) and game-winning goals (eight). Klein was bothered by back spasms this past season and had three goals and 11 assists in 60 regular-season games.New York City F.C.’s David Villa, Toronto’s Michael Bradley and Chicago’s Bastian Schweinsteiger are among the fan selections for next month’s Major League Soccer All-Star Game. The M.L.S. team will face Real Madrid and possibly Cristiano Ronaldo on Aug. 2 at Soldier Field in Chicago.Lewis Hamilton’s hopes of reducing Sebastian Vettel’s 14-point lead in this year’s drivers’ world championship had a setback when he was handed a five-place grid penalty for this weekend’s Austrian Grand Prix. The penalty is for an unscheduled gearbox change, his Mercedes team confirmed. The matter was referred to the race stewards Friday evening after Hamilton, the three-time world champion Briton, had dominated both opening practice sessions.A version of this article appears in print on July 8, 2017, on Page D4 of the New York edition with the headline: Basketball; F.B.I. Investigated Knight Over Complaints.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.