AdvertisementSupported bySports BriefingBy The Associated PressDom Dwyer scored for the second straight game, but a Miguel Camargo goal gave Panama a 1-1 tie Saturday against the United States, the first time the Americans failed to win their opener in the Concacaf Gold Cup.After scoring in his United States debut last weekend against Ghana, Dwyer put the Americans ahead in the 50th minute in Nashville with a left-footed shot from 9 yards that went in off the far post. Dwyer, who was born in England, ran onto a cross from Kelyn Rowe after a throw-in by Jorge Villafaña.Panama put on immediate pressure, and Camargo sent a rebound past the hand of goalkeeper Brad Guzan in the 60th minute after Guzan saved an initial shot by Gabriel Torres that followed an Edgar Barcenas cross. The United States had won its previous 13 Gold Cup openers.“We didn’t play well on the day,” said Bruce Arena, the United States coach. “We didn’t deal well with their pressure, especially in the midfield.”PREMIER LEAGUE STAR ARRESTED Romelu Lukaku was arrested at a house where he was staying in Beverly Hills, Calif., after officers warned him five times to turn down the music at a party, the police said.Lukaku, a striker from Belgium, was not handcuffed or booked last Sunday when he was cited for the misdemeanor of excessive noise, Sgt. Jay Kim said.Lukaku plays for Everton, but Manchester United is trying to sign him to a $97 million deal.AJAX MIDFIELDER COLLAPSES The Dutch club Ajax said midfielder Abdelhak Nouri, 20, was in stable condition after he collapsed during a friendly match against Werder Bremen in Austria and was taken to a hospital by helicopter. Ajax, calling it “a matter of an irregular heartbeat,” said on Twitter, “He is stable, has pulse and is being kept asleep.”A. J. Johnson, a former Tennessee linebacker who is awaiting an aggravated rape trial, was arrested on a charge of driving under the influence.The Knoxville, Tenn., police said Johnson, 25, was cited for simple possession early Saturday when his car failed to proceed through an intersection after a traffic light turned green twice.Martin Truex Jr. was dominant throughout and had enough left on a final restart to win the Quaker State 400, a Nascar Cup race at Kentucky Speedway in Sparta.Second in points entering the 400-mile event, Truex started second beside Kyle Busch and won the first two stages. Truex led the final segment by as many as 15 seconds before a final caution created overtime and bunched the field together. That made no difference as Truex flew past Busch on the restart and went on to his third victory of the season.The Houston Rockets signed guard James Harden to a four-year contract extension for about $160 million, giving him the richest contract in N.B.A. history at $228 million over six years.The extension runs through the 2022-23 season. With Harden under contract on his existing deal for another two seasons, the move will not affect Houston’s aggressive pursuit of free agents this summer as the Rockets make a run at the Golden State Warriors, the reigning champions. MINNESOTA ACQUISITION ARRESTED IN QUEENS Taj Gibson, recently signed by the Minnesota Timberwolves, was arrested early Thursday after what the police said was a traffic violation in Queens.The New York Police Department said officers stopped a 2016 Mercedes-Benz sedan that made an illegal U-turn. Gibson, who was driving, produced a suspended Illinois driver’s license, the police said.The Star Tribune of Minneapolis reported that Gibson was charged with driving with a suspended license and a moving violation. He is due in court Sept. 1.Gregory Polanco hit a two-run homer in the sixth inning, and Ivan Nova pitched three-hit ball into the seventh, leading the visiting Pittsburgh Pirates to a 4-2 victory over the Chicago Cubs.Ian Happ and Kyle Schwarber had back-to-back home runs for Chicago, which has not won consecutive games since a three-game streak from June 18 to 20.AROUND THE MAJORS Mike Clevinger held Detroit to three hits in six innings to win his third straight decision, and the All-Star Michael Brantley broke a scoreless tie with a double as the Cleveland Indians defeated the visiting Tigers, 4-0. The All-Star rookie Cody Bellinger drew a bases-loaded walk to force in the winning run in the 10th inning as the Los Angeles Dodgers rallied at home to beat the Kansas City Royals, 5-4, for their fifth straight victory. Julio Teheran pitched seven strong innings and added a career-high three R.B.I., Nick Markakis and Johnan Camargo each had three hits, and the Atlanta Braves beat the Nationals, 13-0, in Washington.Speeding away on a small mountain road more suited to goats than to riders, Lilian Calmejane of France won Stage 8, to the Rousses ski station, for his first victory in his first Tour de France.The Tour leader, Chris Froome, finished in a group farther back, retaining the yellow jersey.Sebastián Muñoz shot a two-under-par 68 to maintain a two-stroke lead over Robert Streb through the third round of the Greenbrier Classic in White Sulphur Springs, W.Va., keeping him in position to become the tournament’s first wire-to-wire winner.Muñoz, a 24-year-old Colombian and PGA Tour rookie, was at 14-under 196. Streb shot a 65. Davis Love III was at 10 under after a 68. At 53, he is trying to become the oldest winner on the tour.L.P.G.A. RECORD IS CHALLENGED Katherine Kirk shot a seven-under 65 to open a four-stroke lead in the Thornberry Creek L.P.G.A. Classic and move into position to challenge the tour’s 72-hole record. Ashleigh Buhai of South Africa was second after a 65.Coming off a career-best 63 on Friday, Kirk reached 20-under 196 in the tournament, a first-year event at Thornberry Creek near Green Bay, Wis. The tour record for 72 holes is 27 under, set by Annika Sorenstam in the 2001 Standard Register Ping in Phoenix and matched by Sei Young Kim last year in the Founders Cup, also in Phoenix.IRISH OPEN Jon Rahm shot a five-under-par 67 in Portstewart, Northern Ireland, and took a share of the lead with Daniel Im in the third round. The 11th-ranked Rahm, a Spaniard, moved to 17 under over all after making four consecutive birdies from No. 11 and parring his way home.Advertisement