AdvertisementSupported byBy The Associated PressBUDAPEST — Not everyone gets a medal at the world aquatic championships. It only seems that way.Titles are being handed out in a plethora of events in Budapest, far more than are available at the Olympics, although there are some downright puzzling ones.For example: solo synchronized swimming.“I get many questions online,” Svetlana Kolesnichenko of Russia said through an interpreter after capturing the gold medal Wednesday in the solo free event. The main question she gets: What, exactly, is the synchronization in solo synchronized swimming?“My answer would be: It’s a different type of work,” she said. “When you synchronize to the music, you have your own vision, your own interpretation of the music.”Synchronized swimmers have far more medal opportunities at the world championships, which are held every other year, than they do at the Olympics, where duet and team are the only events.In Budapest, there are nine synchronized swimming gold medals on the line — including two mixed events, in which women and men compete in tandem. At the Olympics, only women compete.Ona Carbonell of Spain noted the huge discrepancy between the number of medals available to regular swimmers at the Games and the few for which synchronized swimmers compete.It was 32 to 2 at the Rio Olympics, and at the 2020 Tokyo Games, swimming will include three more events: the men’s 800-meter freestyle, the women’s 1,500 free and a 4x100 mixed-gender free relay, which will give men and women a chance to compete together for the first time at the Games.“Obviously, we would like for the Olympics to be like the world championships, to have more medals,” Carbonell said. “Swimming gets a lot of tests, and we only get two.”The world championships are packed with events that do not exist on the Olympic stage, such as mixed team diving and a brutal 25-kilometer open-water race. There is also the relatively new sport of high diving, a thrilling spectacle that will be conducted from a 27-meter tower — roughly 90 feet high.The world championships do not just give more athletes a chance to pad their résumés; they also serve as a testing ground for events that might someday find their way into the Olympics.There is plenty of Olympic lobbying going on during the 17-day championships — for example, in team diving, which features one man and one woman from each country diving off both the 10-meter platform and the 3-meter springboard.There are 13 diving events at the world championships, compared with eight in the Olympics.Then there is open water swimming, which, at the Games, features just two events — 10-kilometer races for men and women. At the worlds, there are gender-specific events of 5, 10 and 25 kilometers, as well as a team event that includes both men and women — seven chances for a medal.“It’s definitely the hope that one day they will add more at the Olympics,” Haley Anderson said Wednesday, shortly after a fifth-place finish for the United States in the women’s 5K, an event she won at the 2015 world championships. “I would love to see the 5K and 25K at the Olympics, not to mention the team relay, which is so exciting.”The 5K team event probably has the best shot at getting on the Olympic program, while the 25K hardly seems like the sort of TV-friendly race that would win over the International Olympic Committee, as it takes about five hours to produce a winner.“Distance swimming is a very unappreciated event sometimes,” Anderson acknowledged. “Even when you see the mile and 800 meters in the pool, they always go to commercial breaks during the event. But actual distance athletes appreciate it more. They appreciate what goes into it. Sure, everyone loves the sprinters and those 50s. But it’s good when you hear people saying: ‘Oh my god, I watched your 10K. It was so exciting. There was so much going on it.’ That’s what we want to hear.”Advertisement