By THE ASSOCIATED PRESSJULY 5, 2017
Chris Bosh’s time with the Miami Heat is officially over. Weeks after the sides came to a final agreement on how to part ways and more than a year since his last N.B.A. appearance because of blood clots, Bosh was waived by the Heat.The move was a formality. It gives Miami access to $25.3 million in salary-cap space for this coming season, which the Heat will use to sign free agents starting Thursday. Bosh still gets that salary, plus $26.8 million for next season, and in theory could continue his career — if another team declares him fit to play.Cory Spangenberg drove in the only run with a groundout, and six San Diego pitchers combined on a five-hitter as the visiting Padres edged Cleveland, 1-0, despite a record-setting outing by the All-Star Corey Kluber.Indians Manager Terry Francona missed the game after he was admitted to Cleveland Clinic for tests. Francona was hospitalized twice last month after feeling lightheaded and developing a rapid heart rate. He was fitted with a heart monitor last week and said at the time that doctors had ruled out any serious health issues.AdvertisementChris Antonetti, the team president, said Francona did not experience the previous symptoms again, and the tests were being done to help determine what is causing the problem.AdvertisementThe bench coach Brad Mills guided the Indians in Francona’s absence.Kluber (7-3) allowed one run and struck out 10 in eight innings — setting a team record with five consecutive games with double-digit strikeouts. But Kluber, the 2014 American League Cy Young Award winner, received little help from his offense.RAYS PREVAIL IN REUNION WITH MADDON Tim Beckham hit a two-run homer as the Tampa Bay Rays won their reunion with Joe Maddon, beating the Cubs, 6-5, in Chicago. Beckham’s shot highlighted a five-run fourth inning against Jon Lester (5-5).BENINTENDI PACES RED SOX Andrew Benintendi hit two homers and drove six runs as Boston pounded the Rangers, 11-4, in Arlington, Tex. David Price went six scoreless innings, giving up six hits while striking out nine for the win.TAILLON  LIFTS THE PIRATES Jameson Taillon struck out a career-best nine in five innings, Andrew McCutchen hit a pair of solo homers and the Pittsburgh Pirates beat the Phillies, 3-0, in Philadelphia. Taillon (5-2) is 3-1 in five starts since returning from surgery for testicular cancer.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.THAMES’S HOMERS POWER BREWERS Eric Thames hit a pair of home runs and Jimmy Nelson pitched seven strong innings to lead the Milwaukee Brewers to a 6-2 win at home over the Baltimore Orioles.ROYALS MAKE IT FIVE OF SIX Whit Merrifield hit the first pitch of the game from Felix Hernandez for his seventh home run, Mike Moustakas added his 24th homer and the Kansas City Royals beat the Mariners, 7-3, in Seattle for their fifth win in six games.METS CLASS AAA RELIEVER ATTACKED A reliever with the Las Vegas 51s, the Mets’ Class AAA affiliate, was attacked by a homeless man in an attempted robbery in Utah, the authorities said, forcing the team to place him on the disabled list. The pitcher, Logan Taylor, was hit in the head with a tire iron after the man approached him and demanded his wallet while he was walking down a street in Salt Lake City on Saturday, Detective Greg Wilking of the Salt Lake City police told The Las Vegas Review-Journal.The Carolina Hurricanes acquired Marcus Kruger from the Vegas Golden Knights, the forward’s second trade in three days. The Golden Knights picked up Carolina’s fifth-round pick in the 2018 draft. Chicago traded Kruger to Vegas on Sunday for undisclosed future considerations.AdvertisementUsed primarily as a checking-line forward, Kruger had five goals and 12 assists in 70 games last season. He helped the Blackhawks win the Stanley Cup in 2013 and 2015.CAPITALS AGREE TO DEAL WITH WING Right wing Andre Burakovsky and the Washington Capitals agreed to a two-year, $6 million contract. Burakovsky, 22, had 12 goals and 23 assists in 64 games for Washington last season, his third in the N.H.L.AVALANCHE SIGN FORMER TOP OVERALL PICK The Colorado Avalanche added another goal-scoring option by signing the former No. 1 overall pick Nail Yakupov to a one-year deal. Yakupov, 23, was the top pick by Edmonton in the 2012 draft and was traded to St. Louis before last season.Rangers, the record 54-time Scottish champion, was knocked out of the Europa League by a tiny Luxembourg team, Progres Niederkorn, which had never won a match in a European competition. It defeated the Glasgow side, 2-0, at its 14th attempt to reach the second qualifying round, advancing by 2-1 on aggregate.A version of this article appears in print on July 5, 2017, on Page B10 of the New York edition with the headline: Pro Basketball; Bosh’s Tenure With the Heat Ends.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.