By REBECCA R. RUIZDEC. 2, 2017
With top Olympics officials expected imminently to announce a punishment for Russia over its elaborate sports doping scheme, the whistle-blower who played a central role in the illicit program said he was in favor of allowing Russian athletes who can establish their innocence to compete under a neutral flag at the coming Winter Games in Pyeongchang, South Korea.“Innocent athletes should not be prevented from participating,” Dr. Grigory Rodchenkov, Russia’s former longtime antidoping laboratory chief, said in an email exchange on Friday and Saturday with The New York Times through his lawyer — his first interview since being put under protection of United States authorities.International Olympic Committee officials will announce Tuesday how they will handle the matter of Russia’s eligibility at the Winter Games in February. An extreme option would be barring every member of the Russian delegation from participating, regardless of whether they are linked to doping. Dr. Rodchenkov said he supported one of the options that the officials are considering: allowing clean Russian athletes to compete but keeping all Russian emblems out of the Games.In recent weeks, Dr. Rodchenkov’s detailed account about widespread breaches of drug-testing controls at the 2014 Olympics in Sochi, Russia — as well as his contemporaneous notes from that time and digital evidence related to his lab work — have been shared with Olympic officials.AdvertisementAt issue is the extent to which those global officials determine that Russian government and Olympic officials were complicit in the cheating plots, which have so far resulted in 25 Russian Olympians having been disqualified from Sochi. Russian officials have forcefully disputed state involvement, accusing Dr. Rodchenkov of acting alone and criminally charging him with abuse of authority.AdvertisementDr. Rodchenkov has linked Russia’s former sports minister, Vitaly Mutko, and Mr. Mutko’s deputy sports minister, Yuri Nagornykh, to the cheating schemes, asserting they ordered him and others to tamper with more than 100 steroid-laced urine samples in Sochi, and to conceal similar cheating in the years before and after the 2014 Games.In the interview with The Times, he named a new figure as having been actively involved in what he called “the Sochi plan”: Alexander Kravtsov, the current president of Russia’s biathlon union. Mr. Kravtsov served as the diplomatic head of the Russian national team at the Sochi Games on behalf of the Russian Olympic Committee.“At various times, I spoke to Alexander Kravtsov about the use of performance-enhancing drugs generally, and about the Sochi plan in particular,” Dr. Rodchenkov said, adding that Mr. Kravtsov’s personal driver had at times transported agents of the Federal Security Service to Russia’s national antidoping laboratory ahead of the Games, to help study and surreptitiously break into the supposedly tamper-proof glass bottles used to collect urine at international sports events.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.Emphasizing how central the sport of biathlon was in the nation’s cheating, Dr. Rodchenkov said that Mr. Nagornykh had asked him to incriminate a Ukrainian athlete, Vita Semerenko, during a competition in Moscow leading up to the Olympics.“He was particularly concerned with Ukrainian female biathletes, who posed the most serious challenge to Russia’s relay team during the Sochi Games,” Dr. Rodchenkov said, going on to add that the deputy minister had asked him to “make the sample dirty” to disqualify Ms. Semerenko. Dr. Rodchenkov did not comply, he said, convincing the minister that a retest of the drug sample would show the drugs had been spiked into the sample rather than passed through a human body.“I could not have done this to an innocent athlete,” he said. “During my career, I reported many Dirty Samples as clean, but never the other way around.”Mr. Nagornykh, who was also a member of the Russian Olympic Committee, was dismissed by the Russian sports ministry after an investigation commissioned by the global regulator of drugs in sports confirmed Dr. Rodchenkov’s story last year.Attempts to reach Mr. Kravtsov and Mr. Nagornykh on Saturday through the biathlon union and the Sports Ministry were not immediately successful.Dr. Rodchenkov’s lawyer declined to let him respond to some questions based on pending investigations. Since last year, Dr. Rodchenkov has been living in the United States under the protection of American authorities. His information on systematic Russian doping is believed to be relevant to continuing investigations in the United States and abroad.AdvertisementIn August, “Icarus,” a film detailing Dr. Rodchenkov’s move to the United States and tell-all account, was released. It includes a scene in which Dr. Rodchenkov was fingerprinted before being taken into hiding.A version of this article appears in print on December 3, 2017, on Page SP4 of the New York edition with the headline: Whistle-Blower Says Don’t Punish Innocent Athletes.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.