By KEN BELSON and VICTOR MATHERDEC. 11, 2017
The N.F.L. on Monday said it may strengthen its protocol for assessing possible concussions after another player was allowed to return to play despite a violent hit to the head that left him on his back Sunday with his hands noticeably twitching.The latest case involved the Houston Texans quarterback Tom Savage, who was hit by Elvis Dumervil of the San Francisco 49ers after throwing a pass in the second quarter.It seemed at first like another hard hit in a sport full of them, but the immediate aftermath was more unusual. Savage rolled onto his back on the turf at NRG Stadium in Houston and lifted up his hands, which visibly trembled as if he were experiencing an electric shock, a telltale sign of a potential concussion, according to experts.Savage checked into the sideline medical tent but emerged after a few minutes and re-entered the game for the next series. He threw two incompletions as his team failed to get a first down.AdvertisementSavage tried to come back for the next series, and was seen arguing with team officials before being escorted to the locker room. T.J. Yates replaced him. The Texans eventually lost, 26-16. There was no update on Savage’s condition on Monday.AdvertisementAn N.F.L. spokesman, Joe Lockhart, said the league and N.F.L. Players Association would look into how Savage was evaluated for a possible concussion and reassess the protocol the league has used for several years “to see if it can be strengthened.”“We believe very strongly that the protocol is an important part of our overall effort to improve player safety,” Lockhart said in a conference call with reporters on Monday. The review, based on how quickly the league has handled similar cases, could take weeks.There was also criticism when the Seattle Seahawks quarterback, Russell Wilson, did not immediately go through the concussion protocol despite a hard hit during a game against the Arizona Cardinals on Nov. 9. The N.F.L. is still reviewing that case.The New Orleans Saints tight end Coby Fleener was initially not checked for a concussion on Nov. 26 despite receiving a helmet-to-helmet hit violent enough that the defender was penalized for hitting a defenseless receiver. Fleener was eventually diagnosed with a concussion and left the game.Indianapolis Colts quarterback Jacoby Brissett was hit in the head on Nov. 12 and slow to get up. He was evaluated on the sideline and judged fit to play, but about a half-hour later, symptoms emerged and he was diagnosed with a concussion.The N.F.L. has pledged to make the game safer after being criticized for denying the links between head hits and degenerative brain disease for decades.In recent years, the league has changed rules to reduce hits to the head and it has deployed medical professionals on the sidelines and in the press boxes to quickly identify and test players whom they suspect have suffered concussions.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.Yet the N.F.L. concedes the protocol is not foolproof because concussions are often difficult to diagnose in just a few minutes. In some cases, the symptoms are apparent immediately; in others, the players will develop symptoms an hour or even a day later.AdvertisementUnder the protocol, an independent neurologist on the sideline, separate from the team doctor, evaluates players and determines if they are able to play.The independent neurologists are typically specialists from hospitals near the home team. They are paid for their time at games and, in theory, are not supposed to be influenced by a team’s doctors, though in some cities they may work at the same medical facility as the team doctor.After the game on Sunday, the Texans coach, Bill O’Brien, said: “We evaluated him. We made the determination — not me, obviously, the evaluators — made the determination to put him back in the game. We put him back in the game, and he came out, and they evaluated him a little bit more just because of what they saw, and that’s where it’s at.”“I don’t have anything to do with that,” O’Brien added. “Really, all I do is coach.”Savage’s return to the game generated anger and disbelief among many fans and commentators.Brian T. Smith of The Houston Chronicle, under the headline “N.F.L. appears brain dead after letting Tom Savage back into game,” wrote: “You know there’s no way in the world Savage should have been allowed to return to that football game. Only in the N.F.L.”Chris Nowinski, co-founder of the Concussion Legacy Foundation, a nonprofit dedicated to concussions in sports, said that the tests given to players on the sideline, which include a handful of questions, are notoriously imprecise.Players should be forced to sit for at least 10 minutes on the sidelines to give doctors a better sense of whether symptoms, like dizziness and disorientation, are emerging, Nowinski said. If not, he added, the league risks putting injured players back into games and having them receive a second, even more damaging concussion.“This is a life-or-death issue and if they don’t get their arms around it, it will become a life-or-death issue on television,” Nowinski said. “They can’t keep rolling the dice. Guys die from second impact syndrome every year.”Based on the television replay, Nowinski said that Savage displayed a “fencing posture” that occurs when a person who suffers a concussion extends his or her arms, not unlike a fencer.A version of this article appears in print on December 12, 2017, on Page B11 of the New York edition with the headline: Big Hit May Have Led to a Miss by the N.F.L.’s Concussion Protocol.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.