By KEN BELSONJULY 19, 2017
The judge overseeing the N.F.L. concussion settlement said on Wednesday that the plaintiffs’ lawyers could look into whether lenders, claims service providers and other companies are duping former players into signing contracts for unneeded services.The order was made in response to an article published by The New York Times describing how retired players, who stand to receive up to $5 million in the settlement, are being bombarded with sales pitches from companies promising to help retirees fill out the paperwork to file claims.The companies, some of which have hired former players as pitchmen, often fail to note that players can fill out the paperwork on their own, and that court-appointed advisers are available at no cost. Some companies have also promised to introduce players to doctors who, they claim, will write diagnoses to make a player look in worse condition as a way to qualify for a larger settlement.In a notice issued on Wednesday, the judge, Anita B. Brody of United States District Court for the Eastern District of Pennsylvania, said she would hold a hearing in September to address what she called “deceptive practices” that target former players. She also said she would “address the legality of any agreements” between the players and these claims service companies, and could potentially void those agreements.Before the hearing, the judge said lawyers who represented the retired players in their settlement with the N.F.L. could now request documents from any person or company “who has sent purportedly deceptive or misleading solicitations” to former players, as well as review contracts or retainers signed by former players and any referral agreements related to former players.The 20,000 or so former N.F.L. players have until Aug. 7 to register for the settlement, which includes a promise by the league to spend hundreds of millions of dollars for players with severe neurological and cognitive problems.A version of this article appears in print on July 20, 2017, on Page B11 of the New York edition with the headline: Effort to Halt ‘Deceptive’ Claims About an N.F.L. Deal.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.