AdvertisementSupported bySports BriefingBy The Associated PressDonte DiVicenzo’s buzzer-beating tip-in — his only basket of the game — gave top-ranked Villanova a 61-59 victory over No. 12 Virginia in Philadelphia on Sunday and allowed the Wildcats to avoid their first two-game losing streak in four years.Coming off a loss at Marquette on Tuesday, Villanova (20-2) played poorly in the first half and trailed by 12 points with 10 minutes left in the game. But an 11-0 run helped the Wildcats chip away at the deficit, and Villanova had the ball with the score tied and 11.5 seconds left.Josh Hart missed a driving layup, but DiVicenzo tipped the ball in just as the horn sounded. After a brief review by the officials, the basket stood, and the Wildcats mobbed one another at center court.Jalen Brunson and Mikal Bridges each had 15 points for the Wildcats. Ty Jerome led Virginia (16-4) with 15 points.The Wildcats were out of sync in easily their worst first half of the season and perhaps their worst in the last five years. They missed 18 of 22 shots from the floor and nine of 10 3-point attempts. Villanova’s starters made only three baskets in the half, and Hart even fired one shot off the side of the backboard.The game, at Wells Fargo Center, drew a crowd announced at 20,907, the largest to see a college basketball game in Pennsylvania.ARIZONA’S STREAK CONTINUES Kadeem Allen scored 14 points to lead five Arizona players in double figures, and the No. 7 Wildcats wore down visiting Washington, 77-66, to stay alone atop the Pac-12 standings. The Wildcats (20-2, 9-0 Pac-12) won their 14th straight over all and their 18th in a row at home. Markelle Fultz scored 16 points for Washington (9-12, 2-7) but made only eight of 23 shots from the floor.Kyrie Irving scored 29 points, LeBron James had 25 and 14 rebounds, and the Cleveland Cavaliers beat the visiting Oklahoma City Thunder, 107-91, despite another triple-double by the Thunder’s Russell Westbrook.The victory was one of the best performances by the Cavaliers in weeks and their second straight since a tumultuous stretch in which they lost six of eight. That stumble had sparked internal turmoil, with James criticizing the team’s roster after a loss.Westbrook finished with 20 points, 12 rebounds and 10 assists as the Thunder’s three-game winning streak ended.PACERS ROUT ROCKETS Paul George had 33 points while hounding James Harden on defense most of the night to lead the Indiana Pacers over the visiting Houston Rockets, 120-101, for their third straight win. Harden shot 3 of 17 from the floor and finished with 15 points and 8 turnovers as the Rockets wrapped up a five-game trip.AROUND THE N.B.A. Jimmy Butler scored 28 points and Robin Lopez added a season-high 21 points as the Chicago Bulls beat the visiting Philadelphia 76ers, 121-108, bouncing back from consecutive home losses, including one that began with Butler and Dwyane Wade on the bench after they had criticized their teammates. Nikola Vucevic had 25 points and 10 rebounds, D. J. Augustin added 21 points off the bench, and the Orlando Magic beat the host Toronto Raptors, 114-113. John Wall had 18 points and 19 assists, Bradley Beal scored 27 points, and the visiting Washington Wizards extended their winning streak to four with a 107-94 victory over the New Orleans Pelicans.Kansas City’s Alex Smith and Cincinnati’s Andy Dalton threw touchdown passes, and Buffalo’s Lorenzo Alexander intercepted a pass with just over a minute left as the A.F.C. won the Pro Bowl, 20-13, over the N.F.C. in Orlando, Fla.New Orleans’s Drew Brees threw a 47-yard touchdown pass for the N.F.C., and Matt Parter kicked two fourth-quarter field goals to keep the outcome in suspense until Alexander intercepted Washington’s Kirk Cousins deep in A.F.C. territory.A SURPRISE HIRE The San Francisco 49ers turned to the former N.F.L. safety and Fox television analyst John Lynch to be their new general manager.Lynch comes into the job with no front-office experience, having gone straight from the playing field to the broadcast booth. But after a lengthy search that included interviews with nine other publicly identified candidates, the team settled on Lynch to replace Trent Baalke, who had been fired along with coach Chip Kelly.Lynch had a stellar 15-year career with Tampa Bay and Denver that included three All-Pro selections and one Super Bowl title with the Buccaneers. He retired in 2008 and is a finalist this year for the Pro Football Hall of Fame.COLTS PICK NEW G.M. The Indianapolis Colts hired Chris Ballard, previously the Kansas City Chiefs’ director of football operations, as general manager.Brittany Lincicome rallied from two strokes down in the final round to force a playoff, then birdied the first playoff hole to win the opening event of the L.P.G.A. Tour, the Bahamas Classic at the Ocean Club on Paradise Island.Lincicome birdied the par-5 18th for a five-under-par 68 to finish in a tie with Lexi Thompson. On 18 again for the first playoff hole, Lincicome hit her second shot to 20 feet and tapped in for birdie and her seventh tour title.A late goal by Mahmoud Kahraba sent Egypt to the last semifinal spot in the Africa Cup of Nations with a 1-0 victory over Morocco in Port-Gentil, Gabon. Earlier, the brothers Jordan and Andre Ayew scored as Ghana advanced over the Democratic Republic of Congo, 2-1, in Oyem.Egypt, a seven-time champion, will face Burkina Faso on Wednesday. Ghana and Cameroon, both four-time winners, play Thursday.A final-hour pass gave Wayne Taylor Racing the win in the Rolex 24 endurance race in Daytona Beach, Fla.Ricky Taylor went inside the Action Express driver Filipe Albuquerque, but contact sent Albuquerque spinning. Officials determined that Taylor did not deserve a penalty, sending his team to its first Rolex victory since 2005.The retired Nascar driver Jeff Gordon was part of the Wayne Taylor team along with the brothers Ricky and Jordan Taylor and their longtime co-driver, Max Angelelli.Advertisement