By BILLY WITZJULY 21, 2017
SEATTLE — Perhaps it is just a blip, a small sample size not to be given too much weight. But Luis Severino, who pitched himself into the Yankees rotation in spring training and onto the American League All-Star team by early July, looks as if he has taken another leap forward.For the second consecutive start, Severino was pitted against a former Cy Young Award winner in peak form, and it was hard to tell who owned the hardware and who did not.Just as he did in his previous start against Boston ace Chris Sale at Fenway Park, Severino stood toe to toe with King Felix Hernandez on Thursday, pitching seven shutout innings in the Yankees’ 4-1 victory over the Seattle Mariners.Brett Gardner spoiled an outstanding performance by Hernandez with a solo homer with one out in the sixth before the Yankees pushed across an unearned run in the eighth and two more unearned runs in the ninth.Advertisement“It shows you he understands,” Manager Joe Girardi said. “He has to get after it from the first hitter because if he doesn’t, two runs could beat you when you’re facing guys like that. He competed extremely well.”AdvertisementSeverino’s sharpness was necessary on another night when the Yankees’ offense struggled to muster much, and their two marquee relievers — Aroldis Chapman and Dellin Betances — continued to look shaky.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.Betances, who nearly threw away a potential double-play ball — Starlin Castro made a lunging catch to make sure the Yankees got at least one out — struck out Jarrod Dyson to end the eighth with two runners on. Chapman, who gave up a run-scoring double to Robinson Cano, needed 25 pitches to complete the final inning, which ended with David Robertson warming up in the bullpen.Last Saturday, Severino allowed only one run and four hits in seven innings — and escaped a loss when Matt Holliday hit a game-tying homer off Craig Kimbrel to begin the ninth. The Yankees eventually won, 4-1, in 16 innings.Severino had to be almost as good on Thursday. Hernandez allowed only hit through 51/3 innings. As soon as Gardner connected on a 2-1 fastball from Hernandez, the pitcher’s visceral reaction was immediate: He let out a scream as soon as the ball left the bat.The Yankees’ starting pitching has looked resuscitated since coming out of the All-Star break, and the bullpen has gotten a boost with the addition of Robertson and Tommy Kahnle in the trade from the Chicago White Sox. But the return from injury of Matt Holliday and Castro has not sparked the offense.We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.