
Sports of The Times By                     
 WILLIAM C. RHODEN
 
JAN. 6, 2016
In September, after watching the Giants beat Washington to earn their first win in what was to be Tom Coughlin’s final season, I cautioned disgruntled fans.Take heart, I wrote at the time. However dreary things get, it could always be worse. Daniel Snyder could own your team.Four months later, you could argue that Snyder has had the last laugh. Washington (9-7) will make its first playoff appearance in three seasons when it hosts Green Bay on Sunday. The Giants (6-10) finished with their third consecutive losing record. On Monday, the organization, as expected, parted ways with Coughlin after 12 seasons.I prefer to call the day after the N.F.L. season ends Gloomy (not Black) Monday. What strikes me each season in the annual carnival of firings is that the owners often escape responsibility for failure.AdvertisementIn San Francisco, the 49ers’ ownership pushed out Jim Harbaugh and hired Jim Tomsula. Then they fired Tomsula after one season. The team’s chief executive, Jed York, never acknowledged his blunder; instead, he just issued the standard “we can never repay you for what you’ve done” statements as Tomsula walked the plank.AdvertisementIn Philadelphia, the Eagles’ owner, Jeffrey Lurie, fell for the Chip Kelly smoke-and-mirrors show. Lurie handed Kelly the keys to the franchise in 2013, watched as Kelly chased away the team’s best players, then only said good riddance — before this season was over — when it became clear the team had quit on Kelly.Asked on Monday why he had given Kelly everything he wanted, Lurie could not bring himself to admit his hiring had been a mistake. Lurie said he had merely been conducting a “three-year evaluation,” giving Kelly just enough rope to hang himself.“I wanted to make Chip accountable for everything he wanted to have happen,” the owner said. “And one of the ways to make him accountable was to have him make those decisions.”In Cleveland, the Browns’ owner, Jimmy Haslam, fired his third head coach in four years of ownership when he jettisoned Mike Pettine. (Haslam also fired the general manager, Ray Farmer.) To his credit, Haslam told reporters that while Pettine and Farmer were at fault, “the blame lies squarely with me.”
            Get the latest tweets from @NYTSports, including breaking news, analysis and live updates.        But Haslam, who sold his minority stake in the Pittsburgh Steelers to buy the Browns in 2012, also admitted not so much that he didn’t know what he was doing, but that he didn’t know what he was getting into. “It’s much different to be the majority owner,” he said, calling the experience “very humbling.”Yet it’s not clear that he’s learning. After installing a front-office executive with no player personnel experience as vice president for football operations, Haslam announced on Tuesday that Paul DePodesta, formerly of the Mets, had been hired as the Browns’ chief strategy officer.The Mets?The Browns?During the season’s final locker-room session with reporters this week, the longtime Browns lineman Joe Thomas, playing for his sixth head coach, was asked if he was angry to be starting over again. “It doesn’t make you happy when you have to go through another coaching change,” Thomas said. “Coaching changes and organizational changes always set you back. Nobody is happy about it, and it is never easy.”In New York, after allowing Coughlin to make a farewell address, John Mara, a Giants owner, accepted the blame for the team’s last three losing seasons by quoting the man heading for the exit — “we win as a team, we lose as a team” — but he also shifted much of the blame for the Giants’ dismal season onto General Manager Jerry Reese.Advertisement“We’ve had three losing years in a row,” Mara said. “A lot of that is due to some personnel decisions that have been made.”Can’t be much clearer than that.“Let’s be honest,” he went on, “we’ve lost some credibility as an organization.”Get the big sports news, highlights and analysis from Times journalists, with distinctive takes on games and some behind-the-scenes surprises, delivered to your inbox every week.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.Still, the Giants’ gathering on Tuesday was as celebratory as a news conference to announce an unhappy parting could be. Coughlin was spared the indignity of being fired. This was a civil touch, characteristic of an organization that has tried over the years to be as compassionate as possible in its rough-and-tumble business of collisions and broken bones.The gratitude directed toward Coughlin by Mara was authentic. Eli Manning’s fighting back tears was touching. Coughlin’s final talk — about virtue, character and accountability being more important than championships — was old school, yet timeless.Asked if he might regret letting Coughlin go, Mara admitted, “I could very well be saying that.”Within and outside the N.F.L., the organizations that work thrive on continuity, longevity and accountability — beginning at the top. Fans did not hear a lot of top-down accountability over the last three days.What they did hear, and will hear, are names of potential successors. Kelly reportedly has reached out to the 49ers. The Eagles are said to be looking at a group of N.F.L. assistants. The Browns have given no one any confidence they will make a smart hire.The Giants? That will be on Mara, who won’t be able to blame Reese if he gets it wrong.Until he shows his hand, I stick by what I told Giants fans in September: Accept the team’s ups and downs. Look at San Francisco. Look at Philadelphia. Look at Cleveland.And, yes, look at Washington.It could always be worse.Email: wcr@ nytimes.com A version of this article appears in print on January 7, 2016, on Page B13 of the New York edition with the headline: Owners Find Fault, Take Action and Steer Clear of Blame .  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.See More »