By RAPHAEL MINDERJAN. 14, 2016
MADRID — Real Madrid responded on Thursday to a transfer ban imposed by FIFA, soccer’s global governing body, by claiming the sanction was unfairly linked to some youth players whose relatives were already employees of the club, including two sons of its new coach, Zinedine Zidane.FIFA said earlier Thursday that Real Madrid and its rival Atlético Madrid were guilty of illegally signing players younger than 18. Both clubs were temporarily prohibited from acquiring more players, in line with a similar sanction imposed in 2014 on Barcelona, the other powerhouse of Spanish soccer.The ban could prompt both clubs to bid for more players in the current January transfer period, before the penalty comes into force and prevents them from adding players until July 2017. Atlético was also fined 900,000 Swiss francs and Real Madrid 360,000 Swiss francs for infringing the youth transfer rules of FIFA, which is based in Switzerland. The clubs said they would appeal.Atlético is first in the standings in the Spanish league, ahead of Barcelona and Real Madrid. Earlier this month, Real Madrid ousted its coach, Rafael Benítez, and replaced him with Zidane, who had been managing Real Madrid’s B team, Castilla.AdvertisementWhile FIFA did not specify which transfers were illegal, Real Madrid said Thursday evening that it had been punished for adding eight youth players.Advertisement“They have sanctioned us for fielding and registering two sons of Zidane,” Javier López Farré, a legal director of Real Madrid, said at a news conference. He described the ban as “absurd.”Get the big sports news, highlights and analysis from Times journalists, with distinctive takes on games and some behind-the-scenes surprises, delivered to your inbox every week.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.Zidane led France to a World Cup victory in 1998 before joining Real Madrid in 2001 from the Italian club Juventus for a transfer fee that was a world record at the time. All four of his sons are considered promising players, including goalkeeper Luca, 17, and midfielder Enzo, who is 20. Enzo, Zidane’s oldest son, has been playing for Castilla.Enrique Cerezo, the president of Atlético, separately told reporters that the ban was a “big injustice” for which his club had received no warning. Asked whether the club needed to buy more players this month, he insisted that the current squad was strong enough to win titles. “I think that we brought in everything that we needed and a bit more,” he said. Executives of Real Madrid also later said that there were no immediate plans to bolster their team. Both clubs, however, could recall players on loan to other clubs.The sanctions against the two Madrid clubs came after Barcelona recently completed its suspension for similar violations. As a result, two players, Arda Turan and Aleix Vidal, were able to make their long-awaited debut yesterday in a victory in the Copa del Rey against Espanyol, a crosstown adversary.FIFA said both Madrid clubs had violated “several provisions concerning the international transfer and first registration of minor players.” FIFA also said in a statement Thursday that it “worked hard” to protect the rights of players under 18. “As such, the provisions relating to the protection of minors need to be strictly applied,” FIFA said.Real Madrid confirmed last January that FIFA had asked for paperwork relating to 51 youth transfers, but the club said at the time that it was “calm” and confident it had complied with all the rules.On Thursday evening, Real Madrid executives insisted that the ban came as a shock, particularly because FIFA found the club guilty of abusing the rights of youth players who already had family links to Real Madrid. The club said Benjamín Garay, the younger brother of Ezequiel Garay, one of its former players, was also involved in the case.José Ángel Sánchez, general director of Real Madrid, said the transfers were not illegal but “family cases” in which “nothing irregular has happened.”A version of this article appears in print on January 15, 2016, on Page B10 of the New York edition with the headline: Sports Briefing | Soccer; Two Spanish Clubs Penalized.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.