By BEN SHPIGELJULY 20, 2017
PARK CITY, Utah — The referee on the soccer field had just awarded a penalty kick, but he would not learn whether it was justified unless a man sitting in a modular trailer beyond the end line told him so. That man, Kevin Terry Jr., pressed a button glowing purple to replay the incident, then scooted forward to assess the play on a 27-inch tablet.Terry zoomed in tight on the players. He swapped camera angles and adjusted the speed of the footage while working to determine two things: whether the supposed trip was indeed a foul as he suspected, and if so, whether it was committed in the box.His heart thumped. His faced turned red.“It’s stressful,” Terry would say later. “Now the weight is shifting onto me.”That situation, and dozens of others like it, unfolded not during a match at a packed stadium but in youth scrimmages organized last week at a community park here. The games were staged as part of the final training camp to gauge referees’ competence in and comfort with video replay before Major League Soccer begins using it on Aug. 5, after its All-Star break.AdvertisementThe last of the major domestic professional leagues to put a replay system in place, M.L.S. trusts it will enhance the game without disrupting the flow, preventing or rectifying egregious errors with only brief delays and minimal obtrusiveness.AdvertisementA supplementary official, referred to as the V.A.R., for video assistant referee, can recommend a review in four circumstances considered match-changing: goals, penalties, straight red cards and instances of mistaken identity on infractions. In those cases, the V.A.R. has been instructed to discern not whether the on-field decision was correct but whether it was clearly and obviously wrong.In principle, video replay in soccer seems a prudent idea as long as it does not sterilize the game. International competitions and leagues around the world have experimented with the technology, and FIFA would like to install it for the 2018 World Cup in Russia. The Bundesliga also will introduce it next month.In practice, the V.A.R. system caused daily bouts of confusion at its most recent high-profile trial, the Confederations Cup in Russia last month. Lengthy stops and arbitrary use frustrated participants, coaches and fans, and threatened to erode the public’s confidence in the initiative.“If it’s used in the right way, this will be an absolutely wonderful addition to our sport,” said Howard Webb, a former Premier League official, who since March 1 has overseen V.A.R. training in M.L.S. “If it’s overused, it’s going to make our sport a mess.”Webb is determined not to let that happen. He understands some of the criticism levied against V.A.R. during the Confederations Cup, but he is bullish on its future in M.L.S. if for no other reason than the officials’ readiness. They have reviewed hundreds of clips of contentious plays, participated in online webinars and practiced conveying their findings to the on-field official in concise language.At minimum, each official will have refereed a game with a V.A.R., served as a V.A.R. during the M.L.S. preseason or in a United Soccer League match, and simulated three games as a V.A.R. with a surrogate referee. In all, Webb estimated, each official will have spent at least 100 hours training.Several officials said the primary adjustment to the new role had been recalibrating their mentality. For so long they have been accustomed to making every call, but now they need to worry about only select situations.Advertisement“Your instinct at first was to re-ref the game, but that’s not what you’re there for,” said Geoff Gamble, an M.L.S. official. “You’re not trying to overturn every microscopic thing. It’s only the big, big things.”Across two days of practical training and classroom sessions last week, Webb emphasized several points. He reiterated that V.A.R. is not intended to achieve 100 percent accuracy but to instead minimize mistakes like Carlos Tevez’s offside goal for Argentina against Mexico in the 2010 World Cup.With a GoPro camera monitoring officials’ behavior and body language in the booth, Webb directed them to always project confidence when announcing a decision.“Show the world you’re a swan,” Webb said, referring to how a swan is calm above water as its legs thrash below.Like many of his colleagues, Gamble considers V.A.R. a different job. It prizes mental flexibility, strong communication skills, composure and decisiveness. It also commands a degree of attention and focus that, some said, transcends their on-field demands. There are no lulls or breaks in the replay booth.To maintain that level of engagement, the video assistant referees often narrate the game aloud. They say words or phrases like “potential offsides” or “reset” — notifying the technician sitting beside them to disregard the footage that happened before.“In here, there’s no salvation if you miss it,” said Christina Unkel, who officiates professional and international matches. “It’s a different kind of concentration because now you have no excuse for why you missed something.”Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.Unlike in the N.F.L., where coaches can challenge a call on the field, the recommendation for a review in soccer comes from the V.A.R., who sits away from the playing surface, often by the broadcast trucks, and communicates over a wireless headset. Although the number of cameras will vary among stadiums, the V.A.R. will have access to all available broadcast feeds, which will cover at least eight angles.If a recommendation comes, the on-field referee initiates a video review by forming a rectangle with his fingers — the signal for television — and he can then either watch a replay on a monitor beside the field or accept the V.A.R.’s counsel before ruling whether to uphold or reverse the original call.AdvertisementUnless evidence to the contrary exists, the decision on the field prevails, though some officials said they would watch the replays themselves as a way to reinforce their credibility to players.“As referees, we’re obsessive-compulsive,” said Dave Gantar, an M.L.S. referee. “If we make an error in a game, we can’t sleep all night. So, to have somebody come on and go, ‘Hey, trust me,’ is going to be a challenge for a lot.”Of the four reviewable plays, penalty kicks tend to have the least clarity. So many decisions in soccer lack the unambiguousness of tennis, where the ball nicks the line or it doesn’t. Instead, they hinge on someone’s intuition or interpretation of the rules. A foul that may be clear and obvious to one V.A.R. might not warrant a second look from another.The subjectivity that governs soccer has generated a reluctance to air controversial replays to the crowd while the decision is being made, and fans at M.L.S. stadiums will see footage of a reviewed play only after an outcome has been reached.During their training, the referees’ threshold for V.A.R. intervention has evolved. Even though gray areas will continue to exist and, in all likelihood, vex officials, their sense of what constitutes a salient mistake has improved.One referee, Fotis Bazakos, said he adhered to a guiding principle in the booth: If he represents 100 people who consider themselves knowledgeable about soccer, he wants to satisfy 95 of them.“When you try to take something subjective and make it objective, we set the bar really high,” Bazakos said. “We don’t want to get involved unless everybody’s going to be thinking the same thing that we are.”Most of the reviewable situations are accompanied by natural stoppages in play, which give officials faith that replay delays will not intrude much. Data gleaned by M.L.S. during testing buttresses that confidence: A review was conducted once every three games, and it lasted 1 minute 16 seconds. But Webb said he expected the frequency of reviews to increase in M.L.S. because of the faster speed and heightened competition.AdvertisementA clock in the lower-right corner of the V.A.R.’s screen tracks each check, with the green numbers turning yellow at the 11-second mark and red at 30. But Webb has ordered the referees to prioritize accuracy over speed. He wants officials to use common sense when pausing the action, saying he would rather a goal get rescinded than to stop the flow of the game that preceded it.“They need to be able to smell it,” Webb said. “You have to have the instinct to know what is and what’s not going to be expected to be reviewed.”For now, referees will toggle between on-field positions and the booth, though Webb said he could foresee officials who demonstrate exceptional proficiency in the replay system specializing in it.Come Aug. 5, Webb will gladly accept performances like Terry’s. A fourth official in M.L.S., Terry followed proper procedure and rightly confirmed the penalty kick.“I’m ready,” he said.A version of this article appears in print on July 21, 2017, on Page B8 of the New York edition with the headline: Soccer Gets a Second Look.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.