By BILLY WITZMAY 27, 2016
ST. PETERSBURG, Fla. — Manager Joe Girardi had become increasingly agitated about having to answer questions about whether Alex Rodriguez would be his everyday designated hitter when he returned from the disabled list.He snapped, he furrowed his brow, and he groaned over the repeated queries about moving the 39-year-old Carlos Beltran back to right field from the designated hitter role he had thrived in while Rodriguez spent three weeks nursing a hamstring injury.Those questions ceased Friday night in the most emphatic way possible — with a mighty swing of Rodriguez’s bat.Rodriguez, still slugging at 40, blasted a two-run homer deep over the center-field wall as the Yankees defeated the Tampa Bay Rays, 4-1. For good measure, Beltran showed that he could swing the bat well enough as a right fielder, lining a solo home run just over the right-field wall.AdvertisementThe home runs backed an artful performance from Masahiro Tanaka, who thrived for the second consecutive game pitching from the first-base side of the rubber, allowing two hits in seven innings.AdvertisementFinishing off the Rays was not so simple. After Steve Pearce hit a two-out solo homer off Kirby Yates in the ninth, Girardi summoned Aroldis Chapman. He struck out Logan Morrison, but the ball got past catcher Brian McCann, forcing Chapman to work another hitter. He struck out Desmond Jennings to end the game.It was a fine way for the Yankees to start a 10-game, four-city trip and an even finer way for Rodriguez to announce his presence.Rodriguez is batting .188, and his absence had coincided with the Yankees’ recent resurgence as they crawled back to .500 ever so briefly. When they hastily decided to send Rodriguez on a rehabilitation assignment on Tuesday and Wednesday at Class AA Trenton instead of activating him, it seemed they were reluctant to break up the good thing they had going with Beltran in the designated hitter role and Aaron Hicks, a superior defender, in right field.When Rodriguez returned on Thursday, he was hitless in four at-bats, so the questions came again on Friday.“I think we’re trying to put out our best lineup,” Girardi said before the game. “I think people have all of a sudden forgot that Carlos hit really well the last four months of the season playing right field. I understand why I’m going to be asked about it every day, and if he went oh-fer, it’s going to be because he didn’t D.H. This team was built for Alex to D.H. and Carlos to play right field.”Get the big sports news, highlights and analysis from Times journalists, with distinctive takes on games and some behind-the-scenes surprises, delivered to your inbox every week.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.Rodriguez was hitless in his other three at-bats on Friday, striking out twice, but the home run, which he hit on a 95-mile-per-hour fastball that caught the center of the plate, was majestic, traveling an estimated 441 feet in giving the Yankees a 3-0 lead in the sixth. He punctuated the blast with a modest bat flip.“That’s my version of a bat flip, yeah,” Rodriguez said. “At 40, you don’t have too much cool style — all that’s left in me. I don’t know I’ve ever had any, actually.”AdvertisementThe home run showed how fearsome Rodriguez’s bat can be in the middle of the lineup, especially with Mark Teixeira slumping and injured and the Yankees not driving the ball as they did last season, when they were second in baseball in runs scored.“When he’s swinging the bat, he’s an on-base guy, and he’s an R.B.I. guy,” Girardi said. “He hits the ball out of the ballpark, so that’s important. And he can be pretty selective. When he’s going well, he does a good job at both.”Rodriguez’s chief frustration about his strained hamstring was that he felt he had just found his swing, hitting three home runs in the five games before his injury. Even though Friday’s home run was his only hit in two games, he was happy with his swing.“There were some mechanical things going on with my swing that I wasn’t happy about,” Rodriguez said. “We actually talked about not driving the ball for doubles, home runs, and putting crooked numbers on. I found something, and since I found that, even with the three-week break, I just felt a lot better.”Asked what he had fixed with his mechanics, Rodriguez was coy.“Over all, just cleaner,” he said with a pause. “I can’t tell you that.”The home runs by Rodriguez and Beltran were the rare dent the Yankees made against Chris Archer, who has been their nemesis since he arrived in the big leagues. Archer — who owned a 2.25 E.R.A. against the Yankees, the second-lowest mark among active pitchers with at least eight starts — had lost his first four decisions this season, carried a 5.16 E.R.A. into the game and had lasted just three innings at Detroit in his last start.Archer put himself in peril in the sixth when he walked Brett Gardner on four pitches and then sent him to third on a wild pitch. The rest of the defense could not help him escape. Second baseman Taylor Motter dropped a Beltran grounder, allowing him to reach base. Gardner then scored when a hard grounder from McCann skittered off the glove of first baseman Logan Morrison.Meanwhile, Tanaka helped himself — snagging a comebacker and sprinting at Pearce, who had veered off second — and got an assist from Gardner, who bumped against the wall to catch a Corey Dickerson drive to end the fifth.It kept the game scoreless and set the stage for Rodriguez, who did not miss Archer’s fastball — or an opportunity to mark his return.A version of this article appears in print on May 28, 2016, on Page D2 of the New York edition with the headline: Rodriguez Swats Away Doubts in a Yankees Win.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.