By BRAD SPURGEONMAY 27, 2016
The Monaco Grand Prix is probably the only race on the Formula One calendar where the poor race performances of great drivers and the superb performances of lesser drivers share the spotlight with the achievements of the finest drivers.It’s a race that is remembered as much for Ayrton Senna’s crash 12 laps from the end while dominating it in 1988 — the Brazilian lost concentration, hit a wall and lost the victory — as it is for his record of winning there six times.Alain Prost’s desire that the rain-drenched 1984 race be ended before the young Senna, who had climbed up from 13th on the grid to second, could catch him is as memorable as Prost’s four victories there.Then there are the triumphs of the outsiders, like Jean-Pierre Beltoise, a Frenchman whose only race victory came there in 1972, in the rain in an underpowered BRM car.AdvertisementAnd the Monaco Grand Prix is also remembered for its accidents, such as when Alberto Ascari flew off the track in his Lancia and into the harbor in 1955 or when Lorenzo Bandini crashed his Ferrari in the 1967 race and died three days later.The running of the Monaco Grand Prix this weekend marks the 20th anniversary of one of its wackiest editions. In that 1996 race, the French driver Olivier Panis drove his Ligier to his only Formula One victory, moving up from 14th position to finish first among the only three cars that finished the race.With a history marked by both extreme joy and horrendous pain, a history dictated by the unorthodox nature of the street circuit winding through the ancient principality on the Mediterranean, the race and Formula One could be said to have a love-hate relationship.In Monaco, the teams have the most constrained working environment of the season and the drivers have their biggest challenge. But the site also helps create one of the season’s most exciting races and attracts the greatest interest from fans, sponsors and media around the world.“I respect Monaco, I think it is a great thing to have as a part of our championship,” said Pat Symonds, the technical director of the Williams team. “But I don’t really enjoy it particularly. Yet I think it’s great to have that sort of challenge in the championship.”Advertisement“Can you imagine if it didn’t exist, and someone said, ‘Well, let’s go and do it now?”’ he added. “There would be an absolute outrage, wouldn’t there?”All eyes this weekend will be on the rivalry at the top of the championship, between Lewis Hamilton and Nico Rosberg of the Mercedes team. Rosberg has won the last three editions of the Monaco race and is leading the series, 43 points ahead of Hamilton, who is in third place.“It’s an incredible feeling making a car dance through those streets, one of the purest thrills you can have in a racing car,” Hamilton said. “I’ve not had the best run of results in Monaco in recent years — but last year showed I have the pace to do the job.”Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.Rosberg’s three victories in a row in what he considers his home race — he is German but grew up in Monaco and still lives there — came while he was driving in the same team as Hamilton. While Hamilton has won the championship in the last two seasons — outperforming Rosberg over the full seasons — he has won in Monaco only once, in 2008.Symonds said Monaco was a track that seemed to invite victories by both the very best drivers as well as by the occasional odd man out who has a particular style that works well on the atypical circuit.“You need to have a car that the guys can trust; they need to have real confidence in the car,” he said. “A lot of it is about getting a car that is stable. But at the same time, if you have a car that is stable in the classic sense — there is a bit of an understeer and everything — it’s not the way to go quickly around Monaco.”“This is why I think you have people like Michael and Ayrton who were so good around Monaco — because they could keep their cars on that stability limit,” Symonds added, referring to Michael Schumacher, who won five times in Monaco, and Senna. “It is more important on those slow tracks than it is on the fast tracks. They could get it on the stability limit and they still have the confidence to take the thing to within a millimeter of the barrier, which is pretty impressive.”And while most team engineers will say that it is a track more about the driver than about the car, drivers are more likely to talk about how fabulous it feels when things are done right and how bad it feels when things are ever-so-slightly wrong.“I like Monaco if we are competitive,” said Felipe Massa, who drives for the Williams team. “If we start behind, nobody likes Monaco.”AdvertisementHe was referring to the importance of scoring a pole position, because on Monaco’s narrow street track, with barriers so close, it is almost impossible to pass another car.“Any overtake attempt you make could end up in contact with your competitor or the wall, so you really have to balance the risk and reward,” said Joylon Palmer, a driver at the Renault team. “You have to get your move right and hope the other guy sees you. Even if you do everything right, if your rival doesn’t see you it’s likely there’ll be contact.”For the commercial promoter of the series, Bernie Ecclestone, of all the venues in the series Monaco is the one that has the most power to help negotiate a good business deal. It attracts far too many sponsors, adds far too much glamour — the movie stars from the Cannes Film Festival are regular visitors when the two events are scheduled at the same time, as they often are — and has far too much history to consider dropping it in favor of a more lucrative Formula One venue.“It’s full of lovely people, isn’t it?” Symonds said. “Logistically, it is quite difficult. It’s better now that we have the garages, but it is still very cramped, hot, you can’t hear what is going on, etc. But it is a great bit of the show. There are far too many people in Formula One who don’t appreciate the show and the importance of the show, so we need to get on with it.”A version of this special report appears in print on May 28, 2016, in The International New York Times.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.See More »