
On Tennis By                     
 CHRISTOPHER CLAREY
 
JAN. 22, 2017
MELBOURNE, Australia — A Grand Slam tournament that had already taken one big unexpected turn became a genuinely wild ride on Sunday as Andy Murray and Angelique Kerber, the world’s No. 1 singles players, were beaten by unseeded opposition in the fourth round. Roger Federer, meanwhile, continued to do an excellent impression of vintage Roger Federer.The first week of this Australian Open has been one of the most surprising starts to a major tournament in recent years, with the six-time Australian Open champion Novak Djokovic losing to Denis Istomin in the second round and Murray losing to Mischa Zverev on Sunday.“Two huge surprises, no doubt about that,” Federer said.Where it heads in the second week could be just as unpredictable, but what is clear is that Federer in his current state of grace has the potential — even at age 35, after a six-month injury break — to make a deep run.He was frequently the Federer whom fans remember on Sunday as he continued his bravura comeback. Two days after overwhelming 10th-seeded Tomas Berdych in straight sets in the third round, Federer had to dig much deeper to defeat fifth-seeded Kei Nishikori, 6-7 (4), 6-4, 6-1, 4-6, 6-3.The shotmaking and risk-taking were often astonishing, with both men leaping into their strokes and going after returns, and frequently finding the borders of the lines.AdvertisementBut Federer — after recovering from a 5-1 deficit in the opening set to push Nishikori into a tiebreaker — was the more convincing server throughout the match. And despite the eight-year age gap, he also looked like the fresher player down the stretch.AdvertisementWhen Nishikori, 27, took an injury timeout while trailing by 3-0 in the fifth set to address his ailing left hip, Federer stayed on his feet, calmly jogging in place and waiting for the tussle to resume.He finished with 83 winners and 47 unforced errors, winning 80 percent of his first-serve points against Nishikori, one of the game’s top-notch returners, and breaking him seven times.When Federer closed out the match, his celebratory leap and wide-eyed look appeared every bit as intense as his responses to winning some of his record 17 Grand Slam men’s singles titles.“The last shot, when it didn’t come back, it was an enormous joy,” he said.It was a demanding physical test: 3 hours 24 minutes, with plenty of all-court acrobatics and power required. But his path forward in the tournament looks less daunting and potentially less draining with Murray shockingly out of contention.They had been expected to meet in the quarterfinals if Federer could navigate past Nishikori. Instead, the 17th-seeded Federer will face the 50th-ranked Zverev, a serve-and-volley player who will strive to keep the rallies short and spend as much time at the net as possible.It is unlikely, however, that Zverev will find Federer’s second serve as inviting as he found Murray’s. Zverev did not win a set against Federer in their two previous matches and did not win a game in their most recent one, a 6-0, 6-0 quarterfinal loss in Halle, Germany, on grass in 2013.More successful has been Zverev’s 19-year-old brother, Sascha, who defeated Federer in the semifinals in Halle last year and in the Hopman Cup team competition this month.Advertisement“Of course I’m the big favorite in this match,” Federer said. “But I prefer to be the favorite. I did it for years and years. It makes me feel comfortable, and it’s better perhaps to play someone who keeps the points short and goes to net rather than Murray, who makes you hit thousands of forehands and backhands.”Federer added: “But Zverev played really well today, and the surface allows you to play like that, and Zverev really used it well. It was impressive.”Craig Tiley, the tournament director of the Australian Open, insists that this year’s hardcourt surface is no faster than last year’s. But it has certainly rewarded the sort of bold, attacking play that has often been neglected in the baseline-centric modern game.Pat Cash, an Australian who was one of the sport’s premier volleyers when he won Wimbledon in 1987, was among those feeling nostalgic as Zverev pushed forward time and again versus Murray.“One of the joys of being the style of player I was is that you used to get into players’ heads and mess with them, and that’s kind of what Zverev did, didn’t he?” Cash said.“Your opponent just gets tighter and tighter, and they miss and get tighter still,” he added. “Zverev had to do it well, but he did it to perfection.“Andy didn’t play his best tennis. He was tentative. If they play each other another 10 times, Murray will probably win them all, but this is the time Zverev put it all together. It’s a pity to lose the No. 1 seed, but it was an entertaining match and fun to watch, especially for us old-school guys.”The last time neither the first- nor second-seeded player made the quarterfinals of a men’s Grand Slam tournament was at the 2004 French Open, when Federer and Andy Roddick lost early. In their absence, the unseeded Gastón Gaudio ended up the surprise champion after saving two match points and rallying from two sets down in the final against Guillermo Coria.AdvertisementMore conventional contenders still remain in this tournament, including Stan Wawrinka, the reigning United States Open champion, who will face Jo-Wilfried Tsonga, a former Australian Open finalist, in the other quarterfinal in the top half of the draw.In the bottom half, Rafael Nadal, a 14-time Grand Slam singles champion, and third-seeded Milos Raonic, who reached last year’s Wimbledon final, remain in the mix.Asked what a player should avoid if he wanted to win a Grand Slam, Wawrinka, who has won three such titles, thought for quite a while before responding.“One of the things to avoid is to look at Murray and Djokovic losing and think the draw is open,” he said. “The draw is never open.”In light of all the familiar and rising talent that remains in this Australian Open, that seems like particularly sound advice.A version of this article appears in print on January 23, 2017, on Page D1 of the New York edition with the headline: Federer, Exuding Stamina, Finds a Smoother Path Ahead.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.See More »