AdvertisementSupported byOn BaseballBy Tyler KepnerGLENDALE, Ariz. — The best prospect in baseball made his major league debut last September, while the Los Angeles Dodgers were charging toward their third consecutive title in the National League West. He was not there to soak up the atmosphere.Corey Seager was there to contribute. He will probably stay for many years.“He knows what he can do and he showed up doing it,” said the veteran shortstop Jimmy Rollins, who now plays for the Chicago White Sox after Seager replaced him in Los Angeles. “I told him: ‘It’s not a guessing game that you’re up here. You’re not up here as an experiment. You’re up here to help us win ballgames.’ I wanted him to know that right away.”Seager may need some time to help the Dodgers this season. He sprained his left knee running the bases on Friday and the team said he would miss a week or two. The Dodgers will surely not rush a player who hit .337 down the stretch and opened the playoffs against the Mets batting third in the lineup. Seager is 21 but does not seem so young.“He’s got a ton of talent, but aside from that, he didn’t get rattled in situations where he could have been rattled,” said Chase Utley, the veteran Dodgers second baseman. “There was a game when he made a couple of errors, and no one likes to make errors, but it happens to the best of us. But you looked at him and you could tell it didn’t affect him. Maybe inside he wasn’t happy about it, but you could tell it didn’t affect the way he was going to continue to play the rest of the game.”Seager’s talent has been validated by Baseball America, Baseball Prospectus and MLB.com, all of which put him atop their prospect rankings for 2016. He hit .293 with 18 homers in the minors last season, before his .986 on-base-plus-slugging percentage for the Dodgers.Seager also has the pedigree. His father, Jeff, played third base at Fairleigh Dickinson. An older brother, Justin, plays first base for a Seattle farm team, and another older brother, Kyle, is the Mariners’ third baseman.“There are similarities: We’re both left-handed hitters and right-handed throwers,” said Kyle Seager, who made an All-Star team and signed a $100 million contract in 2014. “But from a talent standpoint, he’s definitely got a lot more to offer. He’s pretty special. He’s still really young, but he’s going to be all right.”The Dodgers chose Seager from a North Carolina high school with the 18th overall pick of the 2012 draft. With the next selection, the St. Louis Cardinals drafted Michael Wacha, a college pitcher who eliminated the Dodgers the next fall in the N.L. Championship Series.“They might have second-guessed themselves after that one, you never know,” Seager said, smiling. “But that’s how the draft is. Baseball’s a funny game; people mature at different times.”Seager, by then, had hit just .160 above low-Class A. But he matured rapidly, hitting .349 at two levels in 2014 and putting himself on a path to the majors. He symbolizes the future of the Dodgers, who carry the majors’ highest payroll (nearly $300 million last season) but have held tight to the jewels of their farm system.That approach continued at last July’s trading deadline, when superstars crisscrossed the baseball map but the Dodgers made lower-impact deals. Even so, they nearly survived their division series against the Mets, leading by 2-1 in the fourth inning of the decisive fifth game at Dodger Stadium.Daniel Murphy led off that inning with a single off Zack Greinke. With one out and the Dodgers using an exaggerated infield shift, Lucas Duda walked. With third base unoccupied, Murphy touched second and tore off to steal third, startling Seager and second baseman Howie Kendrick.Murphy scored on a sacrifice fly and ripped the go-ahead homer two innings later, and the Dodgers never scored again. For Seager, the misplay stung.“That was the one situation we didn’t go over,” he said. “That’s why everybody was so thrown off. Duda almost didn’t realize it was ball four or whatever, so we both kind of came to the bag instead of normally just kind of walking forward — and he took it. It was a good play by him that really changed the course of that game and that series.“It’s one of those things — it sat hard, but you had to get over it and move on. You had to get past it.”Two decades earlier, in Seattle, the Yankees were eliminated in the division series in a tight Game 5 loss. Their 21-year-old shortstop, Derek Jeter, was not on the roster but watched from the dugout. It was the final career game for Don Mattingly, the Yankees’ captain at the time, who managed the Dodgers last season before leaving for Miami.“Mattingly would watch Corey play and say, ‘This is the closest I’ve seen to Jeter since Jeter was that young,’ ” said A. J. Ellis, the Dodgers’ catcher. “It was the way he carried himself and the quiet confidence he had in himself and in his position in this game.”In his first full season, Jeter won the Rookie of the Year Award, for which Seager is still eligible, and won the World Series, which the Dodgers have not done in 28 years. Comparisons to Jeter are understandable, given Seager’s comportment and size (he is 6 feet 4 inches, an inch taller than Jeter), but probably unfair.“It is too big to comprehend,” Seager said. “From Day 1, he was kind of the guy I always watched. It’s hard not to respect him and what he did in his career, how he went about it in every aspect of his life, not just on the field but off the field. That’s a guy that you can really model everything after.”At the Dodgers’ complex here, Seager’s locker is between Utley’s and Kendrick’s, 23 years of combined major league experience on either side of his 27 games. In time, Seager could be a leader for a team that could probably use one. For now, the best prospect in baseball is happy with his role.“The one thing I love about him is he does not have any desire for any spotlight, no desire for any attention,” Ellis said. “All he wants to do is be one of the guys.”Advertisement