AdvertisementSupported byBy Ken BelsonPORT ST. LUCIE, Fla. — Almost precisely at 1 p.m. Monday, Jeff Wilpon, the Mets’ chief operating officer, pulled his golf cart up to one of the practice fields here behind Tradition Field.The boss was not there to see the minor leaguers playing a simulated game. What warranted his attention was David Wright, who was about to take his first live at-bats of the year.On a team with formidable pitching and a solid lineup, the biggest question mark hanging over the reigning National League champions is how much Wright, the team captain, can contribute over the course of a 162-game season.Last year, Wright learned he had spinal stenosis, a narrowing of the spinal cord that causes pressure on the nerves. He has tried to mitigate the effects of the degenerative condition by reducing his workload and increasing his pregame preparation.But at 33, an age at which many ballplayers are in decline, Wright will have to live with the occasional nerve pain in his back and leg for the remainder of his playing days and beyond. So rather than overdo spring training, he has taken a go-slow approach.Though spring training is about half over, Wright has yet to appear in a game, and will not for at least another few days. But after collecting one hit in five at-bats against three minor league pitchers on Monday, Wright said that he was comfortable with the blueprint to ease him into the season.“This is exactly what we discussed before camp even started,” Wright said, sweat pouring off his brow. “Try to set not necessarily a plan but a schedule, and we’re exactly right on schedule that we originally threw out there before spring even started.”Wright missed 124 regular-season games last year, but hit .277 with four home runs after he returned during the pennant race. He collected 10 hits in 54 at-bats in the playoffs, but appeared tentative in the field at times.Wright said he normally would resume hitting in December, but took the month off because of his condition. The team’s postseason run, which ended Nov. 1, also pushed back his schedule.Still, Wright said he expected to be ready for opening day, April 3, when the Mets travel to Kansas City, Mo., to play the Royals, who beat them in the World Series last year. The question, though, is how many days he will need to take off to be able to make it through the season.Teams have a lot of experience helping pitchers return after Tommy John surgery, but far less with players trying to continue playing with spinal stenosis, a condition that can include unpredictable side effects.“I think it’s the thing I’m starting to come to terms with: It’s not an injury, it’s a condition, so I’m not going to wake up one day and it’s going to be cured,” Wright said. “But I don’t think necessarily I need to do anything to know what kind of day it’s going to be. That usually happens right away in the morning. I can usually wake up in the morning and know what kind of day it’s going to be.”For now, the Mets appear to be preparing Wilmer Flores and perhaps Eric Campbell to fill in when Wright is unable to play. Through Sunday, Flores had played in eight games this spring, most of them at third base.The Mets acquired two infielders — Asdrubal Cabrera and Neil Walker — in the off-season, and kept shortstop Ruben Tejada, which will allow Flores to move to third base as needed.Wright, who has taken infield practice this spring, appeared comfortable at bat Monday. His single to left field was a solid line drive. He fouled off several pitches and struck out on a fastball high and inside.Wright could make his first start of the spring on Thursday, when the Mets play the Marlins in Jupiter, Fla., or Friday, when the Mets play the Nationals here.“Sometimes, for me, with what’s going on, less is more,” he said.Inside PitchJacob deGrom skipped his scheduled start Monday because of a stiff back. Instead of making a bus ride to Lakeland, Fla., to face the Detroit Tigers, he threw a bullpen session here. DeGrom, who has made one start so far this spring, blamed a soft mattress and long bus rides for the stiffness. He ordered a firmer mattress that Matt Harvey recommended and had it sent by overnight delivery. DeGrom said his bullpen session went well and that he would throw next on Thursday or Friday.Advertisement