AdvertisementSupported byMidwest RegionBy Mike VorkunovWhen Denzel Valentine arrived at Michigan State, few predicted that he would be the program’s next great star. Valentine, while talented, was not a highly heralded recruit; some services did not even rate him among the 100 best players in his high school class.Four years later, Valentine is one of the best players in the country, a Swiss Army knife of a star who has made the Spartans, a No. 2 seed, a contender to reach the Final Four.A native of Lansing, Mich., Valentine is a product of his pedigree and his work ethic. A coach’s son who won two state championships playing for his father at Sexton High a few miles across town, he helped take Michigan State to the Final Four as a junior last March. This season, he has been even better.Valentine leads the Spartans in scoring with 19.4 points per game and is second on the team in rebounding, at 7.6 per game. He also ranks fourth in Division I in assists, with 7.6 per game.At 6 feet 5 inches and 220 pounds, he is big enough to hold his own in the lane, yet nimble enough to lead fast breaks in the open floor. While Ben Simmons, Louisiana State’s wunderkind freshman, has turned heads with his box-score-stuffing stat lines, Valentine has matched him while also leading Michigan State into the Top 5.Kansas, North Carolina, Virginia and Oregon are the top seeds in the N.C.A.A. men’s basketball tournament.“I do think he’s the best player in the country,” Spartans Coach Tom Izzo said.Izzo has paid Valentine the highest of compliments at Michigan State, comparing him to Spartans royalty like Magic Johnson and Draymond Green. But Izzo never asked Green, his previous do-it-all star, to take on the role of point guard midway through the schedule, as he did with Valentine this season.Valentine’s performance since then has been so impressive that Izzo says he is now a more well-rounded player than Green, an N.B.A. All-Star, ever was in college.When asked two weeks ago if he shared that opinion, Valentine indicated that it was an unanswerable question. Instead, he pointed to a priority that he said was more important than any position, award or statistic.“Winning,” he said, “is the thing.”Despite winning the Big Ten tournament title moments before the bracket announcement, Michigan State was bumped down to a No. 2 seed below Virginia, the Atlantic Coast Conference tournament’s runner-up. Both are worthy selections, but the Spartans are always dangerous in March. Since a sloppy stretch in January, Michigan State has gone 13-1.Syracuse, Temple, Tulsa, Vanderbilt and Wichita State sneaked into the field at the expense of hopefuls like Monmouth, St. Bonaventure, St. Mary’s and Valparaiso. “It’s a sad day for midmajors,” Valparaiso Coach Bryce Drew said. Syracuse nearly blew its N.C.A.A. chances by going 4-5 while Jim Boeheim served a suspension at midseason but redeemed itself in a conference that produced two No. 1 seeds.Fresno State over Utah will be a popular pick, but Arkansas-Little Rock over Purdue is safer. U.A.L.R. Arkansas-Little Rock beat San Diego State, Tulsa and DePaul on the road with a top-notch defense (59.6 points allowed per game).ZACH SCHONBRUNAdvertisement