AdvertisementSupported byBy Bill PenningtonTROON, Scotland — Fans in the grandstand stood to applaud Rory McIlroy as he approached the 18th green at Royal Troon on Thursday afternoon. When his par putt completed a round of 69, which kept him near the first-round leaders, a woman’s voice, enriched by a Scottish accent, called out: “Just lovely, Rory.”McIlroy had received far less tribute and commendation around the globe in the previous two days. Before he had even swung a club in the 145th British Open, McIlory had taken a punishing shot at the worth of golf at the Olympic Games.McIlroy, who withdrew from the Rio Olympics last month, said on Tuesday that he would not spend his idle time during the Games watching golf, but rather save his time for the Olympic sports of track and field, swimming and diving. He described those sports, with a twist of the knife, as “the ones that matter.”After Thursday’s round, McIlroy stood by his earlier comments.“Look, it’s my opinion,” he said. “I think my opinion’s shared by a few people, but some people may think it’s wrong and that’s fine.”He also said he wished he had expounded on his remarks on Tuesday when he said it was his goal to win championships, rather than help expand golf’s reach.“Obviously I feel like I do my bit to grow the game,” he said. “It’s not as if I’m uninterested. I feel like golf is a great vehicle to instill values in kids. I’m an ambassador for the P.G.A. Junior League and I do some stuff for the First Tee in the States. I feel like I’ve used my success in golf in a very positive way in the community.”ADDRESSING HIS PUTTS Jordan Spieth finished last season ranked first on the PGA Tour in putting average, one-putt percentage and putts per round, but he never seemed to find a groove on the greens during his opening round at the British Open, taking 33 putts and finishing with an even-par 71. (Patrick Reed, who finished tied for second on Thursday after a 66, took just 24 putts.)Asked if he was bothered by his putting, Spieth shook his head.“I would get over a few of them on the front nine, I would start to get overthinking, like, ‘I’m going to try to hit this with the right pace and line,’” he said. “‘I don’t know if it’s going to go in or not.’ Versus normally, if I hit this with the right pace and line, it’s in the hole. Just your mind gets off a little bit once you feel like you hit a few putts that don’t go in.” SAM BORDENANOTHER ACE Louis Oosthuizen has shown a penchant for dramatic golf shots during his career, and he added to his collection during the first round with a hole in one on the par-3 14th hole at Royal Troon.For most players, any hole in one is memorable, though Oosthuizen is one of the few competitors who might actually view his latest ace as a touch pedestrian. Oosthuizen has won just one major championship (the 2010 British Open) but has pulled off several memorable shots that went viral on the internet, such as his hole in one on the 16th hole at this year’s Masters that banked in off the ball of one of his playing partners.Oosthuizen said this was his fifth official hole in one — one as a 13-year-old and four since turning professional, plus another he doesn’t count that came in a practice round — and, not surprisingly, he has enjoyed all of them.Comparing the ace on Thursday to the one at Augusta, Oosthuizen said: “Augusta, you can hit it anywhere out the right and there are a few ways to do it — this was a proper golf hit straight in it.” SAM BORDENAdvertisement