
On Soccer By                     
RORY SMITH

OCT. 23, 2016
LONDON — With about 15 minutes of a dismal, deflating game still to endure, Manchester United’s fans started to sing. Packed into a corner of Stamford Bridge and spread over two tiers, they split into a percussion section and a chorus line. Those in the front rows beat out a rhythm on advertisements; those in back provided the vocals.Despite the desperation of their situation — their team, beaten and bruised, down by four goals against host Chelsea, with Manager José Mourinho’s long-awaited homecoming proving an unexpected, and partly self-inflicted, humiliation — they chose an upbeat number: a version of Norman Greenbaum’s “Spirit in the Sky,” remixed and adapted in honor of George Best.The fans had wheeled through the chorus a dozen times, maybe more, when Chelsea Manager Antonio Conte decided familiarity was breeding contempt. He turned to his own team’s fans and demanded more noise, gesturing to his players on the field, seemingly asking for an ovation that their performance obviously deserved. Stamford Bridge responded, rousing itself from a satisfied slumber to hail Conte and his team.Nobody would have thought any more of it had Mourinho not walked over to Conte a few minutes later — once the final whistle had blown, with Chelsea celebrating an emphatic 4-0 victory and United mourning a bitter loss — and offered a few choice thoughts on the incident.AdvertisementNeither man, immediately afterward, wanted to confirm what had been said.“You know me,” Mourinho said Sunday. “I spoke to Conte. Not to you. I am not the kind of guy to come here and share things with you that I do not want to share.”AdvertisementConte, too, invoked the convenient omertà that applies to such exchanges between managers. “Private conversations must remain private,” he said.Or, rather, private conversations have to remain private unless they are conducted near a television microphone. And one such microphone captured every word of Mourinho’s rebuke.“This gesture, at 1-0, O.K.,” Mourinho said in Italian, in reference to Conte’s rabble-rousing. “Not at 4-0. It is a humiliation.”Conte felt he had done nothing wrong, insisting that he was calling on Chelsea fans to “give a great clap to the players because after a 4-0 win, they deserved it.”Conte added: “There is respect for everyone, and naturally for Manchester United. I did not do anything to humiliate Mourinho.”There is, of course, a chance that Mourinho himself knew that and that the entire incident was stage-managed: Few coaches are quite the master of the diversionary tactic that he is, and creating a petty squabble to distract from his team’s comprehensive defeat was a move from a page of his playbook.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.But it was also possible that his criticism was sincere. The unwritten code of technical-area conduct that exists between, and is policed by, Premier League managers is complex and full of nuance. Given some of the other arcane infractions seemingly within it, there is no reason whatsoever that “causing excitement in supporters when winning easily” cannot be a violation.Some breaches are well known. Managers must, of course, shake hands with each other, both before and after games. It emerged before the Manchester derby this season — that tense first meeting between Mourinho and his great foe Pep Guardiola, Manchester City’s manager — that these exchanges must also include eye contact; otherwise, they do not count.AdvertisementMany more of the rules and regulations, though, are much more subtle and open to interpretation. Managers will, for example, permit rivals to leave their technical areas without reproach, but not if they indulge in excitable gesticulation or overt displays of emotion at the same time. Jürgen Klopp discovered that after arriving at Liverpool, with Tony Pulis of West Bromwich Albion taking it upon himself to guard the sanctity of that little white box.Celebrations are permitted, but only to a point: Arsène Wenger of Arsenal and Alan Pardew, then with West Ham, came to something that might ambitiously be described as blows when Pardew went overboard commemorating a late winning goal in 2006. Wenger felt Pardew had been a little too confrontational in his joy and refused to shake hands, thus transgressing the code himself, making for an ugly, undignified afternoon all around.Insults are much the same. Stray microphones regularly reveal technical areas to be a world of lurid, polyglot insults, but certain words are considered beyond the pale. When Pardew insulted Manuel Pellegrini, then Manchester City’s manager, during a game, three words might have caused offense. The two profanities were overlooked, but suggesting Pellegrini was “old” was too much.Anything perceived as ungentlemanly, however, causes the greatest offense. When managing Everton in 2010, David Moyes infuriated Manchester City’s Roberto Mancini by dallying when returning the ball for a throw-in. A brief squall between the two followed, with each receiving a red card.Outside parties are often called in to officiate code-related disputes. They are not always impartial, either. In 2009, Sam Allardyce of Blackburn Rovers accused Liverpool’s Rafael Benítez of making a disrespectful gesture during a game at Anfield. Benítez had rubbed his hands together after his team had taken a 2-0 lead, apparently decreeing the match done and dusted.Benítez protested, saying that he had simply been acknowledging that his players had ignored his instructions and scored a goal by doing so, but the ultimate arbiter of the code, Alex Ferguson, had already reached his judgment. Entirely without bias, he accused Benítez, his rival, of showing “arrogance” and “contempt” toward Allardyce, his great friend.It is this class of infringement that Conte seems to have committed, by exhorting his team’s supporters to applaud his players. It must certainly have been a flagrant abuse if Mourinho — a man who shot to fame with a celebratory gallop, almost the length of the Old Trafford sideline, with F.C. Porto back in 2004 — was so offended by it.It is easy to understand why he was, however. Mourinho’s team was down, 4-0, his worst defeat in the Premier League. There could have been nobody better placed to say what humiliation felt like.A version of this article appears in print on October 24, 2016, on Page D4 of the New York edition with the headline: Managers’ Private Chat Goes Public, Shedding Light on a Code.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.See More »