By ANDREW KEHMARCH 12, 2016
EL SEGUNDO, Calif. —  People talked about D’Angelo Russell of the Los Angeles Lakers as if his two main interests in life, having fun and being good at basketball, were diametrically opposite pursuits.What Russell seems to be making his critics reconsider — with every outlandish celebration, every expert pass, every prank at practice and every big shot — is whether those two aims could productively co-exist for him on an N.B.A. court after all.It was a harder premise to argue earlier this season. Russell, the No. 2 selection at the draft last summer, got off to a halting start, and Coach Byron Scott publicly questioned his focus and maturity at every opportunity. The scolding, the displays of “tough love,” were so regular that they felt at times like a primary team storyline alongside the impending retirement of Kobe Bryant.Yet a corner may have been turned. By all accounts, Russell has improved his work habits and gained the trust of his teammates and coaches. On Feb. 21, Scott said Russell — who had been relegated to a bench role after starting his first 20 games — would start for the rest of the season. Russell has responded, averaging 21.0 points and 4.8 assists in 10 games since Scott’s announcement.AdvertisementThat success, in turn, has afforded him the opportunity to express his personality.“This job is one of the best jobs in the world,” Russell said in an interview last week at the Lakers’ training center. “You get to do what you want. If you save your money right, you can have what you want. All your time goes to basketball. You don’t have to do anything else — at least at my age.”AdvertisementRussell turned 20 on Feb. 23. He is the league’s eighth-youngest player. His age is what makes his skill set — a dizzying blend of court vision and scoring savvy — so exciting. It is, too, often the explanation for his impishness and irreverence. It is what makes people concerned about his ability to find a balance between playfulness and professionalism. It is what compels so many people — even Larry Nance Jr., a 23-year-old fellow rookie — to refer to Russell as “a kid.”Nance said: “He still just has the mentality of having fun, whether it is at practice or in a game or in the locker room. He’s always picking at people, joking, nonstop. That’s his personality: a kid.”Elements of that personality were on display during a recent interview in the Lakers’ practice gym. As Russell spoke, he kept making spasmodic moves toward a button on a table that controlled the buzzer. He hit it 11 times during a 13-minute conversation, making the loud horn blare erratically through the gym.“I hate talking to media,” Russell said at one point, biting the skin on his right finger. “I hate it, man. You have to. But it’s crazy. I thought there were only two things in this world that you had to do, and that was die and pay taxes. Now I know that you’ve got to talk to media. And I hate it.”Russell had his attention affixed to the practice court, where Metta World Peace, Tarik Black, Ryan Kelly and Robert Sacre were engaged in a high-intensity, full-court, one-on-one drill. Russell’s eyes darted from side to side. Three times he interrupted himself midsentence to scream across the gym.When World Peace stomped to the rim and dunked, Russell said, “Oh, talk to him!”Later, World Peace dropped his shoulder and muscled to the hoop. “I’m enjoying the show!” Russell said.After World Peace swooped inside for another dunk, Russell shouted, “He’s really putting on a show, bro!”AdvertisementBetween outbursts, Russell answered some questions. He claimed he had been unfazed when Scott relayed his criticisms on a daily basis to team beat reporters. Among other things, Scott had said Russell was not as mature as Chris Paul and Kyrie Irving when they were rookies, hinted that Russell was overconfident, and questioned his practice habits. Such treatment felt jarring to some observers, and stood in contrast to the experiences of other high picks in last year’s draft, like Kristaps Porzingis and Karl-Anthony Towns, who found immediate playing time, success and near universal praise.“To me, it wasn’t tough love,” Scott said this week. “It was more of: ‘This is what you’re supposed to do. It’s discipline. This is your job, and this is what you’re supposed to do, and when you’re not doing it, there are consequences to that.’ ”Russell was asked what effect the public reprimands, and ensuing news stories, had on him at the time. “None; I didn’t deal with it,” he said. “I didn’t care. I didn’t care at all. I wish I could give you a better answer. I didn’t deal with it at all.”Get the big sports news, highlights and analysis from Times journalists, with distinctive takes on games and some behind-the-scenes surprises, delivered to your inbox every week.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.World Peace, 36, has become an unlikely mentor for Russell. (“When I first met him, I was like, ‘I’m scared of this dude,’ ” Russell said.) World Peace said Russell was less focused and less hungry early in this season. In a rapid stream of words, he categorized the directives he has been giving Russell to motivate him. Strewn with profanities, they mostly had to do with staying focused, not accepting disrespect from others, asserting his masculinity, becoming physically stronger and acting like an adult.“You don’t want to joke to the point where you’re being ineffective,” World Peace said. “But he gets it done on the court.”Russell has flourished in recent weeks. He has been somewhat liberated in a new offensive set that the coaches installed last month, and has felt more confident to try new things and to make mistakes. Scott’s tone has changed, for the most part, to commendation and praise.Nance noted that the 6-foot-5 Russell is playing in the context of Western Conference point guards, who might be the league’s most skilled position group in the league. Russell has the skills to compete at that level: a subtle eye for passing, a quick release and smart movement without the ball. He has even displayed a burgeoning post game — stealing moves and wisdom, he said, from Bryant, a master of the craft.Although the Lakers have the second-worst record in the league, Russell has played encouragingly, and his antics now come across as endearing: He pantomimed full body convulsions when Nance dunked in a game against the Golden State Warriors. He sank a half-court shot from his back in warm-ups. After recording an assist under the basket against the Orlando Magic, he appeared to yell something at the basketball as it bounced away.AdvertisementTwo weeks ago, he scored 39 points against the Nets. After nailing a deep 3-pointer late in the game, Russell pointed to his wrist and yelled, “I got ice in my veins!”Russell said in the interview: “It’s cool. Now every time I make a shot, people are like” — and he jabbed his index finger toward his forearm.It seems, over all, to be a period of good vibes and fun. Russell, who is from Louisville, Ky., marveled about Los Angeles: the weather, the views, the food. When he was drafted, he said he would buy a dog and fly his friends out constantly to see him. He has done both of those things. Between that and basketball, there is not much else to worry about.“I knew this lifestyle was good,” he said. “I knew it was cool, like something you couldn’t really complain about. Then I got here. I’ve seen it, witnessed it, and I lived it.” He paused for emphasis. “I can’t complain about anything.”A version of this article appears in print on March 13, 2016, on Page SP5 of the New York edition with the headline: After a Rocky Start, a Prankster Dares His Critics to Reconsider .  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.