By ROB HUGHESMARCH 13, 2016
LONDON —  The season, along with an era, is over for Chelsea.It is only mid-March, but after being knocked out of the Champions League and the F.A. Cup in the space of three days, the club that transformed English soccer in terms of spending has no trophies left to play for in the remaining two months of this season.This is, in a way, the legacy of José Mourinho.The manager that Chelsea twice hired and fired helped raise the team with his style of winner-takes-all, loser-bears-the consequences. After winning the Premier League last May, Mourinho was dismissed by Chelsea’s owner, Roman Abramovich, when all was going sour seven months later.Last Wednesday, Chelsea was eliminated from the Champions League by Paris St.-Germain, who featured a defender, David Luiz, that Mourinho scorned and sold.On Saturday, when Everton expunged Chelsea from the F.A. Cup, the scorer of both goals in a 2-0 victory was Romelu Lukaku, whom Mourinho scorned and sold while at Chelsea.AdvertisementThe first was perhaps the most beautiful goal that Lukaku will ever score. But it was the man Chelsea purchased to replace him, the Brazil-born Diego Costa, who managed to steal the headlines.AdvertisementCosta didn’t score. He was sent off for foul play and for fighting and, many believe, for biting the neck of an opponent, Dracula-style.The pictures of that supposed bite are inconclusive, and of course Costa denies that it was anything other than a hug and a kiss. What led to it was ugly. Costa, already with a yellow card for hitting Gareth Barry with a hand to the face, was kicked late in the game by Barry.An Englishman and a Brazilian trading blows was not the Beautiful Game, and what followed was unacceptable by any standards. Costa jumped up off the turf, got into the face of Barry, and like two demented stags, they butted heads.At that point, came the Costa bite (or affectionate kiss).The referee dealt with it by showing both players a yellow card for their violent posturing. Moments after Costa was sent off, Barry went as well, for a kick at Cesc Fàbregas in an unrelated event.That, alas, was the core of this contest. For more than an hour, two teams whose seasons depend on the F.A. Cup gave a performance dominated by a fear of failure. It was macho to the extent that it was full of players going for tackles that, in the English sense, are regarded as full-blooded and hearty.But with so many players who cost so much money failing to play anywhere close to top standards of Europe, the whole show was heading toward what Chelsea appeared to want: a boring draw and a replay down in London.Thank goodness, then, for Lukaku. After 77 minutes, he did something that transcended all that preceded it.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.The Belgian-born son of a Congolese international player, Lukaku demonstrated how anger can be turned into the real purpose of playing the game. He was angry because, as a center forward, he was being starved of the ball and the opportunity to score.AdvertisementLukaku set off on his run from near the halfway line. He demanded the ball, pointing to where he wanted the pass. When it came, he was out on the left wing all alone, surrounded by four Chelsea defenders.Not a problem. Lukaku was on fire. A giant of a man — 6-foot-3 and built like a heavyweight boxer — he nevertheless has considerable gifts when it comes to movement, control and finishing.He raced with the ball between the first two opponents. He cut inside the penalty box and, at top speed, flummoxed Chelsea defender Gary Cahill by turning right, left, and right again.Then Lukaku finished off his own creation with a powerful, low shot with his left foot.Everton’s problems this season have centered on its inability to hold onto a lead — often one secured by Lukaku. It led Chelsea three times in a Premier League game in London in January, and three times it surrendered those leads in a game that ended 3-3.So Everton needed to score at least once more Saturday to be confident of anything. And before the Costa-Barry altercation, it was Lukaku who finished off the uncertainty.His second goal, struck through the legs of the keeper Thibaut Courtois with Lukaku’s other foot — his right — followed a judicious pass from Ross Barkley.Game over, bar the ridiculous, unseemly behavior of Costa and Barry. The authorities will probably have to accept Costa’s word that his teeth never entered the flesh of his opponent, and they will merely ban him for one game for his red card.Lukaku, on the other hand, is having by far his most productive period since Chelsea offloaded him, first by loaning him out and then by selling him to Everton in 2014.He has scored 25 goals in 36 games this season and said Saturday that he has nothing to prove to Chelsea.Advertisement“I was there as an 18-year-old,” he said on television. “I will always be grateful to them.”And his wonder goal against Chelsea? “I didn’t know where I was going,” Lukaku said, disarming all our thoughts about great creativity. “Then I was in the box, I saw Gary Cahill didn’t know which way to turn either, so I shifted the ball to my left foot and hit it.”We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.