By RICHARD SANDOMIRMARCH 12, 2016
MOORPARK, Calif. — Well before Jessica Mendoza was analyzing the batting performances of major leaguers on Sunday nights for ESPN, her father was using videotape to break down her at-bats in softball.If she stepped into the bucket or didn’t rotate her hips, Gil Mendoza’s video showed it. If she didn’t pay attention to her stride, the video made his admonitions more pointed.“His tripod was out all the time,” she said, smiling at the memory. “I wanted to get some swings in, and he wanted to videotape us.”Gil Mendoza, who has coached football, softball and baseball for decades in this area, knew how much video augmented what he told his hitters, whether they were in high school or college, or were his daughters, Jessica and Alana. “I started with them when they were 5 or 6,” he said. “I videotaped everything: their soccer, basketball and track.”AdvertisementAlana, now Alana Dusan, recalled that after long drives home to Camarillo from softball tournaments, her father would say, “The camera’s ready.”AdvertisementDusan, who went on to play at Oregon State, added, “We had a kind of love-hate relationship with the camera.”But as they got older, Gil Mendoza recognized that he had to let up on his daughters, who would watch the videos as he delivered his critiques.“They didn’t want to sit with Dad,” he said. “So I just laid the tapes on the kitchen table so they could watch when they wanted.”All that video study — with her father and then her Stanford, Olympic and professional coaches — was a bridge to Mendoza’s surprise move last year to ESPN’s marquee baseball team, where it was apparent that her specialty was assessing what batters did: describing the leg kick that Addison Russell of the Chicago Cubs added to his swing during one game, for example, and noting how George Springer of the Houston Astros stayed back in the batter’s box to hit a splitter off the Yankees right-hander Masahiro Tanaka in another.“I can watch her break down Josh Hamilton and the small hitch in his swing, and I’m thinking that that’s perfect,” said Tim Walton, the Florida softball coach who coached Mendoza in the National Pro Fastpitch League a few years ago.Mendoza, 35, is not the first woman to call a baseball game. Suzyn Waldman preceded her, on local and network television, and on radio, where she is a longtime voice of the Yankees.But the ESPN job gives Mendoza, the intense daughter of a first-generation Mexican-American father, a weekly national platform. Her father, now 76, could be tough on her, focusing on the out she made in a game, not the three home runs she hit. The approach, he said, was based on the way his father treated him.Advertisement“My freshman year in college was the first time he said he was proud of me,” she said. “I could have retired that day. It was better than a gold medal.”Now, she said, she is driven not to make mistakes on the air and to waking up at 4:45 a.m. to read articles online about the Boston Red Sox for a spring training game on March 21.“I can’t let up,” Mendoza said. “When I say something, I have to own it. When the red light goes on, I can’t have any doubt.”Get the big sports news, highlights and analysis from Times journalists, with distinctive takes on games and some behind-the-scenes surprises, delivered to your inbox every week.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.Earlier this month, after a trip to spring training camps in Arizona, Mendoza was at her house here 50 miles northwest of Los Angeles, where she lives with her husband, Adam Burks, and her children, Caden, 2, and Caleb, who, at 6, is his grandfather’s latest subject of video study. As she bobbed Caden in her arms, she discussed her evolution from all-American softball player with an Olympic gold medal to an analyst on “Sunday Night Baseball,” ESPN’s marquee baseball franchise. She was not a baseball insider by any measure, and not the gender that is expected in a baseball booth.She received good reviews, but there was criticism, some of it foul, that a woman did not belong in the job, especially one who had played softball and never faced a major leaguer’s 100-miles-per-hour fastball. She had replaced a potential Hall of Fame pitcher, Curt Schilling, who was suspended for sharing an Internet meme about Nazis and Muslim extremism.“Society says this is how it should be, that baseball should be called by a man,” she said calmly. “Any change gets you resistance — ‘No, I want things to be the way they are.’ ”There has been relatively little in her smooth path to an elite ESPN job that has been occupied by the likes of Joe Morgan, Orel Hershiser, Bobby Valentine, Terry Francona and her friend and softball enthusiast John Kruk. She had been an ESPN softball analyst for seven years when she began to offer commentary to “Baseball Tonight” in 2014.Phil Orlins, the network’s coordinating producer for baseball, said that Mendoza lobbied him to do more baseball work, perhaps as a field reporter. But he said he warned her: “If you want to differentiate yourself and make an impact — no matter if you break down a swing from the sideline — you’ll still be a female on the sideline. To really make a difference, to make a breakthrough, it has to be in the booth.”AdvertisementSo Orlins devised an open-ended plan: Sometime that season, he would add her to the booth for a game.But her eagerness to be part of the Sunday night crew led her to a game last May at Dodger Stadium without an assignment.“I went there five hours before, pretending to be part of the team,” Mendoza said. “Hanging out with Kruk on the field. In the truck. ‘Do you need me?’ I asked. I took notes. I was the nerd tagging along, and I wondered if people were saying, ‘Why is she here and is she going to leave any time soon?’ ”Orlins kept his promise and added her to a Monday night game in late August. There was no announcement that she would be there, working with Dallas Braden and Dave O’Brien.She recalled that it was easier than she expected.“I’d done hundreds of softball games from the booth, and when I did baseball, I said, Yes, I understood everything and recognized it,” she said.Two days later, Schilling’s Twitter message put his career on hiatus and transformed Mendoza’s. In her first Sunday night game in Schilling’s place, Jake Arrieta of the Cubs pitched a no-hitter.After the season, ESPN gave Mendoza Schilling’s job permanently. She will work with Dan Shulman and Aaron Boone.“I would have been shocked if they said that you’ll just come in and out next year,” she said. “I deserved to be here on a consistent basis.”AdvertisementMendoza is mindful of the need to close the gap between her mastery of softball and her knowledge of baseball. During spring training, she has been talking to scouts and team executives to understand what she missed by not rising to a major league team through a farm system.“I’ve seen her firsthand, getting engulfed with somebody about the insider game of hitting,” said Tim Kurkjian, an ESPN baseball reporter. “She’s fascinated by it.”Her primary goal at spring training has been to face major league pitching. She did not feel she had to swing or even bring a bat. She simply wanted to see what she had not experienced in softball. She hoped to look at Clayton Kershaw and say, “O.K., Clayton, give me the slider I’ve heard so much about.”On Tuesday, she stepped into the batter’s box against Jeff Samardzija of the San Francisco Giants. “His curve was beautiful, and it made me laugh out loud,” she said, adding that Dave Righetti, the Giants’ pitching coach, “was also laughing because he said, ‘You nearly came out of your shoes.’ ”A version of this article appears in print on March 13, 2016, on Page SP3 of the New York edition with the headline: Her Calling Began With a Camera.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.