By BEN ROTHENBERGJAN. 22, 2017
MELBOURNE, Australia — Three days after the six-time Australian Open champion Novak Djokovic bowed out in the tournament’s second round, top-ranked Andy Murray followed.Murray, a five-time runner-up in Melbourne, was unable to counter the unrelenting net play of 50th-ranked Mischa Zverev, falling by 7-5, 5-7, 6-2, 6-4 in a fourth-round match on Sunday afternoon at Rod Laver Arena.The last time neither Djokovic nor Murray reached the quarterfinals at a major event was when they both lost in the fourth round of the 2007 Australian Open. Then seeded 14th and 15th, they lost to Roger Federer and Rafael Nadal.In Sunday’s final match, the top-ranked woman, Angelique Kerber, followed Murray’s ungainly lead. Kerber, the defending champion, put up little resistance in a 6-2, 6-3 pummeling by 35th-ranked CoCo Vandeweghe.AdvertisementZverev ambushed Murray with spectacular net play, sky-hook overheads that fell near the line and stab volleys that just dipped over the net. In an era dominated by baseline rallies, Zverev disrupted Murray by going to the net 118 times in the 3-hour-34-minute match, winning 65 of those points.AdvertisementZverev said his commitment to aggressive play had kept nerves from sabotaging the moment.“I was in a little coma, and just serve-and-volleying my way through it,” Zverev said in his on-court interview.Murray said it was Zverev’s execution, not his tactics, that proved problematic, adding that his opponent had “deserved to win.”“I don’t think it’s so much someone necessarily coming in; it’s the shots he was coming up with when he did come forward,” Murray said. “I mean, he came up with some great pickups, you know, reflex volleys, especially at the end of the match when it was tight. That was tough, because I was hitting some good shots, chasing some good balls down. Just wasn’t meant to be.”Kerber’s destruction came in far different fashion, with Vandeweghe’s bludgeoning serve and groundstrokes blasting through Kerber’s soft defenses. Vandeweghe hit 30 winners to Kerber’s seven. Many of Vandeweghe’s winners were struck close to the middle of the court after she had lured Kerber out of position with her previous shot.“We’re two totally opposite players,” Vandeweghe said. “I would expect myself to have more winners as well as more unforced errors than she would have.”Kerber had looked far from invincible this season, losing two of her three matches before this tournament, then dropping sets in her first two rounds to opponents ranked outside the top 50.“Of course, it was a little bit difficult at the beginning to get used to everything,” Kerber said of being the top seed at a major for the first time. “But when the tournament started, I was doing all the things like I did last year, was trying to do everything simple. Actually, I was feeling good. I have a good team around me, the same team like last year.”AdvertisementKerber’s loss jeopardizes her No. 1 ranking, which she claimed during her United States Open title run in September. Serena Williams can take the top ranking if she wins here and becomes the Australian Open champion for the seventh time.Williams had some struggles of her own on Monday before defeating the No. 16 seed, Barbora Strycova, 7-5, 6-4, in the fourth round. With temperatures soaring above 90 degrees, Williams lost her first two service games and was broken four times over all.Strycova, a quick and clever player with some of the best footwork in tennis, was able to save seven set points in the opening set — deploying serve-and-volley on occasion — before Williams closed the set with a mis-hit backhand that landed short and surprised Strycova.Williams failed to serve out the match at 5-3 in the second set, but she broke Strycova in the next game. It was a patchy performance: Williams made 46 unforced errors and only 45 percent of her first serves. But neither she nor her older sister Venus has dropped a set in reaching the quarterfinals.Nor has Serena Williams’s next opponent: the No. 9 seed Johanna Konta, who won the event in Sydney this month and has carried that sparkling form into the Australian Open. On Monday, Konta defeated the No. 30 seed Ekaterina Makarova, 6-1, 6-4, by rallying from 4-1 down in the second set.“She’s been playing really well,” Williams said. “She has a very attacking game. I know her game pretty well. I look forward to it.”If Williams does know Konta’s game well, it is only by watching from afar. This will be their first match, and when Konta was informed during her on-court interview that she would face Williams next, the crowd in Margaret Court Arena let out a big “Oooh,” as if Konta might be in grave danger.Konta laughed at the reaction.“Believe it or not, that’s an incredible experience for me,” she said. “She’s one of the few players still playing who I watched growing up. As a young girl wanting to be a professional tennis player, it’s an incredible honor.”AdvertisementKonta added, “I will cherish every minute out there.”Murray, who ascended to the No. 1 ranking for the first time in November, finished last year as the sport’s most dominant player, reeling off titles at Wimbledon, the Olympics, Shanghai, Paris and the World Tour Finals. Asked if that heavy workload had worn on him, Murray said he would meditate on the possibility.“I was full of confidence coming into the beginning of this year,” he said. “I prepared as best as I could but maybe have to have a look back and assess some things and see maybe if there’s some stuff I could have done differently.”Zverev played not only a great match but a daring one, risking exposure at the net by Murray, one of the game’s best at passing shots.“I can’t stay on the baseline, a couple feet behind the baseline, try to out-rally him,” Zverev said of Murray. “He’s very strong physically. He has a good baseline game. I knew I had to come in. That was my only chance to win. So, yeah, honestly, there was no Plan B for me.”Aggressive net-rushing like Zverev’s can lead to reward but also to embarrassment in this era of powerful baseliners. Zverev has been on the wrong end of lopsided losses before: 6-0, 6-0 to Federer in 2013, and 6-1, 6-1 to Nadal in Brisbane this month.“I always say it takes longer to develop a serve-and-volley game because, I mean, eventually you’re going to get passed a lot,” Zverev said. “Especially when you’re younger and you play top guys. Like what happened to me two weeks ago in Brisbane against Rafa — he killed me, 1-1. I really felt like I had no chance.”He added: “I feel like if you’re younger and you feel something like that on the court, you get discouraged quite easily. You change to, let’s stay on the baseline, let’s try to get somewhat of a rhythm going. I feel like it’s a very different mind-set you need to have as a serve-and-volleyer. You need to go to the net, get passed for two sets.”But when the disruptive tactic works, success can come quickly. Zverev posted strong results last fall, reaching the quarterfinals of two ATP events in China and then a semifinal in Basel, Switzerland, and re-entering the top 100 for the first time since 2011.Get the big sports news, highlights and analysis from Times journalists, with distinctive takes on games and some behind-the-scenes surprises, delivered to your inbox every week.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.Irina Zvereva, Mischa’s mother, taught her sons tennis with their father, Alexander Zverev Sr. She credited him with teaching Mischa how to volley, a strength of the senior Zverev’s own game when he was a Davis Cup player for the Soviet Union. She said that their fitness trainer Jez Green, who used to work with Murray, had gotten Mischa into the best shape of his life.Advertisement“We want to say big thank you for this guy,” Zvereva said.Mischa Zverev struggled with injuries for much of his career but was inspired to keep going by his younger brother, Alexander, a 19-year-old wunderkind who many predict will reach No. 1. (Mischa watched his brother succumb to Nadal in a five-set third-round match at Rod Laver Arena on Saturday.)Zverev spent some time coaching while he was injured, traveling to far-flung Futures events. “Not the nicest places around the world,” he said.Though not instantaneous, Zverev’s rise up the rankings has been meteoric. He was ranked as low as 1,067th in March 2015, and 171st a year ago.“I realized, A, I missed playing myself, and B, I still felt like I could do some damage on court,” he said. “I felt like I was still pretty young, and I started missing tennis myself.”Christopher Clarey contributed reporting from Melbourne.A version of this article appears in print on January 23, 2017, on Page D5 of the New York edition with the headline: Top-Ranked Players Murray and Kerber Are Eliminated in Fourth Round.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.