By MARC TRACYMAY 25, 2016
WASHINGTON — The Mets and the Nationals played their second rubber match in less than a week on Wednesday afternoon, with the Mets looking for a better result than the one they had obtained at Citi Field last Thursday, when Washington hammered the erstwhile Mets ace Matt Harvey for nine runs in two and two-thirds innings.Harvey, who gave up five runs in Tuesday’s loss here, remains an enormous question mark for the Mets. But on Wednesday, their captain, David Wright, hit a first-inning solo home run that gave them a lead they never relinquished at a sold-out Nationals Park, and the Mets went on to win, 2-0, tying the season series at 3-3. Wright’s homer was the game’s only extra-base hit.But the game ball deserved to go to the rookie pitcher Steven Matz, 7-0 in his last seven starts and 11-1 in 14 regular-season games in his career. Facing the Nationals’ formidable lineup — albeit one without the regular leadoff hitter Ben Revere and the slumping star Bryce Harper, whom Manager Dusty Baker gave a “mental day off” — Matz gave up no runs and four hits in eight innings, while recording seven strikeouts.Harper got off to a blazing start this season, but he has struggled lately as opposing managers have tried to take the bat out of his hands, as seen by the major-league-leading 13 intentional walks he has been issued. Baker did call on Harper to pinch-hit in the bottom of the eighth with a runner on first, two outs and the Nationals trailing, 2-0.AdvertisementAt that point, Mets Manager Terry Collins could have brought in his already-warm closer, Jeurys Familia, but he stuck with Matz.Advertisement“We had Jeurys ready, and I know Jeurys gets Bryce out,” Collins said after the game, “but I think when you have a young player, there are certain situations where you’ve got to challenge him. That’s one of them.”Matz fell behind in the count with two balls and no strikes, at which point, Collins said, the Mets pitching coaching Dan Warthen muttered, “We’ll find out what he’s made of.”Two pitches later, Matz (7-1) got Harper to ground out weakly to second base on an outside fastball, ending the inning.Get the big sports news, highlights and analysis from Times journalists, with distinctive takes on games and some behind-the-scenes surprises, delivered to your inbox every week.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.“Matz threw the ball really well today,” said Daniel Murphy, a former Met now playing second base for the Nationals. Murphy added, “I thought Tanner threw well enough to win.”Tanner Roark (3-4), the Nationals’ starter, mostly quieted the Mets’ ordinarily loud bats — they entered the game tied for the major league lead in homers and have slugged 65 of them in 46 games. Roark gave up one earned run in seven innings, lowering his E.R.A. to 2.71.Murphy hit two singles and continued to lead the majors with a .394 batting average, but he helped contribute to the Mets’ second run. Neil Walker kicked off the top of the seventh by hitting a single. Matt Reynolds hit into a fielder’s choice, and Murphy then committed an error on a potential double-play ball by Eric Campbell that sent Reynolds to third. Rene Rivera then singled, driving in Reynolds, who had entered the game at shortstop in the bottom of the first because of Asdrubal Cabrera’s back spasms.“No, it was not a bad hop; it was a bad play,” Murphy said of his error, one of two committed by the Nationals.AdvertisementThe first round of what promises to be a season-long slugfest between the Mets and the Nationals ended in a draw. The teams are scheduled to play six more games just before the All-Star break, with the final six scheduled for September.After Wednesday’s victory, the Mets (27-19) were a half-game back of the Nationals (28-19), with a day off Thursday followed by three games at home versus the Los Angeles Dodgers. The Nationals host the St. Louis Cardinals for four games beginning Thursday.Familia finally entered the game in the bottom of the ninth and gave up successive singles to Jayson Werth and Murphy.But Familia struck out Ryan Zimmerman before getting Anthony Rendon to ground into a forceout at second base.That left catcher Wilson Ramos, hitting .336, at the plate with two outs and runners at the corners. Ramos grounded to third, giving Familia his 16th save this season in 16 opportunities.A version of this article appears in print on May 26, 2016, on Page B15 of the New York edition with the headline: Wright Goes Deep (Home Run), and So Does Matz (Eight Innings).  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.