By LELA MOOREMAY 25, 2016
A Washington Post poll recently found that nine out of 10 Native Americans did not find the name of the Washington Redskins offensive. Seven in 10 said they did not find the term “redskin” disrespectful at all.The New York Times asked its readers, including many Native Americans, for their opinions about whether the term is a slur and who gets to decide if it is.The origin of the term “redskin” is disputed. A Smithsonian Institution scholar, Ives Goddard, wrote in a 2005 paper that the term originated with Native Americans in the 18th century as a way to distinguish themselves from white settlers. Some Native American activists, however, assert the term arose as a pejorative and is linked to bounties placed on the scalps of Native Americans by the United States government.The reader Michael Krigbaum, who submitted one of 2,689 responses to The Times, noted Goddard’s work and said, “At no time during the crusade to soil the term ‘redskin’ has the anti-name crowd brought forth a fact-based and historically cited argument that suggests the term was ever negative in connotation or denotation.”AdvertisementBut for many readers who identified themselves as Native American, the name is far from benign.“I have never heard of any real-life circumstance in which a non-Native person called a Native person ‘redskin’ to their face and meant it as a compliment or positive in any way,” said Velma Craig, a Navajo.AdvertisementMonica Draper, a member of the Navajo Nation, had a similar sentiment.“As a child,” she said, “my classmates would make fun of me by calling me a redskin. I’m sure they did not say it as a compliment.”Laura Grabhorn, a member of the Central Council of Tlingit and Haida Indians of Alaska, said, “The name has never been consciously an ‘honor’ for actual Native people.” She said that as a teenager performing with other Native American children at a Redskins halftime show, she was mocked by fans.Jacob Floyd, a member of the Creek tribe, said that “for me the point is that hundreds of tribal councils and Native organizations have decided that it is offensive.”“Why is that not enough?” Floyd said. “The patronizing non-Native response continues centuries of colonial paternalism in which non-Natives apparently know what’s best for us.”Many readers saw the influence of the Redskins name and imagery differently — even those who were Native Americans and attended schools that used Native American mascots.“I went to a high school whose mascot was an Indian,” Lily Fawn White of the Ponca Tribe of Oklahoma said. “It was equally, if not more, horrendous to see opposing teams burning our mascot in effigy. ‘Scalp the Indians!’ ‘Go Back to the Reservation!’ etc. were signs we read and chants we heard every Friday night.”She added, “It’s time we find a true mascot that uplifts and energizes rather than one that demoralizes and hurts.”AdvertisementBut Lawrence Alfred Jr., a Navajo, said that his community had a high school team named the Redskins and that he was not offended.“My grandfather, whom was a Navajo Code Talker, was a Redskins fan,” he said. “If you are Navajo and follow tradition, you will not find this offensive because in our culture we name people by the way we see it.”Several Native American readers said the continued use of the name reflected how Native American history was often overlooked.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.“People think that native people are characters from the olden days,” said Aaron Golding, a member of the Seneca Nation of Indiana.The use of Native American dress by Redskins fans was a particularly sore subject for some readers.“To me it is personally offensive to see non-Natives making a mockery of our cultural items — feathers are sacred gifts that we have a lot of respect and honor towards,” said Victoria, a member of the Seminole Nation of Oklahoma who did not give her last name. “When someone wears fake feathers that are painted in the name of football, it’s disgusting.”Jeffrey Charley, a member of the Navajo Nation, said: “I do agree there is some education that is needed for the fans to know what is sacred to the Native Americans. The feathers. The headdress. The war cry and why they paint their faces.”Non-Native American readers were more likely than those who identified themselves as Native Americans to say the Redskins name carried no negative connotation.“For me, personally, it’s a name I’ve cheered and representative of a team that has brought me entertainment for decades,” Amy Ray said.Indeed, several non-Native American readers said the name was intended to evoke positive images of Native Americans.Advertisement“People no longer associate it with a derogatory word but rather the football team,” Christopher Bolton said. “So in a sense, the Washington Redskins has helped rebrand an offensive term and fight racism.”Ken Hargreaves said: “It is a nickname for a fierce warrior. I don’t see how that’s offensive. Redskin denotes someone as formidable, to be respected and even feared.”Jerome M. Capone said: “The fans don’t consider it an insult but a term connoting strength, skill and determination. Don’t change it. And let’s stop talking about it.”Who, ultimately, should decide the fate of the Redskins name? Most readers, Native American and non-Native American alike, agreed that the decision should be left up to American Indian tribes. Bob Wirths said it should be up to “a majority of regular Native Americans, as opposed to activists and academics.”C. Wabnum, a member of the Kickapoo Tribe in Kansas, said that “Native American people from a wide cross section, including a random sampling of urban and reservation Natives from various age groups and professions,” should decide the name’s fate.Allan Olson said the decision should rest with “the leaders of today’s Indian communities — their political leaders, their cultural leaders and their spiritual leaders.”“These leaders speak for Native America and articulate the Indian point of view in a way that few Native Americans have been able to do before,” Olson said.A version of this article appears in print on May 26, 2016, on Page B11 of the New York edition with the headline: Readers Weigh In, Adding Depth to ‘Redskins’ Debate.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.