AdvertisementSupported byNationals 7, Mets 4By Tyler KepnerWASHINGTON — The superhero lurking in Matt Harvey must recognize his dire predicament. It is Batman, after all, who would find himself trapped in an impossible riddle, wrapped in the clutches of doom, sharks everywhere, with no hope of escape — only to fight back, every time, and survive.Yet Harvey’s story seems stuck on repeat: same bat time, same bat channel, same bad ending. Hitters are punishing his pitches, and Harvey, the Mets’ opening day starter, is now statistically among the worst pitchers in the game.The Washington Nationals flattened Harvey for the second start in a row on Tuesday in a 7-4 victory at Nationals Park. Harvey allowed five runs in five innings, capped by Daniel Murphy’s long two-run homer. Harvey generated only four swinging strikes, allowed three home runs and refused to speak with reporters after the game.“He’s frustrated,” catcher Kevin Plawecki said. “Anybody would be. He’s a competitor and obviously wants to do well, and he hasn’t really gone through a tough stretch like this before. So it’s somewhat new to him.”Harvey finished last season with a 2.53 career E.R.A. In 10 starts this season, he is 3-7 with a 6.08 E.R.A., ahead of only Milwaukee’s Wily Peralta (6.99) among qualified National League starters. Opponents are hitting .509 (28 for 55) in Harvey’s third time through the batting order.The Mets considered skipping Harvey’s next start, or pushing it back, after last week’s fiasco at Citi Field, in which the Nationals buried him for nine runs in two and two-thirds innings. They reconsidered when Harvey said he wanted to keep pitching.Now, the Mets may want to take a break from Harvey, who allowed five runs and eight hits in five innings, with two walks and a career-low one strikeout. Manager Terry Collins would not commit to using him the next time through the rotation.“Right now, we’ve got to think what’s not just best for Matt but what’s best for us moving forward at the moment,” Collins said. “There’s a lot of things to consider, and that’s why we’re not going to make any rash judgments tonight. We’re going to sleep on it and talk about it tomorrow.”Collins said he would speak with General Manager Sandy Alderson and the pitching coach Dan Warthen, who was not made available to the news media after the game. Nobody wants to say much, but Harvey is clearly faltering in the middle innings as his fastball loses steam.One scout at the game, who requested anonymity because his team had not authorized him to speak publicly, said Harvey looked mentally beaten and lacked his usual explosiveness in the strike zone. The Nationals, of course, were not about to offer much candor about a wounded rival.“His stuff is still electric,” Anthony Rendon said. “To me, he’s still the same pitcher that comes after you: good slider, hard fastball — he mixes it up in and out. He’s going through a rough patch, but I’m pretty sure he’ll find his way out, like every other good pitcher does.”Maybe so, and the Mets have often cited Stephen Strasburg, another hard-throwing right-hander with a Tommy John scar on his right elbow, as a source of hope for Harvey. Strasburg has been inconsistent in the past but now seems at his peak: 8-0 with a 2.79 E.R.A. this season. He struck out 11 in six and two-thirds innings on Tuesday to beat Harvey for the second start in a row.Harvey, of course, pitched into the ninth inning of the final game of the World Series last fall, reaching 216 total innings in his comeback after having Tommy John surgery in October 2013. Collins had continued to cite that as a reason for Harvey’s struggles and said fatigue probably led to his drop in velocity in the fifth.“If he had got through the fifth inning unscathed, he would have left there with some real good confidence,” Collins said.The Mets are used to Harvey’s not only pitching well but doing it with a sneer. At his best, he has the brash demeanor of a true staff ace, the kind of pitcher whose starts are a beacon of hope every five days. Around the Mets’ organization, though, Noah Syndergaard has taken that role, and Harvey is adrift.On Tuesday he walked the leadoff batter, Ben Revere, but erased him on a double play and carried a 1-0 lead into the bottom of the fourth. With one out, Ryan Zimmerman pulled a changeup over the fence in left-center for a homer. The next hitter, Rendon, did the same.Harvey had begun his midgame malfunction. After his three scoreless innings on Tuesday, his season E.R.A. for the first three innings was a respectable 3.03. But for Innings 4 through 6, it now stands at 9.89. Harvey has not pitched more than six innings in any start, and he did not get the chance this time.He gave up three hits in the fifth, all on fastballs. The Nationals took healthy swings off the pitch, with a double by Revere, a single by Jayson Werth and a sacrifice fly by Bryce Harper bringing Murphy to the plate.Murphy had homered off a hanging curveball from Harvey, his former teammate, last week. This time, Harvey reached for a fastball with a 1-1 count. It touched 94 m.p.h. and Murphy unloaded on it, sending his seventh homer into the second deck of seats above right field.Harvey completed the inning and then left for a pinch-hitter. In his wake were a wretched pitching line, an unsightly E.R.A. and no clear way to untangle his chains.Advertisement