By DAVID WALDSTEINMAY 23, 2016
PARIS — A year ago, dressed in a pair of garish pink-and-gray plaid shorts that became a symbol of his success, Stan Wawrinka made the French Open his own by stunning Novak Djokovic in the final.This year, Wawrinka came dressed in a fluorescent yellow-green shirt atop black shorts that made him stand vividly against the red clay of Roland Garros.But Wawrinka did not need any special attire to gain attention, not after being the previous year’s surprise winner. What he almost gained was the unwelcome glare that would have accompanied his becoming the first defending champion to lose in the first round of the French Open.Wawrinka, the No. 3 seed, walked triumphantly back onto Philippe Chatrier Court on Monday but had only a brief moment to enjoy the sensation. He lost the first set to the giant killer Lukas Rosol and fell behind, two sets to one, before narrowly escaping with a five-set victory, 4-6, 6-1, 3-6, 6-3, 6-4.Advertisement“I came back to play a match, not to enjoy and think about what I did last year,” Wawrinka said. “For sure, when I enter the court, I had all the memory from last year. But after that, I was here to beat Rosol today.”AdvertisementAlthough it was the second day of the tournament, it had the feel of an opening session after much of Sunday’s schedule was wiped out by rain. Monday’s issue was a shortage of sunlight.The rain ended in the early afternoon, but the conditions remained chilly, overcast and damp throughout.When darkness finally enveloped the grounds, a few matches hung in the balance, including a surprisingly tense affair between No. 2-seeded Andy Murray and the 37-year-old qualifier Radek Stepanek, which was called in the fourth set.The match was the last on court at Chatrier Court, following wins by Wawrinka, Kei Nishikori and Agnieszka Radwanska.Stepanek won the first two sets, 6-3, 6-3, but Murray recovered to win the third, 6-0. He seemed to have seized the momentum, and the older Stepanek appeared to be stalling to force the suspension.At least, that is what Murray seemed to suspect. During the changeover after the third set, when Stepanek went to the bathroom, Murray lobbied the chair umpire Damien Dumusois to take action against Stepanek’s delaying tactics.“It’s very predictable,” Murray told Dumusois before questioning how long Stepanek’s bathroom break would go.AdvertisementDumusois replied that he had sent someone to retrieve Stepanek, at which point Murray opted to take a break, too.When play finally resumed, the light had dimmed further. Murray built upon his newly discovered dominance, winning the first three games of the fourth set. When play was suspended, Murray led the set by 4-2. The match was scheduled to resume Tuesday.Murray’s previous match at Roland Garros, a semifinal against Djokovic last year, was suspended after the sixth game of the fourth set because of an approaching storm. Murray also trailed by two sets to one then, with the fourth set tied at 3-3. When play resumed, Murray claimed the set,  but Djokovic won the fifth, 6-1.Also suspended because of darkness Monday was John Isner’s match with John Millman of Australia after a marathon second-set tiebreaker. Isner won it, 14-12, when Millman missed an overhead slam, evening the match at one set apiece.While the courts were still adequately lit, Garbiñe Muguruza, the No. 4 seed on the women’s side, had to go three sets to beat Anna Karolina Schmiedlova, 3-6, 6-3, 6-3. After losing the first set, Muguruza faced nine break points in an epic 26-point game but eventually held, and the rest of the match flowed in her favor.Get the big sports news, highlights and analysis from Times journalists, with distinctive takes on games and some behind-the-scenes surprises, delivered to your inbox every week.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.Muguruza reached the quarterfinals last year and followed with an appearance in the Wimbledon final, so an early loss would have been seen as a big step backward. Instead, she overcame her opponent and the chilly conditions to move on in a match that had been postponed from the day before.“It was so cold,” she said. “Even though I was running and playing, I felt, like, cold. I thought it was going to rain. I was looking to the sky, I’m like, ‘Oh, please,’ you know? But it’s the same as for the other girl.”Four seeded women did lose: No. 7 Roberta Vinci, No. 16 Sara Errani, No. 17 Karolina Pliskova and No. 32 Jelena Ostapenko. Marin Cilic, the 10th seed in the men’s draw who lost to Wawrinka in the final of the Geneva Open on Saturday, made a quick exit, falling to 166th-ranked Marco Trungelliti of Argentina, 7-6 (4), 3-6, 6-4, 6-2.AdvertisementSeveral other matches were continued from Sunday. Jack Sock, the 23rd-seeded American, had to come back to play a fifth set against Robin Haase of the Netherlands, who had won the previous two sets and seemed to have the momentum before the rain ended play Sunday. Sock won the fifth set easily, taking the match, 6-3, 7-5, 3-6, 6-7 (3), 6-2.In a meeting of Americans, Bjorn Fratangelo, a wild card and the 2011 French Open junior champion, beat Sam Querrey, 6-3, 6-1, 6-7 (3), 6-3, to advance to the second round of the senior draw for the first time.Another American, the 19th-seeded Sloane Stephens, had little trouble defeating Margarita Gasparyan of Russia, 6-4, 6-3. Stephens was relaxed enough after that she spent some of her news conference discussing the blankets she travels with to enhance her comfort. It was cold enough to have one on court, though she declined.Comfort has never been a problem for Stephens at the French Open, where she has reached the fourth round in each of the last four years. She recently won on the green clay at Charleston, S.C., but for some reason the Roland Garros clay is particularly appealing.Asked why, she said: “I don’t know. It’s red?”For Wawrinka, the path to victory, as he explained it, lay in finding solutions. In the fourth set, Rosol, best known for upsetting Rafael Nadal at Wimbledon in 2012, had two break points that could have put him in command of the match. But Wawrinka held, and the match lurched in his favor for the first time.At 2-2 in the fourth, Wawrinka won a 31-shot rally to make it 15-15. Rosol won the next two points, but with a key service break within reach, he cracked. Wawrinka hit an overhead winner and then, at 30-40, Rosol botched a backhand into the net. Wawrinka then found another solution by firing an ace to win the game and avoid a potential disaster.“The fact that he made two mistakes is also a good solution,” Wawrinka said.An article on Tuesday about first-round matches at the French Open misstated, in some copies, the seeding of Sloane Stephens. She is 19th, not 24th.A version of this article appears in print on May 24, 2016, on Page B11 of the New York edition with the headline: Wawrinka Needs 5 Sets as Title Defense Begins.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.