By DAVID WALDSTEINMAY 24, 2016
PARIS — When Serena Williams’s quest to win the Grand Slam ended in September, it did not come until the semifinals of the United States Open, the second-to-last chance that anyone had to stop her.Angelique Kerber’s bid for a Grand Slam — if it could even have been said that there was one — expired in her very first opportunity after  she won the Australian Open in January.Such is the state of women’s tennis, in which Williams stands high above a fluctuating undercurrent of contenders.The ailing, third-seeded Kerber was beaten by Kiki Bertens, a lanky Dutchwoman who is ranked No. 58, by 6-2, 3-6, 6-3 in the first match on Philippe Chatrier Court on a cool, overcast day at Roland Garros.AdvertisementThen, on Court 1, fifth-seeded Victoria Azarenka was forced to retire, down by 4-0 in the third set, allowing 118th-ranked Karin Knapp to move on.AdvertisementAzarenka’s departure could make Williams’s path to the semifinals easier because they were in the same quarter of the draw. Williams, the defending champion, is seeking her 22nd Grand Slam singles title, which would tie her with Steffi Graf for the Open-era record.Williams began her campaign by hammering Magdalena Rybarikova, 6-2, 6-0, in the last of five matches on the Chatrier court. The match took only 42 minutes — just a few minutes longer than one of Azarenka’s injury timeouts.Azarenka arrived in Paris with a back problem that had surfaced earlier in the clay-court season, but it was her right knee that did her in on Tuesday. She had obvious difficulty moving in the second set against Knapp, smashing her racket against the clay in frustration. But she recovered remarkably well to force and win a second-set tiebreaker.In the third set, the problem resurfaced, and Azarenka pulled up, hobbling and bouncing on her left leg. Her face twisted in frustration as she was temporarily unable to put weight on her right knee. She was eventually able to limp to the net to shake hands with Knapp.Get the big sports news, highlights and analysis from Times journalists, with distinctive takes on games and some behind-the-scenes surprises, delivered to your inbox every week.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.Williams was not on court long enough to suffer any maladies, but she said she was taking precautions against the cold, damp weather.“I’m just really, really loading up the vitamin C’s and water so I can hopefully stay healthy,” said Williams, who was sick for much of her run to the title here last year.Things went more according to expectations on the men’s side, where Rafael Nadal, Novak Djokovic and Jo-Wilfried Tsonga all won in straight sets. Nadal, a nine-time French Open champion, beat Sam Groth, 6-1, 6-1, 6-1, in 80 minutes and hit the shot of the tournament so far, a between-the-legs, down-the-line winner.AdvertisementDjokovic beat Yen-Hsun Lu, 6-4, 6-1, 6-1, in 90 minutes. Tsonga, the No. 6 seed, pushed aside Jan-Lennard Struff, a German qualifier, 6-3, 6-4, 6-4.Tuesday was also an opportunity to clear up the slate of unfinished matches from the day before. Andy Murray defeated Radek Stepanek in five sets in a continuation of their suspended match, and 15th-seeded John Isner, whose match with John Millman of Australia was suspended Monday after a second-set tiebreaker, came back to win, 6-7 (4), 7-6 (12), 7-6 (7), 7-5.Venus Williams, at 35 the oldest player in the women’s draw, celebrated her 19th appearance in the French Open by beating Anett Kontaveit, 7-6 (5), 7-6 (4). This is Williams’s 70th Grand Slam tournament, leaving her one behind Amy Frazier for the career record.Kerber’s loss was her fifth in the first match of a tournament this season since she beat Serena Williams in the final in Melbourne.“The first rounds are always tough in the tournament, especially for me,” Kerber said. “But what can I say? It happens.”Lingering soreness in her shoulder has been a part of her problem. Kerber went to the trainer’s room in the third set for treatment, but it did not help.“It’s getting worse and worse,” she said, “but I hope it’s not too bad.”A version of this article appears in print on May 25, 2016, on Page B10 of the New York edition with the headline: Kerber’s Bid for a Grand Slam Has a Short Life: One Match.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.