By BEN ROTHENBERGJAN. 22, 2017
MELBOURNE, Australia — Nearly two decades after her debut at Melbourne Park, Venus Williams has made a vintage run to return to the quarterfinals of the Australian Open for the ninth time. She beat the 181st-ranked qualifier Mona Barthel, 6-3, 7-5, in a fourth-round match Sunday afternoon at Rod Laver Arena.Williams, 36, first played in the Australian Open in 1998, and she made the quarterfinals that year at age 17 (after beating her sister, Serena, then 16, in the second round). Venus Williams has reached the final only once, in 2003, losing to Serena.This year, Venus Williams has played near the top of her game in Melbourne, not dropping a set through four rounds.“I think I was born to play this game; I really do,” Williams said. “I’ve been blessed enough to do something that I love, and I think this was my calling because I grew so big, and so tall, that I can cover the court and hit it hard.”AdvertisementWhen Williams, the 13th seed, won the match on a netted forehand by Barthel, she raised her fists and smiled broadly. After shaking her opponent’s hand, she twice waved to the crowd, pirouetting.AdvertisementWilliams has not advanced beyond the quarterfinals at Melbourne Park since her loss to Serena in the 2003 final. But against Barthel, she won 90 percent of the points when she got her first serve into play, hit 31 winners and four aces.Get the big sports news, highlights and analysis from Times journalists, with distinctive takes on games and some behind-the-scenes surprises, delivered to your inbox every week.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.“This is what you do all the hard work in the off-season for,” Williams said. “It’s wonderful to be able to advance even further.”Barthel was the lowest-ranked player to reach the fourth round in the women’s draw here since 2010. She has a career-high ranking of 23 and was consistently in the top 50 before an illness last year.Barthel had had an entertaining streak in Melbourne. To reach the round of 16, she had to win three qualifying matches before beating two Australian wild cards and the reigning Olympic gold medalist, Monica Puig, in the first three rounds.Williams’s next opponent will be 24th-seeded Anastasia Pavlyuchenkova, who dismissed a fellow Russian, eighth-seeded Svetlana Kuznetsova, 6-3, 6-3, in 1 hour 8 minutes.Pavlyuchenkova, a junior standout, won the girls’ title here in 2006 and 2007. But the promise of those victories has not been fulfilled. As a professional, Pavlyuchenkova had a losing record in Melbourne, 6-8, before this year. But with her win Sunday, she has reached the final eight of all four Grand Slam events, at the French Open and the United States Open in 2011 and at Wimbledon last year.“It’s super-exciting,” she said. “I was always wondering why I could never have a good start here in Australia after a good preseason, good off-season and a lot of practicing.”Pavlyuchenkova, 25, described herself as being in “a perfect middle” between youth and experience.Advertisement“I guess I just feel more ready now mentally; maybe that’s why,” Pavlyuchenkova said. “I’m trying to enjoy and believe in myself more than before.”An article in some copies on Jan. 22 about Venus Williams’s advancing to the quarterfinals of the Australian Open, using information from The Associated Press, misstated the number of double faults she had in her fourth-round match against Mona Barthel. She had seven; it is not the case that she “did not serve any.”The Associated Press contributed to this report.A version of this article appears in print on January 22, 2017, on Page SP4 of the New York edition with the headline: Again Flashing Classic Form, Venus Williams Advances.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.