By TYLER KEPNERJULY 6, 2016
CLEVELAND — The best place to watch a celebration 52 years in the making was from atop the ballpark of the Cleveland Indians. That was where Chris Antonetti, president of the Indians’ baseball operations, watched the Cavaliers start their motorcade through downtown after winning the N.B.A. title last month. For almost an hour, Antonetti, Manager Terry Francona and others in the front office watched the cars wind from a plaza next door, up to Ontario Street, down to Carnegie Avenue, over to East Ninth Street, and into history.“I can show you some of the pictures,” Antonetti said, flipping through cellphone snapshots of the joyous throng in wine and gold. “It’s inspiring. It’s what we’re all working towards, to have another parade.”The Indians will not be the team to end Cleveland’s half-century of sports heartbreak, but they are doing their best to keep the party rocking. They hold a six-and-a-half-game lead in the American League Central with a 51-33 record, buoyed by a club-record 14-game winning streak that started two days before the Cavaliers won it all.“Everyone’s asked: ‘Does the Cavs’ winning the championship take the pressure off you guys, or does that help you guys?’” said Jason Kipnis, the second baseman for the Indians, who host the Yankees for four games starting Thursday. “I want to be like: ‘I don’t see LeBron throwing any complete games for us — so they haven’t done anything, really, for us.’Advertisement“But what they did do for us was, with the parade, with the excitement and buzz around the city, we saw what can happen when you win. There’s not one athlete who plays the game that doesn’t want that for themselves. Seeing that becomes a little bit more motivation for you to say, ‘Hey, we want that, let’s do it right.’ You get to picture what it actually might look like — like, O.K., just change the colors around a little bit and add more people.”More people? Kipnis believes it. An Indians’ celebration, in theory, could attract more than the estimated 1.3 million who feted the Cavs. The Indians have not won the World Series since 1948, and while the sports and economic landscapes have changed drastically in recent years, the fans did sell out the ballpark for 455 games in a row.AdvertisementThat streak stretched from 1995, when the Indians reached the World Series, to 2001, when they won their sixth A.L. Central crown in seven seasons. Since then, they have won the division only once, in 2007, when they lost in the championship series to Francona’s Boston Red Sox.Francona managed the Indians to a wild-card berth in 2013 and two more winning seasons after that. But this could finally be the breakthrough the franchise has sought, with a simple but painstakingly executed formula: dependable starting pitching. It reminded Francona, he said, of the Atlanta Braves teams that once ruled the National League.“They were always the favorite,” Francona said. “Well, what it meant was they had good pitching, and you do it every day. And as long as you score runs, and they’re meaningful runs, that’s a good way to play. You feel like you always have a chance.”There are other reasons for the Indians’ success. They are heady and aggressive on the bases, leading the A.L. in percentage of extra bases taken. They gave shrewd one-year contracts to first baseman Mike Napoli, outfielder Rajai Davis and infielder Juan Uribe, and all have contributed. Three homegrown first-round draft picks — outfielders Lonnie Chisenhall and Tyler Naquin, and the sublime All-Star shortstop Francisco Lindor — are playing every day and hitting .299 or better.But the rotation is the Indians’ foundation. Despite Wednesday’s tumble by Josh Tomlin, who lost, 12-2, to Detroit, the Indians’ five regular starters are a combined 39-17 with a 3.09 E.R.A. As a whole, their starters had the best E.R.A. in the A.L. through Tuesday and had held opponents to a .235 average.“One of the reasons for me to be consistent is them — they’re doing a really good job,” said the right-hander Danny Salazar, a first-time All-Star whose 2.36 E.R.A. leads the A.L. “I want to fit there with them, and I know if I want that to happen — if I want to be on the same level they are — I have to stay consistent.”AdvertisementLike a few other staffs, the Indians’ starters watch one another’s daily bullpen sessions (except for that day’s starter). It stokes an unspoken competition between Salazar, Tomlin, Corey Kluber, Carlos Carrasco and Trevor Bauer, but more important, it helps them learn from one another’s habits.Tomlin called his stuff “subpar” compared to the others, but he survives by working diligently to guide each of his pitches to every quadrant of the strike zone. That example, Carrasco said, underscores the importance of command to pitchers like him and Salazar, who are hard throwers with power changeups.“No matter how hard you’re throwing,” Carrasco said, “if you hit your spot, you’re good.”The Indians’ starters were not always good and took longer to develop than the Mets’ celebrated rotation.Salazar was signed from the Dominican Republic in 2006, the year Cleveland drafted Tomlin from Texas Tech in the 19th round. Carrasco arrived three years later, from Philadelphia in the Cliff Lee trade, and weathered Tommy John surgery and a bullpen demotion before establishing himself.Get the big sports news, highlights and analysis from Times journalists, with distinctive takes on games and some behind-the-scenes surprises, delivered to your inbox every week.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.Kluber was not among Baseball America’s top 10 Padres prospects when San Diego dealt him to Cleveland in a three-way deal in 2010. Bauer was a high pick (third over all by Arizona in 2011), but such an enigma that the Diamondbacks gave up on him after a year and a half. He led the A.L. in walks last season and started this season in relief.“To see them all have success in different ways,” Antonetti said, “and also have different paths to get to the major leagues, it’s not only fun to watch, but it’s also helpful to share with some of our minor league players and say, ‘Look, there are a lot of different paths to becoming a successful major league player.’”The pitching coach Mickey Callaway said the starters follow the lead of Kluber, the stoic right-hander who won the 2014 A.L. Cy Young Award. Kluber’s coiled delivery sometimes causes him to spin off and lose his release point, which makes his pitches flat and leads to occasional bad starts (he has five this season with at least five earned runs). But Kluber also has two shutouts, and he has thrown three complete games.AdvertisementBauer, Callaway said, has learned to simplify his pitch mix while expanding the way he attacks hitters, resisting the predictable pattern of hard stuff up, soft stuff away. Callaway called Tomlin’s bullpen outings “Picasso paint sessions,” noting that he nearly has as many wins (9) as walks (11).Carrasco holds his changeup like a splitter, Callaway said, producing similar spin and depth to that of Seattle’s Felix Hernandez. And then there is Salazar’s mystery pitch, which Callaway called one of the best in the majors.“It’s kind of a pitch that was dumb luck for him,” Callaway said. “He went to go throw a circle-change and all of a sudden he’s throwing this split-finger/forkball hybrid thing that just dives off the table. Guys are aware of that, and when you throw 96, 97 off of that or before that, it works pretty good.“He’s got such a quick arm, and he’s got a really good delivery that allows for a lot of power. He drives the four-seam fastball that seems like it’s rising to a hitter. Everybody’s used to swinging at a ball that’s coming down. His seems like it’s rising to them, and they just can’t hit it.”The best part, for the Indians, is that all the starters are under club control for a while — Tomlin through 2018, Bauer, Carrasco and Salazar through 2020, and Kluber through 2021. This year, they will combine to make about $13.7 million — or less than Anibal Sanchez, the Detroit right-hander who was bruised for seven runs in a 12-1 mauling on Tuesday. Sanchez, who makes $16 million, is 5-9 with a 6.52 E.R.A.The Indians won their first 11 games from the Tigers this season, a satisfying turnaround for Kipnis, who thoroughly embraces the culture of the franchise. He keeps a tribute to Jobu, the voodoo god from the movie “Major League,” in the open locker he shares with Napoli — with Jobu dolls, a Jobu sweater and bottles of Jobu’s rum.Kipnis has felt the sting of losing here. In his first full season, 2012, Detroit won the pennant, and the Indians lost 94 games. The Tigers are still a threat, the Kansas City Royals are the reigning World Series champion, and the Chicago White Sox hold a winning record.But they all are chasing Cleveland, and another major championship does not seem far-fetched anymore.“I’ve been down on the opposite side of this,” Kipnis said. “It’s exciting. We firmly believe we’re in the middle of our window right now. We’ve got guys who are taking advantage of it.”A version of this article appears in print on July 7, 2016, on Page B11 of the New York edition with the headline: Indians Trying to Follow in Cavaliers’ Parade Path.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.