AdvertisementSupported byBy Seth BerkmanBreanna Stewart sat in the visitors’ locker room at Madison Square Garden on Wednesday night in an unfamiliar position.Stewart had just put on a dynamic exhibition, scoring 24 points with 16 rebounds and playing all five positions, but her Seattle Storm had nevertheless lost, 78-74, to the Liberty. The Storm (7-12) had dropped three straight before they defeated the San Antonio Stars on Friday.Over the last four years, Stewart had experienced a total of five losses when wearing the blue and white jersey of the University of Connecticut. Her senior class was the first to win four national titles, and Stewart was named the most outstanding player in the Final Four each time.As Stewart has quickly discovered, there is a difference between stardom in college and life in the W.N.B.A. Losing is frustrating but not quite unexpected, she said. She is still, however, acclimating to the demands of being the top overall pick in the league’s draft in April. Having entered the W.N.B.A. with a pedigree as one of college basketball’s greatest players, Stewart also carries expectations that she will be a pillar on which the Storm can build for the next decade.“It’s funny — I think that sometimes I forget that I’m a rookie,” she said. “I forget this is my first two months in the league, just because of the expectations I have on myself, along with other things surrounding that.”Despite being matched against players more accomplished than those she usually faced in college, Stewart remains a marvel. Against Tina Charles and the Liberty, the W.N.B.A.’s top defensive team last year, Stewart was able to angle her 6-foot-4 frame for unblockable fadeaway shots in the post. She displayed seasoned instincts when cutting past defenders for a pass and, while still in motion, deflecting the ball with one hand to an open teammate waiting in the corner. For good measure, Stewart also threw in a Dream Shake under the basket, the trademark move of the Hall of Famer Hakeem Olajuwon.Those plays are examples of why Golden State Warriors forward Draymond Green has studied the W.N.B.A. in an effort to refine his own game. They are also the polished work of a player who, at 21, may already have a talent level that the league, in its 20th season, has never seen. (Seattle’s Sue Bird, also a UConn alum, compared Stewart to a combination of Elena Delle Donne, last year’s most valuable player, and Lauren Jackson, a three-time M.V.P. recently named one of the league’s top 20 players ever.)Despite these virtues, a burdensome question will shadow Stewart this season and beyond: Can she be a transformative player who singularly increases the popularity of women’s basketball in the United States?Unfair as it may be to expect Stewart to immediately draw sellout crowds and boost television ratings, she acknowledged the hopes being placed on her, and she has already pondered her role as a driving force in women’s professional sports.“While I was in college, I still knew what was going on at the next level and that kind of thing,” said Stewart, who was named rookie of the month for the second time on Thursday and was averaging 18.8 points a game with 9.6 rebounds. “The ‘separate but equal’ is the best way to describe things. Obviously, what’s going on in the N.B.A. and the W.N.B.A. is different — it’s completely different. But that doesn’t mean it can’t be equal.”There are early indications that Stewart is making an impact. According to the Storm, the team had a 14 percent increase in ticket sales for its home opener compared with last season, and a 15 percent increase in merchandise sales — driven by Stewart apparel — for the game. The Storm have also had a 100 percent increase in average viewership on local television compared with last year.“I don’t know if I’ve seen a player that is as recognized as she is everywhere, all over the country, every airport, every airplane, and just the diversity of demographics that are drawn to her and clearly want her picture, want her autograph,” Storm Coach Jenny Boucek said. “It’s pretty cool to see a female athlete have that notoriety, No. 1, and that respect. It’s really good for our game.”On Wednesday, Storm or UConn fans made up a majority of the group-sales ticketholders who were allowed early entry to the Garden, and many took photographs of Stewart during warm-ups. The announced attendance of 9,852 was higher than for games that had featured Maya Moore, Candace Parker and Diana Taurasi, but still only about half of the arena’s capacity.In terms of her play, Stewart is often compared to Kevin Durant. On June 28, while Durant’s impending free agency dominated basketball discussions, Stewart scored 38 points in a win over the Atlanta Dream.Stewart does not complain about what may be unreasonable expectations — at UConn, winning national championships also included preparation for the professional spotlight. In fact, the exposure she received in college may have been greater than what she is getting in the W.N.B.A.Swin Cash, a veteran of 15 W.N.B.A. seasons and a four-time All-Star who won two titles at UConn, said the pressure placed on a player of Stewart’s magnitude was fair.“Absolutely,” Cash said. “To who much is given, much is required.”The transition out of college has been difficult for Stewart at times. In Seattle, she enjoys the freedom of living alone, but she also laments having to find new friends. Her parents call and visit, and Bird has become a mentor. UConn Coach Geno Auriemma texts Stewart regularly to give advice and help her through some of the frustrations of losing.As demonstrated by the back-to-back games the Storm played during the week, Stewart’s schedule is grinding. After winning the fourth championship with the Huskies, she was immediately drafted. As soon as she finished college, she began training with Seattle. Next month, she will play in the Olympics.“It seems like a lot of things just keep coming at me, but that’s part of it,” said Stewart, who is near the completion of a multiyear endorsement deal with Nike. “It gets hard, but I think for me, I try to take it one day at a time.”Advertisement