By BRAD SPURGEONJULY 8, 2016
In this third straight Formula One season dominated by the Mercedes team, one of the most intriguing plots to follow has been the indomitable return of the McLaren team after it stumbled last year to its worst season since 1967.McLaren, the second-most successful team in series history, discontinued its use of Mercedes engines two years ago and renewed ties with Honda as engine provider only to see its legendary eminence falter. This was all the more surprising since of the eight Formula One teams based in England, the one that most symbolizes the British mastery of the elite racing series is McLaren.But now a more buoyant McLaren returns this weekend to its home Grand Prix, celebrating 50 years in Formula One — a longevity second only to Ferrari’s.And while Ferrari continues to lead in the statistics as the most successful team — with 224 victories to 182 for McLaren, 16 constructors’ titles to 8, and 15 drivers’ titles to 12 — no other team comes close to McLaren in several areas, including a vast, diversified business that grew from the Formula One team.AdvertisementAnother great British team is Williams, the third-most successful in the series, although it has raced in more than a decade fewer seasons than McLaren. But Williams has yet to prove that it can pass perhaps the most difficult test of all, which only Ferrari and McLaren have done: successfully passing on the company from its founding director to a different owner-director.AdvertisementWilliams is still owned and operated by Frank Williams, who founded the team in 1977, although his daughter Claire has worked for several years as deputy team principal.McLaren was founded in 1963 by the owner-driver Bruce McLaren, a New Zealander who first raced in Formula One at the 1966 Monaco Grand Prix. The team went on to successfully weather two potentially destructive iterations of ownership.The first came when McLaren died in a racing accident in June 1970. A group of the team’s directors subsequently not only kept the team afloat, but they also went on to win world titles, with Emerson Fittipaldi in 1974 and James Hunt in 1976.The second challenge came when, after several seasons without a victory, the team passed into the ownership and direction of Ron Dennis at the end of 1980. At the impetus of Marlboro, McLaren’s sponsor, Dennis bought out the team and merged his Formula 3 team with McLaren, maintaining the Formula One team’s name and traditions.It would not be long before Dennis brought the team to victory in a style that would mark the next 35 years of his management. (Dennis still owns 75 percent of the McLaren company and is the chairman and chief executive officer.)In 1981, McLaren introduced the carbon-fiber chassis that would soon become the norm for the series.It was the beginning of a period of McLaren domination. First came Niki Lauda’s world title in 1984. At the end of the 1980s and the beginning of the 1990s, there followed six drivers’ titles between them for Alain Prost and Ayrton Senna. In 1988, the two drivers won all but one of the races.“I grew up watching McLaren racing in Formula One,” said the Spaniard Fernando Alonso, a two-time world champion who drives for the team today. “Those memories are part of who I am; they mark a point in my life that I’ll always remember fondly.”Advertisement“It’s hard to believe that the whole team in Monaco back in 1966 comprised only six people — including Bruce and his wife,” he added. “But it’s proof of how much you can grow and develop something with sheer passion and determination.”Today, the team that Dennis built has turned into the biggest company in Formula One behind Ferrari. It is now known as the McLaren Technology Group, and comprises the team, a technology company, a marketing company, a catering company and a manufacturer of luxury sports cars.The group has more than 3,000 employees. The team has grown from those six in the early days to nearly 1,000 today. In 2004, McLaren moved into a vast advanced industrial complex in Woking, England, designed by Norman Foster, one of the world’s leading architects.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.“Despite its roots in New Zealand, McLaren feels like the quintessential British Grand Prix team,” said the Briton Jenson Button, the team’s other current driver and also a world champion. “It’s been based in the U.K. for its entire lifetime — half a century — and has a set of values and sense of sporting fair-play unlike any other team in Formula One.”Those values were questioned in 2007, however, when the International Automobile Federation, the sport’s governing body, fined McLaren $100 million for possessing Ferrari design secrets.  »But it is also a sign of the team’s strength that McLaren returned the following year to win the drivers’ title with Lewis Hamilton driving. The team had groomed the series’ first mixed-race driver from boyhood through the various racing categories to his arrival in Formula One in 2007 at the age of 22.McLaren has not won a title since then, however, and, worse, it is Hamilton who has won the last two titles for the Mercedes team, which he joined after leaving McLaren in 2013.Since 1995, Mercedes provided McLaren with engines. With those engines, McLaren had also won world titles with Mika Hakkinen driving in 1998 and 1999. Mercedes was even part owner of the team for several years.McLaren split with Mercedes in 2014 and rejoined forces with Honda last year, when it dropped to ninth position out of 10 teams, its lowest level since 1967, when it had finished 10th. It looked like it might be the beginning of the end for this once great team, which had so dominated with Honda in the late 1980s and early 1990s.AdvertisementBut Honda’s return to the series came one season after the introduction of the new downsized turbo hybrid engines. The Japanese manufacturer was therefore behind the other engine manufacturers in terms of development.Now, however, after looking like it was on the verge of oblivion last year, McLaren Honda has begun to make a comeback. So far, there have been no podium finishes, but some observers are predicting that the team could challenge for victory, and even titles, much sooner than anyone might have thought.The McLaren car has performed better every race, although the power unit still has reliability problems. At the last two races, the McLaren drivers qualified in the top 10. Button notably started third on the grid in Austria last weekend — after qualifying fifth and having two cars ahead of his bumped back with penalties. The British driver finished in sixth position. Alonso, meanwhile, had finished fifth in Monaco and sixth in Russia.“We really got the maximum from everything,” Button said after the race in Austria. “Through every session, we’ve been improving; every run we’ve done, we made the car better and better.” »The team is now seventh in the standings, with 32 points, 4 points behind Toro Rosso in sixth.A statistical comparison of the team’s results this season compared to last season shows that McLaren has made the most progress of just about any team.Honda has made huge progress on the power unit this year, especially with the turbo and energy recovery systems, Yusuke Hasegawa, the director of the engine program, said in Austria last week.While the team does not expect the race on Sunday at Silverstone to be one of its best, Eric Boullier, the racing director, said there was no doubt that McLaren is returning home with its head high.“We head to our home race under no illusions that the fast sweeps and long straights of Silverstone will play to the strengths of our car,” he said. “But, equally, we go there feeling hugely encouraged by the ongoing improvements we continue to show.”A version of this special report appears in print on July 9, 2016, in The International New York Times.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.See More »