
On Baseball By                     
 TYLER KEPNER
 
OCT. 22, 2016
CHICAGO — The win total has risen steadily, from 61 to 66 to 73 to 97 to 103, more and more doses of sunlight for fans used to gloom. Theo Epstein, the architect of the Chicago Cubs, has come to the end of his fifth season here with baseball alive in the crisp autumn air.“Walking the dog, walking around town — people are very into it, as they should be,” Epstein said during batting practice at Wrigley Field on Saturday. “I love being in a city that’s playing October baseball, where you can just feel everyone captivated by the ball club, everyone walking around tired from staying up late, prioritizing baseball above all else. It’s a great phenomenon.”As the Cubs chase their first World Series title since 1908 — they clinched their first berth in 71 years on Saturday night by defeating the Los Angeles Dodgers in Game 6 of the National League Championship Series — Epstein’s trades have stocked the roster with impact players.He turned Andrew Cashner into Anthony Rizzo; Jeff Samardzija and Jason Hammel into Addison Russell; Scott Feldman into Jake Arrieta; Ryan Dempster into Kyle Hendricks; Luis Valbuena into Dexter Fowler. Winning deals has translated to winning games.Advertisement“It’s best not to think about winning or losing trades anyway, because the best ones work out for both teams,” Epstein said. “But, as a rule, if you’re the team that’s selling — if you’re out of it and you’re trading with a team that’s in it — you usually have the pick of just about their whole farm system, with a few exclusions. You should hit on the guys that you get back.”AdvertisementThe Cubs’ deals were so successful that even lesser names they acquired helped sweeten trade packages later. In the Russell deal with Oakland, in July 2014, the Cubs also acquired pitcher Dan Straily and the outfield prospect Billy McKinney. Straily went to Houston in the January 2015 Fowler trade, and McKinney to the Yankees in the Aroldis Chapman deal this past July.Hendricks, who came from Texas in 2012, and Arrieta, who came from Baltimore a year later, make up half of the Cubs’ playoff rotation. Rizzo, the first baseman, has teamed with third baseman Kris Bryant for one of baseball’s best middle-of-the-order duos.In Rizzo’s case, Epstein and his lieutenants reacquired a player they had drafted for the Boston Red Sox in the sixth round in 2007. Rizzo made a strong impression, on and off the field, fighting and overcoming Hodgkin’s lymphoma, then thriving as a hitter in the minors.Even so, the Red Sox dealt Rizzo to the San Diego Padres in December 2010 as the centerpiece of a trade for Adrian Gonzalez. Rushed to the majors the next season, Rizzo batted .141 with one homer in 49 games.Get the big sports news, highlights and analysis from Times journalists, with distinctive takes on games and some behind-the-scenes surprises, delivered to your inbox every week.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.Yet the more significant development, for Rizzo’s future, was happening in Boston, where the Red Sox collapsed down the stretch and fumbled away a playoff spot. That helped usher Epstein out of Boston and to Chicago, where he became president for baseball operations.Epstein hired Jed Hoyer, his former assistant, from San Diego to be his general manager. Jason McLeod, another former Red Sox executive, also left the Padres to join the Cubs. Reacquiring Rizzo became a priority.“When we made the trade for him in San Diego,” McLeod, now the Cubs’ senior vice president for scouting and player development, said this spring, “having intimate knowledge of who he is as a person, on top of what we felt he was going to be as a player, played a huge role.”AdvertisementMcLeod added: “When we all came here and talked about making the trade again, we had more information to provide Theo about how he’s been in San Diego, how he dealt with the struggles at the major league level, how so much was put on him when he came up. It was tough, but he fought through it and handled it great for a kid who was 21, 22 at the time.”Even so, the audition had been so bad that Hoyer raised questions about Rizzo’s swing as the Cubs considered making the deal. Epstein urged Hoyer to remember the player Rizzo had been in the Boston farm system. He was a force then, and Epstein was convinced he would be a force in Chicago.In January 2012, the Padres — who had just acquired another young first baseman, the since-departed Yonder Alonso — swapped Rizzo to the Cubs for Cashner and an outfield prospect, Kyung-Min Na, who never reached the majors. Cashner went 28-43 with a 3.67 E.R.A. over four and a half seasons with the Padres, who traded him to Miami in July.Since the arrival of Manager Joe Maddon in October 2014, most of the Cubs’ important acquisitions — Jon Lester, John Lackey, Ben Zobrist — have come through free agency. But Maddon has been impressed by the attention to character, as well as statistics, that helped drive trades like Rizzo’s.“I think sometimes in the game today, it gets to the point where it’s just about acquiring a number,” Maddon said. “I’m a big believer in that, but I also like the balance between the person and what the back of his baseball card says. Our guys do a wonderful job of balancing the math with the actual person.”The Cubs also made the most of their high draft picks, taking Bryant second over all in 2013 — after the Astros chose pitcher Mark Appel, who has not reached the majors — and Kyle Schwarber with the fourth pick in 2014. Schwarber, who tore knee ligaments in April, reported to the Arizona Fall League on Saturday in hope of being activated for the World Series.These Cubs have gotten here without Schwarber, and despite feeble offense by right fielder Jason Heyward, a $184 million free agent. But they have made enough wise moves to become the strongest team in the game.“We’ve made plenty of mistakes,” Epstein said. “But the ones that we’ve hit on, we’ve gotten lucky with some impact guys back, some best-case scenarios as far as how the guys have turned out. We knew we didn’t have a chance to rebuild twice in a market like this.”A version of this article appears in print on October 23, 2016, on Page SP2 of the New York edition with the headline: Epstein’s Moves Fortify the Cubs With Impact Players.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.See More »