By MATT GILESMARCH 12, 2016
When Chris Flemmings was choosing a college in May 2012, there weren’t many programs interested in a 6-foot-5, 160-pound swingman. It wasn’t that Flemmings was a nobody — he had scored nearly 500 points during his senior season — but both his high school and A.A.U. teams were too far off the radar to attract attention.“Unless you knew a student, most people in the state didn’t even know about my school,” he said.But Barton College, a Division II program an hour east of his hometown, Cary, N.C., liked his athleticism and versatility. Flemmings became a small-college star at Barton, earning two all-league selections and winning his conference’s player of the year award in 2014. That success brought a second chance.“I had planned to stay at Barton all four years,” Flemmings said, “but by the end of my sophomore year, I thought I should take a chance to play at a higher level.”AdvertisementHe chose U.N.C.-Wilmington, a college his mother had visited on a business trip and one that had just hired a coach whose preferred style of play seemed a good match for his game. The switch worked: Two years after walking on to the team, Flemmings made 37 percent of his 3-point attempts and led U.N.C.-Wilmington in scoring. Last week, he helped the Seahawks, the Colonial Athletic Association champion, lock up a spot in the N.C.A.A. tournament.There are no official records for how many players have up-transferred, or moved up a level of play, but this season there are at least a dozen former Division II and III players sitting out mandatory redshirt years or taking the court for Division I teams.Michigan’s Duncan Robinson, a former Williams College star, is the most prominent, but there are also notable up-transfers at Maryland (Varun Ram), Hofstra (Hunter Sabety) and Arkansas-Little Rock (Thomas Brandsma). Some players transferred for family reasons (Ryan Majerle now plays for his father, Dan, at Arizona’s Grand Canyon University), others for a bump in competition (Dylan Sinnickson, now a reserve at Vermont, formerly led Middlebury in scoring) and, potentially, the chance to attract the eyes of professional scouts.“I know how good shooters are coming from Division III, having coached a few of them,” said Wisconsin Coach Greg Gard, who won three Division III titles in six years as an assistant at Wisconsin-Platteville. “You do not want H-O-R-S-E with someone who has played in Division III.”The players’ numbers and their successes in Division I have varied, but their departures have unquestionably weakened the teams they left behind.AdvertisementWhile moving up a level or two midcareer remains a tricky decision for players and coaches, the shrinking talent gap between divisions is governed by restrictions that regulate such transfers. Coaches cannot contact a player until he secures a release from his current college, and even then, they are dependent on video and the word of fellow coaches, as they are not allowed to scout Division II or Division III players in person.The best up-transfers provide a scoring boost, or valuable contributions off the bench, or — in the best cases — much more. Flemmings and Winthrop’s Jimmy Gavin, a graduate transfer from Division II who averaged 19 points for a team that lost in the Big South tournament final, were all-conference players this season.“There are dozens of players that could play at the D-I level and be all-league caliber,” Winthrop Coach Pat Kelsey said, “but if I was a D-II coach, I would hate it.”Two years ago, George Washington Coach Mike Lonergan heard rumblings that Matt Hart, who was averaging more than 20 points a game for Division III Hamilton College in upstate New York, was contemplating a transfer after his sophomore season. After checking out Hart with friends in New England who had seen him play, he offered him a spot on his team.“I thought about getting a walk-on who, even if he never played, would help us in practice,” Lonergan said. “I had nothing to lose.”Get the big sports news, highlights and analysis from Times journalists, with distinctive takes on games and some behind-the-scenes surprises, delivered to your inbox every week.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.Lonergan, who won a Division III national title at Catholic University, said he did not think there would be a flood of divisional up-transfers — “The jump requires a level of athleticism that most of these kids don’t have,” he said — and that logic is shared by Linc Darner, the coach at Green Bay, who won the Division II national championship at Florida Southern a year ago.“I think there will have to be more than a few having success before head coaches start telling their assistants to beat down the doors of D-II and D-III teams,” Darner said.Those opinions are small consolation for coaches like Jeff Culver of the University of Colorado-Colorado Springs, who lost his best player — Derrick White, a Division II all-American and elite-level scorer — to Colorado last spring.Advertisement“Derrick had no other offers out of high school,” Culver said. “He was totally overlooked, and we thought he had a high ceiling.”Culver knew White wanted to play professionally, and the coach was in communication with, and sending video to, a half-dozen executives and scouts for N.B.A. teams.“We wanted to show Derrick that the N.B.A. will find you regardless of where you play,” Culver said. “We recruited and developed Derrick, and felt we could have gotten him ready for the N.B.A., but he thought the Pac-12 was better suited from a practice and competition perspective.”He added: “I hope it is not a trend. If more and more D-II and D-III guys leave, it makes it that much tougher to manage and maintain your roster.”A version of this article appears in print on March 13, 2016, on Page SP4 of the New York edition with the headline: Taking Their Game to the Highest Level.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.