By ROBERT WEINTRAUBMARCH 11, 2016
NASHVILLE — College basketball’s most talented player stood near the free-throw line with his mouthguard sticking out. He appeared listless as his Louisiana State teammates passed the ball around the perimeter. Then, in a single fluid motion, he shoved the mouthpiece into position and rolled off his defender to the basket and soared for a powerful alley-oop dunk.Ben Simmons, the dynamic 18-year-old freshman forward, can make the game look so easy he barely seems to be trying sometimes, even as he fiddles with opponents and his equipment simultaneously.In Friday’s Southeastern Conference tournament quarterfinal game against Tennessee, Simmons took a seat on the bench after committing his second foul not five minutes into the game.“It was frustrating to sit, but it made sense,” he said.Yet he cruised to 15 points and 8 rebounds in 25 minutes, while repeatedly drawing the Volunteers’ defense inside, allowing L.S.U.’s guards to rain open jumpers from the outside.AdvertisementL.S.U. won, 84-75, over an undersize Tennessee team (15-19) playing its third game in three days. The victory did nothing to solve college basketball’s biggest mystery: why a team that features such a special talent is otherwise so pedestrian.L.S.U.’s long-shot hopes for an N.C.A.A. tournament berth remain alive, if barely. Unless the Tigers (19-13) receive the automatic berth that comes with winning the conference tournament, Coach Johnny Jones’s team will miss out on the tournament. (L.S.U. faces top-seeded and 17th-ranked Texas A&M (25-7) in a semifinal on Saturday.)Simmons has had a statistically terrific season, averaging nearly 20 points, 12 rebounds and 5 assists per game, confirming the preseason buzz that hovered around him. Raised in Melbourne, Australia, and playing high school ball in Florida, Simmons has a diverse game that has been compared to those of Magic Johnson and LeBron James.Johnson himself took to Twitter to announce “LSU’s Ben Simmons is the best all-around player I’ve seen since LeBron James came out of high school to the NBA!”Billy Kennedy, the Texas A&M coach, said: “It’s rare that a guy 6-foot-10 and 250 pounds or so can come at you full speed and make a play either for himself or one of his teammates. He’s a problem because not only is he so talented, but he does such a good job keeping everyone else involved.”AdvertisementJones’s coaching acumen has come under a heavy barrage of criticism for his team’s record despite the presence of such an unselfish star. When asked about it, he laughingly responded, “Who says that?” before adding, “I’m not sure about all the talent we have. I try not to get caught up in that. I do know about the talent our opponents have, and the bunch of great guys I coach against in this league. That’s my concern.”Underachievement is something of an L.S.U. tradition when great players don the purple and gold. Simmons played his home games in the Pete Maravich Assembly Center, named for the floppy-haired scoring sensation who averaged 44.2 points per game in his career. But his teams never made the N.C.A.A. tournament (though the field was far smaller in Pistol Pete’s day). A generation later, the Tigers fielded teams featuring the all-Americans Chris Jackson (the future Mahmoud Abdul-Rauf) and Shaquille O’Neal between 1988 and 1992, but managed only two tournament wins.L.S.U.’s lone senior of consequence, Keith Hornsby, has battled injuries all season. The rest of the Tigers, including another highly touted freshman, Antonio Blakeney, and the junior guard Tim Quarterman (they combined for 40 points against Tennessee), have been inconsistent.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.“They’re playing a team of freshmen and sophomores,” Kennedy said, “and sometimes that’s not a question of talent. You’re talking egos and attitudes. Immaturity is the hardest thing to overcome.”Simmons, too, has not always risen to the occasion, especially late in games. As the clock ticked down in closely watched games against North Carolina State in December and against Oklahoma in late January, Simmons did not demand the ball and take the decisive shots.“The disappointment with him comes in specific moments, not in total production,” the ESPN analyst Sean Farnham said.L.S.U.’s struggles may hinder future obvious one-and-done players. Simmons’s godfather, David Patrick, is an L.S.U. assistant coach, helping to explain why Simmons is a Tiger.Simmons began the season as the presumptive first selection in the N.B.A. draft, but Duke’s Brandon Ingram has closed the gap in recent weeks, as worries about Simmons’s jump shooting and passivity have dogged his season, despite his eye-popping numbers.The N.B.A. seems less concerned with his unfamiliarity with Baton Rouge classrooms. Simmons was benched for the first few minutes of L.S.U.’s loss at Tennessee on Feb. 20. At the time Jones gave the reason as “academic stuff.”Advertisement“He’s 18, and knows that even before he touches an N.B.A. floor next year he’s going to have a $100 million shoe contract,” Farnham said. “Are you really going to care about oceanography?”Simmons’s failure to muster a 2.0 grade point average in the fall semester took him out of the running for the Wooden Award, college basketball’s version of the Heisman Trophy. More viscerally, Simmons’s poor grades opened the door for opposing fans. When L.S.U. played at Kentucky last Saturday, Simmons was met by loud chants of “G-P-A! G-P-A!”A less modest and mature player might have shouted back “A-T-M” but Simmons refrained.Late Friday afternoon, after assuring he will play at least one more collegiate game of consequence, Simmons slipped off down the Bridgestone Arena hallway, camouflage backpack over his black warm-ups, his lone companion a single security guard.Soon enough, he will have much larger crowds around him. And far more pressure to lift his team above mediocrity.A version of this article appears in print on March 12, 2016, on Page D6 of the New York edition with the headline: Simmons, a Top Big Man, May Find an N.C.A.A. Berth Is Out of Reach.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.