

 Benjamin Hoffman
 

KEEPING SCORE
MARCH 12, 2016
It was easy to underestimate Chris Bosh when he joined the Miami Heat at the dawn of the Big Three era. LeBron James was considered the best player in the game, and Dwyane Wade was the Heat’s incumbent superstar, with one title already under his belt. Bosh seemed like a somewhat lower-grade star.To be labeled less than James or Wade is hardly an insult, but to some casual observers, Bosh did not deserve a place next to his famous friends despite having been named to five consecutive All-Star Games as a dominant power forward for the Toronto Raptors.Now in his sixth season in Miami, and working his way back from a second consecutive season marred by a health scare, Bosh has emerged as that rare star who truly believes he would do anything to win.Bosh has served in numerous roles for the Heat, and this season extended his streak to 11 consecutive All-Star selections.AdvertisementInitially, he was willing to take fewer shots to open the offense for James and Wade. Later, to increase the team’s speed, he moved from power forward to center, helping to create the small-ball revolution that has become ubiquitous in the league. Bosh transitioned back to being a No. 1 option on offense when James left as a free agent and health problems forced Wade to step back.With Hassan Whiteside developing into a dominant center in his absence last season, Bosh was again willing to change positions, moving back to power forward this year.AdvertisementWith 17 games left in the regular season heading into the weekend, Bosh, who has dealt with blood clots, says he is healthy enough for basketball-related activities. This presents the Heat, who have been playing well without him, with a conundrum: They recognize Bosh’s value but do not want to jeopardize his health or the team’s success.“I have been working out, training with the team, watching film of the games, walking through plays and have attended home games despite not being visible to the public,” Bosh said in a statement released by his public relations firm on Thursday. “I remain positive that I will be able to return this season.”There is little doubt that a healthy Bosh is one of the Heat’s best players, and if they expect to make a deep playoff run, then a battle-tested power forward with two N.B.A. championship rings and an Olympic gold medal would certainly be an asset. However, it will very likely take some time to work him into the style of play that the Heat developed while he was out.Relying mostly on defensive efficiency to succeed with Bosh, the Heat had gone 9-3 without him entering the weekend, and the offense had been reborn. They had scored nearly 7 more points per 100 possessions, and their defense had improved its efficiency despite a pace that had increased to 99.9 possessions per 48 minutes, as compared with the 94.67 they averaged with Bosh.
            Get the latest tweets from @NYTSports, including breaking news, analysis and live updates.        A big part of the surge has been the continued development of Whiteside. Considered a box-score darling by critics who claim his ability to rack up statistics does not translate to his making a basketball team better, he has made the most of his opportunities in the absence of Bosh.Whiteside, 26, was looking like a journeyman before breaking out last season. A devastating shot-blocker and a terrific rebounder, his game has gone to another level recently. He had played in 11 of the 12 games Bosh has missed entering the weekend, and though his playing time had not increased drastically, he had gone from scoring 12.2 points a game next to Bosh to 18 without him. He had a similar increase in rebounding, averaging 15.1 a game from 11. His offensive and defensive ratings, which are estimates of how many points he scores and allows per 100 possessions, had both improved considerably.AdvertisementWhiteside has had plenty of help, with Wade, Goran Dragic and Luol Deng all playing well in the 12-game stretch. And recently, the team has gotten an unexpectedly strong contribution from Joe Johnson, a seven-time All-Star who has looked rejuvenated since negotiating his release from the Nets. Johnson was scoring 13.7 points a game while shooting 58.2 percentfrom the field with the Heat.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.Interestingly, Coach Erik Spoelstra has been using a starting lineup that eschews the traditional positions. With Wade, Dragic, Deng, Johnson and Amar’e Stoudemire, the Heat’s lineup consists of two combo guards, two small forwards and a power forward. Whiteside, despite his gaudy statistics, has been coming off the bench.The obvious solution would be to replace Stoudemire in the starting lineup with Bosh and leave Whiteside’s role as is, but it remains to be seen if Bosh will have a limited role until the team better understands his condition.Worrying about where Bosh fits in the lineup is the kind of problem any team would be happy to have, but if he is cleared to play, it will not be a surprise for the Heat’s rhythm to falter some as he finds his way in the new-look offense. But they can rest assured that if Miami needs him to change the way he is doing things, he will do it without complaint. He has been doing that for them since Day 1.A version of this article appears in print on March 13, 2016, on Page SP6 of the New York edition with the headline: Bosh’s Return Gives the Heat an Enviable Puzzle .  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.See More »