
On Horse Racing By                     
 JOE DRAPE
 
MAY 24, 2016
No one should be surprised that Doug O’Neill, the trainer of the Kentucky Derby winner Nyquist, has decided against sending his colt to New York for the 148th running of the Belmont Stakes. Nyquist had been fighting a fever and an elevated white blood cell count since being vanquished by a familiar rival named Exaggerator on Saturday in a cold, muddy renewal of the Preakness Stakes in Baltimore.The colt’s illness appeared to be routine and easily treatable with antibiotics. If a Triple Crown were at stake, O’Neill and the owner J. Paul Reddam might have been more reluctant to cancel their Belmont trip.Jack Sisterson, O’Neill’s assistant, who is in Baltimore with Nyquist, said, “Doug wants to do what’s best for Nyquist: get him back to 100 percent healthwise and get him back to California.”As fun as a rematch might have been to watch, there would be little reward in risking Nyquist’s health when there will be multiple opportunities down the road to tangle with Exaggerator again for rich purses and under better circumstances. The Belmont is the race to end all races when a Triple Crown hangs in the balance, but it is also a grueling, mile-and-a-half marathon that requires stamina and grit.AdvertisementNyquist showed both in Kentucky, and he fought back gamely in the stretch at the Preakness before falling behind Exaggerator and the second-place finisher, Cherry Wine. No shame there — it was Nyquist’s first defeat in nine starts.AdvertisementNow, however, he is clearly a tired colt, and there was no reason to put him in position to lose again.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.Nyquist’s stallion rights were sold last fall to Darley America, Sheikh Mohammed bin Rashid al-Maktoum’s breeding operation in this country, for $8 million to $12 million, with bonuses for wins in future races. The gamble by the sheikh, who rules Dubai in the United Arab Emirates, paid off nicely when Nyquist was named 2-year-old champion, and the sheikh was amply rewarded when the colt became the Kentucky Derby champion.In the breeding shed, a victory in the Travers Stakes in August at Saratoga and a triumph in the Breeders’ Cup Classic in November would be far more valuable than a Belmont win. Nyquist has already earned $5.1 million in purses, as well as a $1 million bonus for winning the Florida Derby.The Belmont’s $900,000 first-place check is nothing to sneeze at, but a rested Nyquist could make that up easily at the Haskell Invitational and the Travers.The absence of Nyquist does leave New York Racing Association officials scrambling. Exaggerator is now the headliner, which is not terrible, but the colt lost to Nyquist in four previous races. Cherry Wine was probable for the Belmont, but what little star power the race had left grew dimmer when the trainer Steve Asmussen said his colt Gun Runner, who finished third in the Derby, would skip the race and resume his campaign this summer.“We’re sorry that Nyquist cannot compete at the 2016 Belmont Stakes and hope for a speedy recovery and return to the racetrack,” said Chris Kay, NYRA’s chief executive. “The greatest racing fans in the world are right here in New York and would love to see Nyquist running later this spring at Belmont Park and this summer at Saratoga Race Course.”A version of this article appears in print on May 25, 2016, on Page B12 of the New York edition with the headline: An Understandable Absence for Nyquist.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.See More »