AdvertisementSupported byBy Ken BelsonBubba Smith, an All-Pro defensive end in the N.F.L. who went on to a second career as a movie actor, had chronic traumatic encephalopathy, the degenerative brain disease linked to repeated head trauma, when he died in 2011.The findings were confirmed by researchers affiliated with the Department of Veterans Affairs, Boston University and the Concussion Legacy Foundation, and released on Tuesday morning with the permission of the executor of Smith’s estate.Smith is the 90th former N.F.L. player found to have had C.T.E. by the researchers at the Boston University brain bank; they have examined 94 former pro players. On a scale of 1 to 4 used by the neuropathologist who examined Smith’s brain, Smith had Stage 3 C.T.E., with symptoms that included cognitive impairment and problems with judgment and planning.Some scientists caution that much remains unknown about C.T.E., including why it afflicts some players but not others. But even the N.F.L., which for years denied there was any connection between head trauma sustained on the field and long-term cognitive impairment, has admitted that there is a link.Smith, whose given name was Charles, died at age 66 of an overdose of phentermine, a weight-loss drug. He also had heart disease and high blood pressure, according to the Los Angeles County coroner.At 6 feet 7 inches and nearly 300 pounds, Smith was known as a quick and powerful lineman. During a standout career at Michigan State, where he was named an all-American in 1965 and 1966, Smith’s size and prowess gave rise to the chant “Kill, Bubba, Kill,” which emanated frequently from the stands. (He later co-wrote a book with that title.)Smith was chosen as the No. 1 overall pick in the 1967 draft by the Baltimore Colts. He was a member of the teams that lost Super Bowl III to the Jets and beat the Dallas Cowboys in Super Bowl V. After five seasons in Baltimore, Smith played two seasons with the Oakland Raiders and two seasons in Houston with the Oilers.Chronic traumatic encephalopathy, a degenerative brain disease, has been found in dozens of former N.F.L. players. Here are some of the most notable cases, along with New York Times coverage.After Smith retired following the 1976 season, he used his size and fame to build a second career in film and television. He was best known for his role as Moses Hightower, the mild-mannered florist-turned-lawman in the film comedy “Police Academy” (1984) and many of its sequels.He appeared on many shows, including “Good Times,” “Charlie’s Angels,” “Semi-Tough,” “Hart to Hart,” “Married With Children” and “Family Matters.” He was also seen in a well-known series of Miller Lite commercials — “Tastes Great; Less Filling” — in the 1970s and ’80s.Smith joins dozens of notable N.F.L. players found to have had C.T.E., including Junior Seau, Frank Gifford and Ken Stabler, Smith’s teammate on the Raiders.The growing list of players found with C.T.E. has prompted other players to agree to donate their brains to C.T.E. research. The former Oakland Raiders George Atkinson, Phil Villapiano, George Buehler and Art Thoms — all teammates of Stabler’s and Smith’s — have pledged their brains to the Concussion Legacy Foundation.Advertisement