By FRANK LITSKYJAN. 15, 2016
Dr. Dave Sime, who passed up baseball and football careers to become the world’s fastest sprinter but who never won the Olympic gold medal he coveted, a victim of hard luck and the unforgiving rules of track and field, died on Wednesday in Miami Beach. He was 79.The cause was a heart attack, his son, Scott, said.Dr. Sime (pronounced sim) was a sought-after ophthalmologist in the Miami area for 42 years, counting among his patients President Richard M. Nixon and the sports stars Ted Williams, Mickey Mantle, Bob Griese and Sugar Ray Leonard.He might have been numbered among them had he chosen a different path. He was such an outstanding athlete in high school that he passed up 23 football scholarship offers and was said to have turned down a $65,000 offer from the New York Giants baseball team.He chose running instead, and later medical school. He achieved his greatest athletic renown in the mid-1950s, when he broke or tied five world records outdoors and four indoors in the sprints and low hurdles.AdvertisementA tall, rangy redhead at 6 feet 2 ½ inches and 179 pounds, Sime was so dominant a runner that he seemed, as the columnist Arthur Daley wrote in The New York Times, “a lead pipe cinch to win at least one and perhaps three gold medals at Melbourne” in the 1956 Olympics.AdvertisementBut he never got there. Weeks before the United States Olympic track and field trials, he pulled a groin muscle horseback riding — his first time on a horse. He soon aggravated the muscle and eventually tore it, ending his Olympic dream that year.Sime made it to the 1960 Games in Rome, however, by then as a 24-year-old second-year student at Duke University School of Medicine. And he reached the final in the 100-meter dash. But he had a wobbly start. He “left the starting block like a drunk on roller skates,” Sports Illustrated wrote.He rallied, bore down on the finish line and, neck and neck with Armin Hary of Germany, was the first to cross it — with his foot. But the rules say that only the torso counts, and Hary’s, with chest out, got there first.Mr. Daley, writing in The Times, said Sime had dived for the tape “a split second too soon.”Both runners were hand-timed in 10.2 seconds, an Olympic record. The photo-finish timer, not yet recognized for timing, caught Hary in 10.32 seconds and Sime in 10.35. The difference was perhaps an inch.The silver medal was little consolation to Sime. “You move on,” he said. “You get over it.” Besides, he was expected to win a gold medal a week later anchoring the United States team in the 4x100-meter relay.In that final he received the baton in second place, surged to the front and finished first in 39.4 seconds, an apparent world record. But again he was thwarted. Because his team’s first baton pass was made outside the 20-meter passing zone, the Americans were disqualified.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.David William Sime was born on July 25, 1936, in Paterson, N.J., and grew up in adjacent Fair Lawn. He went to Duke on a baseball scholarship, played one year as a center fielder and batted .432. His speed was readily apparent. “Here at last is the player who can steal first base,” The Times exclaimed.He played one year of football at Duke as a lonesome end, lining up 15 yards from the nearest teammate. His first game was against Notre Dame, and on the first play of Duke’s first possession, he caught a touchdown pass. On the first play of Duke’s next possession, he caught another touchdown pass. The Detroit Lions drafted him, but that season was his last in football.AdvertisementSime started his track career as a sophomore at Duke when the track coach saw his speed in baseball. At a time when the world record for 100 yards was 9.3 seconds, he ran 9.8 in his first practice and 9.6 in his first meet. A career was born.There was another side of Sime. David Maraniss, in his book “Rome 1960: The Olympic Games That Changed the World” (2008), wrote that just before the 1960 Games, the C.I.A. recruited Sime to entice the Soviet long jumper Igor Ter-Ovanesyan, a friend, to defect to the United States. Sime introduced him to a C.I.A. agent, but Ter-Ovanesyan, afraid of a trick, stayed put.The 1960 Olympics ended Sime’s serious track career. In later years, he jogged two or three miles a day and took up golf, tennis, in-line skating and hiking. Three times he fought off cancer. In 1981, he was elected to the National Track and Field Hall of Fame.At 35, as a lark, he ran a 100-yard race in a Miami meet, mistakenly thinking it was a Masters track and field event for those over 30. He clocked 9.6 seconds on a cement surface. “It was probably the first track meet I ever enjoyed,” he told The Times.Dr. Sime lived near Miami Beach in Surfside, Fla., and also had a home in North Carolina. Besides his son, Scott, from a previous marriage, he is survived by his wife, Illeana Sime; two other children from his first marriage, Sherrie Giusto and Lisa McCaffrey, who is married to the former pro football player Ed McCaffrey; a stepson, Silvio; a stepdaughter, Racquel; one step-granddaughter; and eight grandchildren, including the 2015 Heisman Trophy finalist Christian McCaffrey of Stanford.Scott Sime, interviewed by The Record in Bergen County, N.J., in 2012, called his father “a guy who has lived his life with the accelerator touching the floor.”For all his Olympics frustration, Dr. Sime, a modest man, preferred to look at his good fortune.“I was very highly motivated, and I was in the right place at the right time,” he told an interviewer. “I worked hard, but a lot of people work hard. There are a lot of Einsteins driving taxicabs.”Daniel E. Slotnik contributed reporting.A version of this article appears in print on January 16, 2016, on Page D8 of the New York edition with the headline: Dave Sime Is Dead at 79; World’s Fastest Sprinter, but Far From Its Luckiest.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.