AdvertisementSupported byBy Andrew DasNew York teams claimed two playoff byes and the league scoring title on Sunday in a furious finish to the M.L.S. regular season.With all 20 teams kicking off simultaneously on Sunday afternoon, the visiting Red Bulls defeated the Philadelphia Union, 2-0, to lock up first place in the Eastern Conference. New York City F.C. also claimed a first-round bye by virtue of its 4-1 win over the visiting Columbus Crew.The Red Bulls and New York City F.C. will play the winners of two midweek knockout-round games — Toronto F.C. against Philadelphia on Wednesday, and D.C. United against Montreal on Thursday — in the conference semifinals, with the Red Bulls playing the lowest seed remaining, and New York City F.C. playing the other.The winners from the knockout round will host the first game of the conference semifinals on Sunday, with the second legs scheduled for Red Bull Arena and Yankee Stadium on Nov. 6.The playoff berth is the first for New York City F.C., which tumbled out of playoff contention last year at the end of its inaugural season. That fade cost Coach Jason Kreis his job, but his replacement, Patrick Vieira, and his team finished strong.The Red Bulls, though, have been even better. After a 1-6 start to the season, they have been among the league’s best teams. Since July, in fact, they have been unbeatable: The Red Bulls’ last defeat was a 2-0 loss to N.Y.C.F.C. on July 3, a run of 16 games — nine wins and seven ties — that they will now carry into the playoffs.The Red Bulls’ other prize Sunday was an individual one, as forward Bradley Wright-Phillips edged New York City F.C.’s David Villa to win the league’s scoring title for the second time in three years. Wright-Phillips had 24 goals, one more than Villa and three short of the 27 he scored when he led the league in 2014.F.C. Dallas held off the Colorado Rapids to win the Supporters’ Shield as the league’s regular-season champion when each team tied on the final day, but Dallas may come to regret it. While the honor was once a fair predictor of postseason success — four of the first seven teams to claim the Shield went on to lift the trophy at the end of the playoffs — in recent years, it has morphed into a poisoned prize.Since 2003, only two regular-season champions have gone on to win the league’s title game, the M.L.S. Cup final. In fact, those two teams — Columbus in 2008 and the Los Angeles Galaxy in 2011 — also were the only two Shield winners to even advance to the Cup final in the past dozen years.But it could always be worse: Last season’s M.L.S. Cup finalists, Columbus and the Portland Timbers, both missed the postseason this year.Dallas and Colorado clinched the byes in the Western Conference. In the knockout round, Los Angeles will host Real Salt Lake on Wednesday, and the Seattle Sounders will host Sporting Kansas City on Thursday.Advertisement