By GARY SANTANIELLOMARCH 11, 2016
Boston College center Alex Carpenter is at the pinnacle of women’s hockey.An Olympic medalist, she is the best player on the top-ranked Division I team, which finished the regular season undefeated and claimed the Hockey East tournament Sunday.She is the reigning Patty Kazmaier Award winner as the best women’s player in Division I, and one of three finalists for this year’s honor.But there is a collegiate summit she is still seeking: Boston College’s first national championship in women’s hockey. In the 15-year history of the women’s tournament, a team from New England has never won.Carpenter’s last chance to reach that goal begins Saturday against Northeastern. A victory would propel Boston College into the Frozen Four the next weekend in Durham, N.H., about 90 minutes north of the campus.AdvertisementCarp, as teammates have called her since she played Mite B hockey as a child, assisted on the first goal and scored the second and third goals in the Eagles’ 5-0 victory in the Hockey East championship game Sunday. The three plays were a sampler of her exquisite skills: a deft pass, a one-timer into a top corner, and a backhand rebound of her own shot from an impossible angle.Advertisement“It’s kind of hard sometimes when you’re mesmerized by what she’s doing on the ice,” the senior defenseman Kaliya Johnson said. “She’s so talented.”Goalie Katie Burt, a sophomore who has 13 shutouts this year, laughed while describing Carpenter’s scoring skill, citing a practice when she believed her only vulnerability was a tiny spot above her right shoulder. “She hit that spot against me three times in a row,” Burt said. “Some of the stuff she does is just crazy.”Carpenter has led Boston College in goals each year since she was a freshman, but then, scoring is in her DNA. She is the oldest child of Julie and Bobby Carpenter. His 18-year N.H.L. career included a Stanley Cup in 1995 with the Devils and two more as a Devils coach. In 1985, her father was the first American to score more than 50 goals in an N.H.L. season, when he played for the Washington Capitals.And her brother Bobo Carpenter, a 19-year-old freshman at Boston University, is an N.H.L. prospect.Carpenter’s value to Boston College, though, goes far beyond the stat sheet. She kills penalties, defends passionately and exploits the attention paid to her by setting up teammates.Maine Coach Richard Reichenbach, whose team lost to the Eagles in the quarterfinals of the conference tournament, called her “one of the most complete players we’ve played against.“She really can do everything,” he said. “I’ll be glad when she graduates.”Carpenter’s earliest hockey memories date to when she was 5 or 6, learning the sport in a backyard rink her father constructed in Albany, site of his first post-N.H.L. job. Julie Carpenter said her daughter, in her first organized game, scored seven goals for Bethlehem Red, a boys’ team.Carpenter grew up going to Montessori schools, and in effect she skipped the eighth grade because she was academically advanced. She arrived at the Governor’s Academy, north of Boston, at 13.AdvertisementShe registered 239 goals in 100 games for a team that won four New England championships.“She was a real student of hockey, and worked hard to develop all the skills she needed,” said her prep school coach, Babe Ceglarski, the son of Len Ceglarski, a longtime former Boston College men’s coach.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.That extended to defense, where she made a significant contribution to the team.“When she developed into a real good defensive player,” Ceglarski said, “the rest of the team bought into it, too.”When Carpenter arrived at Boston College at 17, the Eagles were coming off a Frozen Four appearance. Always conscientious and intensely competitive — “She got that from her father,” Julie said — Carpenter said she found the transition from prep school challenging, despite her on-ice success.“I don’t think I cracked too many smiles freshman year,” she said.After her sophomore season, she took a leave of absence to play in the Winter Olympics in Sochi, Russia, where she was the American squad’s second-youngest player. What she learned from her older teammates was that even at the highest levels, enjoying the experience was as important as the competition.“I saw veteran players having fun with each other, and seeing that was a good thing,” she said. “I realized I didn’t have to be so uptight.”Now, as a senior and a captain, Carpenter has even more to offer her teammates.“She’s a jokester,” said Boston College Coach Katie Crowley, a three-time Olympian and a gold medal winner in Nagano, Japan, in 1998. “She’s always pulling pranks and teasing other players. And it works so well because no one ever expects it to come from her.”Her teammates Johnson and Burt cackled to each other recalling the time this year when Carpenter hid a susceptible teammate’s gloves in that player’s equipment bag as they were heading off-campus to practice.“She’s definitely lightened up a lot,” Johnson said. “I think she’s realized she can have fun with the sport and still be an intense player.”What also endears Carpenter to teammates is her eagerness to work with them after practice on specific skills, particularly freshmen.Advertisement“She’s a special player and a special person,” Crowley said.Carpenter’s immediate focus is helping Boston College win its first women’s title and complete a 41-0-0 season. The five-time champion Minnesota is the only other team to complete a perfect season, in 2013.A little more than a week after the Frozen Four, Carpenter will be in Kamloops, British Columbia, to help the United States defend its world championship. In June, she was the first pick in the inaugural National Women’s Hockey League draft, selected by the New York Riveters. And her sights are already set on the 2018 Olympics in South Korea, after leading all goal scorers on the team that won a silver medal in 2014.There is plenty of hockey in her future. Goalies take note.A version of this article appears in print on March 12, 2016, on Page D1 of the New York edition with the headline: Olympian’s Last Chance at College Title.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.