By BEN ROTHENBERGMARCH 11, 2016
INDIAN WELLS, Calif. —  For a change, it was the trailblazing Venus Williams’s turn to follow her younger sister Serena’s lead. One year after Serena Williams returned to the desert tournament now called the BNP Paribas Open for the first time in 14 years, Venus followed in her footsteps Friday afternoon, taking the court for a second-round match against Kurumi Nara and receiving a warm reception.But after rain swept through the desert midway through the first set, the weather turned cold and blustery, and the 10th-seeded Williams struggled to find her form, ultimately falling, 6-4, 6-3, to the 89th-ranked Nara.“This is the biggest win for my career, so I’m very happy,” Nara said.For Williams, the loss put only a slight damper on her journey back to Indian Wells.Advertisement“Just being here, just being on the practice court and on site has been so positive and such a great experience,” she said. “It just shows that, yeah, you know, that you can always come back home, I guess. You can always go home.”AdvertisementVenus Williams had not entered the stadium since 2001, when she pulled out of a scheduled semifinal match against Serena. The late announcement of the withdrawal angered the crowd, which viciously booed both Serena on the court and Venus in the stands during the final. There was significant fanfare last year when Serena ended her 14-year boycott of the tournament. She had announced her decision to return to Indian Wells last year with an essay in Time magazine, and in making her return, she joined with the Equal Justice Initiative, a nonprofit organization focused on providing legal assistance to underserved communities. Venus’s decision to return to Indian Wells was revealed much more quietly, with her name simply appearing on the tournament’s entry list in January. On March 1, she published an essay in The Players’ Tribune explaining her decision and describing the pain that had kept her away for 15 years.“I remember leaving Indian Wells in 2001 feeling like I wasn’t welcome there,” Williams wrote. “Not feeling welcome somewhere is a hard memory to let go of — at any age. At 20? It’s almost impossible. And so that’s what I did. I held onto it.”After her loss Friday, Venus discussed her decision not to return to the tournament in 2002, a decision which she would repeat 13 more times.“At the time, I didn’t feel comfortable — I wouldn’t have felt comfortable coming back through those doors,” she said. “The very next year would have just been too overwhelming. So at the time, it was just about being able to play in circumstances that are — and we’re not even talking about favorable — but just normal circumstances.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.“You try to put yourself in a position where you’re not facing any adverse circumstances. So that’s really what it was at the time. I wasn’t angry. I’m not an angry person. But I definitely probably hold on to stuff like anybody normal.”Citing her sister’s example of forgiveness, Venus decided to return.Serena’s highly anticipated return last year was electric, with a packed stadium roaring as she walked onto the court for a night match. For Venus a year later, the reception was more subdued, but it was warm, with those in attendance for the day session match screaming supportively.Advertisement“After Serena came back last year and she had such a warm welcome, I definitely thought to myself, ‘I’ve got no reason not to go anymore,’ ” Venus said after the loss. “It was time to be able to, just, you know, move on and let the past be the past.“Sometimes that’s what you have to do. I think, at this point, everyone has been able to move on.”Williams said her return to Indian Wells was possible because there had been movement by both her family and the tournament. “I think it’s a two-way street,” she said. “We could have come back here and everyone could have picked up where they left off.”Last year, Serena tried to keep a straight face before ultimately appearing near tears. On Friday, Venus smiled broadly and looked up into the stands. When she reached her chair, she touched her heart and waved to the crowd. “I’m a person that’s not into the spotlight so much,” Venus said, “so I guess with such a warm welcome, I actually felt a little shy.“So, you know, it’s been a wonderful moment. Fifteen years later, to have such a joyous return is more than I could have ever. It’s such a blessing.”She said she hoped to be able to return here again.“It would have been an even better moment to have a win and share that moment with the crowd, who have been so supportive and just so amazing,” she said. “But not everything can end fairy-tale. It’s enough of a fairy tale to be here. Sometimes, there’s a little bit of a glitch. Doesn’t mean that I can’t come back next year and try to do even better.”A version of this article appears in print on March 12, 2016, on Page D6 of the New York edition with the headline: Venus Williams Returns to Indian Wells, in the Form of a Shooting Star.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.