AdvertisementSupported byClippers 101, Knicks 94By Andrew KehLOS ANGELES — As questions about the direction of the struggling Knicks continued to hound the organization, Phil Jackson, the team’s president, held a rare discussion with the news media on Friday morning to address a host of festering concerns.Jackson, who has had only two other news conferences this season, spoke at Staples Center, where the Knicks lost to the Los Angeles Clippers, 101-94, later that night. He said he had joined the players on their five-game trip to evaluate the club “spiritually, physically.”As the Knicks (27-40) lurch through another losing season, their second under Jackson, his system of play and larger ideas about the club have begun to face criticism from fans and pundits. At the same time, speculation has arisen about whether he will remain for the length of his five-year contract.“The energy that I have is directed towards turning this team around,” Jackson said when asked about his personal commitment to the project. “That’s taken my full effort. So far it’s been a challenge. I’m still in it, and I’m in it to win it, so to speak.”Jackson maintained a cautiously optimistic tone over the 30-minute discussion. He reiterated his view that Carmelo Anthony, the frustrated star, was a cornerstone player for the team. He said he was pleased with Kurt Rambis, his longtime friend and the team’s interim coach, who has gone 4-8 since taking over for Derek Fisher. And he hinted at tentative plans for how he wanted to approach the free-agent market this summer.Jackson said he had met with Anthony this week. He said Anthony had peppered with him questions and expressed disappointment but had not wavered in his commitment to the club.“He sees the potential that we have,” Jackson said. “He has questions about where we’re going. We discussed it.”Jackson said that whether Anthony, who has a no-trade clause, ultimately left the team was entirely the player’s decision. “It’s in his lap,” Jackson said.Jackson said he had spoken to Rambis about making sure Anthony was not overtaxed down the final stretch of the season. He said that in general, he was much more communicative with Rambis than he had been with Fisher. He said discussion would continue about how to balance winning and developing players.In retrospect, Jackson rued the lack of communication with Fisher, but he acknowledged it had been partly by his own design. “You guys wanted to harp in on the fact that he was a puppet, perhaps,” Jackson told reporters, “and I wanted him to have the autonomy to make decisions on his own and not feel like I was an overlord.”Rambis, Jackson said, was “perfectly capable” of coaching the team permanently. He praised the way Rambis had found a preferred rotation — something Fisher never seemed to do. But he said he would wait to see how the season played out to make a firmer decision.Looking ahead, Jackson suggested that the Knicks did not need to pursue one of the top free-agent point guards, even if they have become among the most vital cogs in the predominant style of play in the league.“The idea of chasing a point guard, where it becomes just an obsession, is not necessary,” Jackson said. “We can play the game without that.”Despite the overall frustration of the team, Jackson tried to put the season in perspective. He noted that the team had managed only 17 wins last season and said it had always been unlikely that they would jump to 41 wins — his perceived threshold for the playoffs — in just one year.He praised the team’s strong start and noted that injuries and fatigue — specifically naming the rookie Kristaps Porzingis — ultimately might have slowed them down. “Our phenom, our kid who has surprised everybody, hit the wall,” Jackson said.If anything else, things are not as dismal as last year.“What I wanted to accomplish, I think we accomplished this year,” Jackson said. “I feel like every game we have a chance to win. That changed. I feel like that was a part of it I didn’t like to see.”Advertisement