By HUW RICHARDSJAN. 15, 2016
LONDON — As the European Rugby Champions Cup pool stage moves into its penultimate round, nobody is better placed than Racing 92.The club from the Paris suburbs leads its pool by seven points and will clinch a place in the final eight with a round to spare if it beats the winless Welsh club Scarlets at the Stade Olympique Yves-du-Manoir on Sunday.It would be only the second time, following its playoff debut last season, that Racing had reached the final eight. But its ambitions, and in particular those of the club president, Jacky Lorenzetti, extend much further than that.“We are an ambitious club with long-term objectives, both nationally and internationally,” he said Thursday.AdvertisementFrench clubs often give priority to their own national championship, but Lorenzetti said, “To be champion of France would be great, but to be champion of Europe would be even better. Europe is the measure of our ambition.”AdvertisementAt first sight, Lorenzetti, named the 119th richest man in France in a 2014 survey, looks typical of the wave of wealthy new owners who have transformed modern French rugby.He made his fortune building his company, Foncia, into the largest real estate business in France.His purchase of Racing in 2006 reflected a decision to devote himself to what he called his great passions: rugby, wine and real estate. His other possessions include three of the most distinguished vineyards in Bordeaux.His ambition is as great as any of his contemporaries, but he also wants to build for the long term and to preserve his club’s history — the team was France’s first-ever champion in 1892. (The “92” in its name is not for the championship year, but is the postal code for the district in which it plays.)So Racing’s international brand will be built this year, first by a challenge match against New Zealand’s Otago Highlanders in Hong Kong on Feb. 6, and then by a preseason training camp in either Texas or California.It will move next year from its outdated, undersized and inconveniently located stadium in the suburb of Colombes to a state-of-the-art, dual-use indoor facility with a capacity of 32,000 in La Défense, much closer to central Paris.“We will be playing in the largest indoor concert hall in Europe, fully enclosed and air-conditioned. We will offer rugby as a sporting spectacular,” said Lorenzetti. “It means we don’t have to rely on the income of perhaps 16 matches a year, since there may be 40, 50 or even 100 concerts.”The move is a huge step forward for the club and yet, he says, “Leaving Colombes will feel like a death. It has not just been our ground. It is the stadium of the 1924 Olympic Games, which was organized by Racing — the only Olympics organized by a private club. It is where France played for many years.”Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.Discussions continue on how to preserve its historic grandstand and other buildings, and the club retains a tangible link with its past in its blue-and-white hooped jerseys.AdvertisementWhile other French clubs frequently change colors — with Racing’s Paris rival, Stade Français, setting its own standards for the eye-catchingly lurid — Racing has never changed the colors it adopted in imitation of Cambridge University in 1882.Similarly, its expensive and well- publicized ventures into the global talent market, most recently with the signing of Daniel Carter — the All Blacks legend, World Cup winner and International Player of the Year — have been complemented by investment in developing local talent.“When the training center and academy were opened three years ago, I wrote that they were the best facility of any club in the world,” said Ian Borthwick, a New Zealander who formerly wrote for the French national sports daily L’Équipe and now works for Racing as an adviser to Lorenzetti. “And nobody has seriously disputed that.”The fruit of that investment, he points out, can be seen on occasions like the French championship match earlier this season when Racing went to Clermont — generally regarded as the toughest road trip in Europe — and won with a team that included three players from its under-22 squad.Racing currently tops the French championship standings, as well as its European pool.But the coach, Laurent Travers, warned in the past week against taking victory over Scarlets for granted.“This game is like a trap for us,” he said. “On paper, it would appear to be the easiest game in our pool, but in the past this is exactly the type of game where we have struggled.”Memories remain of last season, when Racing was the top seed in the Champions Cup quarterfinal draw, but lost at home to the English club Saracens. “We lacked experience, and were beaten in the last minute,” recalled Lorenzetti.Experience, much of it from the All Blacks, has since been added. Carter has joined his former New Zealand teammates like the winger Joe Rokocoko, the lock Ross Filipo and the back-row forward Chris Masoe.“The New Zealanders have made a real difference,” said Lorenzetti. “There is a new maturity and a different level of performance.”AdvertisementOther contenders for European honors this season — Toulon, Clermont, Saracens and the rest — should consider themselves warned.A version of this article appears in print on January 16, 2016, in The International New York Times.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.