By BILLY WITZMAY 22, 2016
OAKLAND, Calif. — When Athletics catcher Stephen Vogt hit a tailing liner down the left-field line that bounced toward the wall for a double on Sunday afternoon, Yankees starter Michael Pineda followed the drill and ran to back up catcher Brian McCann.As Jake Smolinski crossed the plate and Billy Burns followed him, giving Oakland the lead in the fifth inning, Pineda hopped up and down several times. While walking back to the mound, he shook his head and waved his hand in disgust.The frustration was understandable, given how well Pineda had pitched to that point.But unlike much of this season, one mistake — or even two — did not leave Pineda with a day’s regret.The Yankees rallied to regain the lead on sixth-inning singles by Mark Teixeira and Starlin Castro, then hung on for a 5-4 victory over the Athletics at Oakland Coliseum.AdvertisementThe win, which completed a four-game sweep of Oakland, was the Yankees’ season-high fifth in a row and the 12th in their last 17 games, allowing them a chance to enjoy their day off on Monday — the only break in a stretch of 40 games.AdvertisementThe turnaround comes at a good time: The Yankees play 12 of their next 13 games against division teams.“It’s a lot better,” Manager Joe Girardi said of the team’s mood after the Yankees began the season losing 16 of 24 games. “There was a lot of frustration in our clubhouse, whether it was from pitchers or whether it was from position players who were struggling with the bat. Everyone seems to be doing their part now.”The Yankees’ about-face mirrors a more recent one by their starting pitchers. It was only on Tuesday, after losses in back-to-back games in Arizona to begin this trip, that the rotation looked tattered: C. C. Sabathia and Luis Severino were on the disabled list, Masahiro Tanaka was in a funk, and Pineda was a mess.Pineda’s habit of hanging sliders — slightly spinning cookies that sat invitingly in the middle of the plate when he had two strikes on hitters — had confounded the pitching coach, Larry Rothschild. In Arizona last week, Rothschild’s even temperament gave way to exasperation after Pineda struck out nine but also gave up five runs and made two fielding blunders in five innings.“It would be easy to sit here and say it’s going to turn and things will change, but it’s too long,” Rothschild said on Tuesday. “We’re almost a quarter of the way through his starts, so we need that straightened out.”Rothschild was modestly encouraged on Sunday after Pineda allowed six hits, struck out six and walked one in six innings. Pineda had stayed more upright and kept his shoulder and elbow elevated, resolving problems that had led to his inconsistency.Get the big sports news, highlights and analysis from Times journalists, with distinctive takes on games and some behind-the-scenes surprises, delivered to your inbox every week.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.“He made some strides today — he just needs to keep making more strides,” Rothschild said, citing Pineda’s consistency with his fastball and slider, the latter of which still needs to be better.AdvertisementPineda, who improved to 2-5 and lowered his E.R.A. to 6.34, had himself to blame in the first inning, when Burns singled, stole second and then third when Pineda — as he had with Arizona’s Paul Goldschmidt last week — never looked back at Burns as he took a huge, walking lead off second. Burns scored on a groundout by Vogt.The Yankees regained the lead, 2-1, on homers by McCann and Jacoby Ellsbury, and Pineda had the misfortune of losing it in the fifth. Smolinski reached down to pull a slider into left for a one-out single, and with two out, Burns bounced a chopper over the head of third baseman Chase Headley, who had been drawn in. Vogt followed by slicing a 95-mile-per-hour fastball that was on the outside edge, scoring both runners.Pineda’s performance was heartening, although it was the worst performance by a starter during the win streak. Nathan Eovaldi, Ivan Nova, Sabathia and Tanaka each pitched at least six innings and gave up a lone run.Rothschild was baffled by how a rotation that does so well in critical statistical categories — fewest walks in the American League, fourth in strikeouts per nine innings and first in groundball-to-fly ball ratio — had a 4.71 E.R.A., 11th best in the league, entering Sunday.“Some numbers are just hard to comprehend,” he said. “None of it makes any sense to me.”Equally baffling has been the slide of Teixeira, who has not homered in 120 at-bats, the worst stretch of his career. Teixeira had a small and significant victory on Sunday: He reached on a grounder when second baseman Chris Coghlan — playing in short right field — could not throw him out. It ended an 0-for-19 slump and brought Brett Gardner sliding headfirst into home with the tying run.“You just make sure you’re running hard, because you don’t know what’s happening behind you,” said Gardner, who began the play at second and kept running when he heard the third-base coach, Joe Espada, shouting, “Go hard, go hard, go hard.”Castro followed with a single that scored Carlos Beltran, who added a run-scoring double in the seventh.That run proved important when shortstop Didi Gregorius and Castro booted consecutive grounders in the eighth that allowed the A’s to close to 5-4.AdvertisementWhen the Yankees return to Yankee Stadium, they expect that Alex Rodriguez, out since May 4 with a strained hamstring, will be in the lineup, although Girardi would not say if Rodriguez would be slotted into his usual No. 3 spot.“Can you worry about today?” Girardi said. “We don’t even know if we’ll be here on Tuesday.”That may be true, but with the way the Yankees have begun to play, and with their starting pitchers rounding into form, it no longer seems as if their world is coming to an end.A version of this article appears in print on May 23, 2016, on Page D3 of the New York edition with the headline: Sharper Pineda and Lively Bats Lift Yanks Over A’s.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.