By VICTOR MATHER and KEN BELSONMAY 23, 2016
The Tom Brady deflation saga is still going strong, 16 months after it began. At this point, it has little to do with the air pressure in footballs and everything to do with whether Commissioner Roger Goodell of the N.F.L. overstepped his role as arbitrator when players appeal penalties. Here are some questions and answers about the case as it stands now.What happened Monday?Tom Brady filed an appeal on Monday with the United States Court of Appeals for the Second Circuit, asking for a hearing on his suspension, his lawyer Theodore B. Olson and the N.F.L. Players Association said.A panel of the court, voting 2 to 1, reinstated his four-game suspension last month. Brady now wants the full court of up to 14 judges to hear the case.What is the appeal based on?Olson said Goodell “ignored highly pertinent rules in the collective bargaining agreement on tampering with equipment” and changed his reason for penalizing Brady without giving the quarterback a chance to defend himself. The panel rejected similar arguments, ruling that Goodell acted within his authority.AdvertisementWait, is that the Ted Olson?Yes. Olson, the former solicitor general famous for representing George W. Bush in the 2000 election case and arguing for same-sex marriage, joined the case after the panel’s ruling and is now outside counsel to Brady and the players’ union.AdvertisementWhat’s the timetable for a ruling?Though the wheels of justice sometimes turn slowly, it is expected that the Second Circuit will decide whether to hear Brady’s latest appeal well before the season starts.What is Brady’s chance of success?Not great. Only eight of more than 27,000 cases got a hearing from the full appeals court in the Second Circuit from 2000 to 2010, according to The Boston Globe.But Olson said he was encouraged because the dissenting vote in Brady’s appeal was written by Chief Judge Robert A. Katzmann, who rarely breaks ranks with his fellow justices. Olson added that the core issue of the fairness of an arbitrator resonates far beyond this case. “This affects millions of people, the legal principles here, and we hope the court will recognize that it is more than about Tom Brady and the Patriots,” Olson said.Get the big sports news, highlights and analysis from Times journalists, with distinctive takes on games and some behind-the-scenes surprises, delivered to your inbox every week.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.DeMaurice Smith, the executive director of the N.F.L. Players Association, said that Goodell had been rebuked four times for overstepping his role as arbitrator, including in the New Orleans Saints bounty case and the suspension of Ray Rice, the former Baltimore Ravens running back.The N.F.L. said it would have no comment on the appeal until its lawyers had read the petition.What would happen next?Whatever the result of this appeal, the next step would be the final one: the Supreme Court. The body that decided Marbury v. Madison, Brown v. Board of Education and Roe v. Wade might soon be considering deflated footballs.Where do the Patriots stand?Brady and the Patriots won the Super Bowl in 2015, the year of Deflategate. Last season, they were eliminated in the conference championship game. The team lost its first-round pick in the recent N.F.L. draft over the scandal, and will lose a fourth-rounder next year.I somehow missed this whole thing. Can you briefly summarize it?The Patriots beat the Colts in the A.F.C. championship game in 2015, but afterward accusations were made that they had gained an advantage by playing with partly deflated footballs. After an extensive investigation, the league found that it was probable that Brady knew about the scheme. He was suspended for four games.AdvertisementBrady lost his first appeal, heard by Commissioner Goodell, who, in an unusual arrangement, hands down penalties and also hears appeals of those penalties. Then Brady turned to the courts. He won a ruling from a district court judge in Manhattan in September, clearing him to play last season. But the panel of appeals court judges reinstated his four-game suspension, and, barring another reversal, he will have to serve the ban at the beginning of next season.A version of this article appears in print on May 24, 2016, on Page B11 of the New York edition with the headline: What Now For Brady On Appeal.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.