By SETH BERKMANMARCH 11, 2016
This week, Jack Gibbs engaged in a heated argument with his teammates about the propercolor of fire hydrants. Gibbs, a junior guard at Davidson, was so certain of his stance that he posted a poll on Twitter. In a near landslide, voters sided with him.“As you can see, red overwhelmingly won,” Gibbs proudly said Tuesday in a phone interview.This was clearly of more concern to him than the news of the day — his selection to the Atlantic 10 Conference first team — or the other debate that Gibbs has been thrust into lately: How does he compare to the only other high-scoring Davidson guard most basketball fans know, Stephen Curry?N.C.A.A. Tournament Selection Sunday seedingsDespite averaging 24.8 points a game in the regular season — and being among the top five scorers in Division I — Gibbs is quick to temper suggestions that his game rivals that of Curry, who played for Davidson from 2006 to 2009 and now torments N.B.A. opponents as one of the world’s best scorers.“I don’t feel they’re warranted,” Gibbs said of the comparisons, “but definitely a blessing.”AdvertisementBut there is at least some basis to draw parallels. Since 1979, Gibbs and Curry are the only Davidson players to score at least 40 points in a contest, both having done so on at least three occasions. In December, when Gibbs had 41 in a win over Charlotte, Curry was in the crowd and congratulated him afterward.AdvertisementCurry remains the college’s career scoring leader with 2,635 points in only three seasons, and he also tops the lists for 3-point field goals and free throws made. But there are areas where Gibbs has distinguished himself from Davidson’s most famous product, validating a season in which he has inherited the pressure of living up to a nearly impossible standard.“If you ask Coach, he’d say no one can compare to Steph, and I agree with that,” Gibbs said. “The things he does on the court are amazing. It’s like art.”If Curry’s artistry is full of groundbreaking style — the swift dribbling, the mind-bending passes and the looping 3-pointers from the flick of a wrist — Gibbs’s foundation is less flashy and more traditional. Three inches shorter than the 6-foot-3 Curry but a more solid 195 pounds, Gibbs has a game heavily influenced on curling around off-ball screens and attacking off the dribble from pick-and-rolls.In recent years, math students at Davidson have pored over numbers and charts to help create scouting reports for Coach Bob McKillop. At the request of The New York Times, the group compared the college careers of Curry and Gibbs, using their own tools and Synergy, a program that collects data for more than 30,000 basketball games a year.For example, both players excelled as jump shooters off the dribble, but Gibbs has scored more of his points by finishing near the rim. In isolation plays, using available data from the 2008-9 season, when he led the nation by scoring 28.6 points a game, Curry averaged 1.039 points per possession, putting him in the 88th percentile. This season, Gibbs’s 1.212 points per possession in similar situations placed him in the 94th percentile.Both players finished their junior seasons in the top 10 in usage rate, a statistic that measures the percentage of a team’s possessions ended by a player while on the court. Curry’s 2008-9 usage rate was 38.2 percent, first in the nation, while Gibbs’s was 34 percent, good for eighth over all.Statistics also show Gibbs has an advantage over Curry handling the ball in transition, although he has played more point guard in his college career. As a junior, Curry became a primary ballhandler in transition and averaged .893 points per possession, compared with Gibbs’s 1.111 points per possession this season.Richmond guard ShawnDre’ Jones, whose Spiders limited Gibbs to his worst shooting game of the season on Jan. 25 (3 of 17, 11 points), said: “We try to give him no breathing room. In transition, we make sure he sees a lot of bodies. He’s such a great player that he can sometimes make something out of nothing.”AdvertisementMore traditional statistics show that Curry had six games of 40 or more points against Gibbs’s three, and that Curry was by far the better outside shooter. On defense, advanced stats also indicate Curry was sounder and more adept at creating turnovers — his steal percentage was 4.2 percent, where Gibbs has never risen above 3 percent.No matter what the numbers suggest, McKillop dismisses the notion of finding an equal to Curry at Davidson. Aside from his basketball performances, McKillop praised Curry’s philanthropic contributions and the time he still spends around the program.“There’s no way you can compare anybody to Steph Curry,” McKillop said. “Steph Curry is on a planet of his own. Everyone in Davidson college basketball understands that. Steph is an icon for us.”Gibbs said the increasing mentions alongside Curry are flattering, but in repetition they become a bit tiring. Teammates and friends recognize Gibbs more as the eccentric who regularly prepares for games by listening to songs from “High School Musical” or by John Mayer, and who in his downtime becomes highly invested in the board game Catan.He recently has invested much emotion on the health of his mother, Aloma. Last month, she learned she had uterine cancer.Get the big sports news, highlights and analysis from Times journalists, with distinctive takes on games and some behind-the-scenes surprises, delivered to your inbox every week.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.“When I found out, it was definitely pretty tough,” Gibbs said. “I never had really any health problems in my family. The first few practices after I found out, it was noticeable I’ve been thinking of other things. I talk to her every day. She tells me how she’s feeling better and better. We’re definitely optimistic of the outcome and trying to stay strong for her.”For Gibbs, basketball has become a release, a place where he said he can “just kind of let go.”On Thursday, with his parents in attendance in Brooklyn for Davidson’s opening game of the Atlantic 10 tournament, Gibbs missed five of his first six shots, and the Wildcats were tied with La Salle, 11-11, midway through the first quarter. In absence of his usually reliable jump shot , Gibbs switched to more of a facilitating role.AdvertisementWith the ball in his hands, he displayed speed reminiscent of Curry’s and a quirk of throwing jumping hook passes over his head. Scoring became secondary; he finished with 9 points but with a game-high seven assists in a 78-63 win.Aloma Gibbs said being able to watch her son play helped lift her spirits as she battled cancer. As for the family’s thoughts on the Curry comparison?“He may never happen again,” Gibbs’s father, Jack, said of Curry. “The way he shoots those half-court shots. …”“Gosh, amazing! Unbelievable!” Aloma Gibbs said. “But we don’t want Jack to ever be pressured about anything.“Jack is who he is.”Tim Chartier, Jason Feldman, and Nathan Tenpas contributed reporting from Davidson, N.C.We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.