By THE ASSOCIATED PRESSMARCH 11, 2016
Drawing the wrath of the N.H.L., an independent arbitrator cut Calgary defenseman Dennis Wideman’s suspension in half to 10 games on Friday after concluding that he did not intend to injure a linesman when he knocked him to the ice during a game last month.In an 18-page ruling, arbitrator James Oldham wrote that he agreed with the N.H.L.’s decision to suspend Wideman for abusing an official. But he disagreed with Commissioner Gary Bettman’s conclusion that there was sufficient evidence to show Wideman deliberately wanted to injure Don Henderson during a game against Nashville on Jan. 27.“My fundamental disagreement with commissioner Bettman’s decision, is that, based on the totality of the evidence presented to me, I do not think that Wideman’s behavior was animated by an intent to injure Henderson,” Oldham wrote, citing testimony from the N.H.L. director of officiating, Stephen Walkom, among others in reaching his decision.Wideman has already served 19 games as the appeals process went to Bettman and then Oldham. He will get back $282,258 of the $564,516 he was going to forfeit as a result of the suspension. The Flames said he would be in the lineup Friday night against the Arizona Coyotes.AdvertisementAccording to the ruling, Walkom said Wideman “was upset, he’s skating to the bench, and he made a mistake, and he crosschecked the linesman, and he knocked him to the ice with enough force to hurt him, even though he probably didn’t intentionally mean to hurt him.”Because Wideman sustained a concussion seconds earlier on a legal hit from Nashville’s Miikka Salomaki, “it is possible, given the speed of events and Wideman’s condition, that Henderson may have been but a blurred distraction,” Oldham wrote.AdvertisementHenderson got a concussion of his own from the blindside hit, which Oldham wrote could not be called a crosscheck.Despite a text message Wideman sent to another player saying he was only having a hearing because of “stupid refs and stupid media,” cited by Bettman in responding to Wideman’s first appeal, Oldham wrote that it did not represent intent to injure.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.The N.H.L. said it “strenuously” disagreed with the decision and was “reviewing the opinion in detail to determine what next steps may be appropriate.” The appeal to an independent arbitrator is the final step of the appeals process, according to the collective bargaining agreement.The N.H.L. Players’ Association said it was pleased with the decision.“Given that it was undisputed that Dennis suffered a concussion mere seconds prior to his collision with linesman Don Henderson, we felt strongly that there should have been no discipline,” the union said.Oldham wrote that Wideman’s “exemplary” record without discipline throughout his career played into his decision.“Taking into account Wideman’s 11 years of discipline-free performance as a professional hockey player, there is no occasion to go beyond the 10-game minimum,” Oldham wrote.We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.