AdvertisementSupported byBy Ben ShpigelIn the first two days of free agency, the Jets secured their top three running backs for next season — Matt Forte, Bilal Powell and Khiry Robinson. They had yet to determine by Thursday who would be handing the ball off to them. Despite the Jets’ insistence that they wanted to re-sign the incumbent starting quarterback Ryan Fitzpatrick — and despite his stated desire to return — he remained available, locked in a contract impasse.The Denver Broncos, who let Brock Osweiler leave for Houston two days after Peyton Manning retired, could be the only other viable suitor for Fitzpatrick, who wants more money than the Jets are willing to pay him. NFL Network reported their offer as comparable to the three-year, $21 million deal Chase Daniel signed to back up Sam Bradford in Philadelphia. By contrast, Osweiler netted $72 million over four years with the Houston Texans. The Jets are the best fit for Fitzpatrick, who set a franchise record with 31 touchdown passes and thrived with the offensive coordinator Chan Gailey, and there might be a mutiny in the locker room if he signs elsewhere. In that event, the Jets could pursue a trade with the San Francisco 49ers for the deposed starter Colin Kaepernick or with Houston for Brian Hoyer. Until that is resolved, the Jets, who are looking to offset Chris Ivory’s departure to Jacksonville, can bask in their shrewd remodeling at running back, which continued Thursday with the return of Powell and the signing of Robinson. They join Forte, who was picked up Wednesday from the Chicago Bears and is expected to start.The Jets adored Powell and viewed his return as critical. He led the team with 4.5 yards per carry, and his receiving skills — 47 catches for 388 yards — diversified the offense. His pass protection, particularly in picking up blitzes, earned repeated praise from coaches and teammates. His absence in the season-ending loss at Buffalo — injuries cost him five games — factored into the loss that kept the Jets from making the playoffs. In pedigree and in running style, Robinson, 26, resembles Ivory. Robinson also went undrafted out of a small college (West Texas A&M) before signing with the New Orleans Saints, emerging as a complementary player in three seasons there but never winning the starting job outright. Limited to eight games last season after breaking his leg in November, Robinson had 56 carries for 180 yards and four touchdowns. His power will balance the versatility of Powell and Forte, and it could be featured best near the goal line or in short-yardage situations, in which the Jets struggled last season. Robinson, according to Pro Football Reference, has gained first downs on five of his six career rushes on third or fourth down when needing two or fewer yards. Advertisement