By BILLY WITZMARCH 10, 2016
TAMPA, Fla. —  Sometime this season, when Aroldis Chapman, baseball’s hardest thrower, confronts the heart of the Toronto Blue Jays’ fearsome batting order, the atmosphere will be different from that of Thursday, when a few thousand fans enjoyed a trifling spring training game.It would be nice for Chapman, when the scene moves to a raucous stadium, if the results are different, too.Chapman’s debut as a Yankee was a mostly forgettable exercise. He hit two batters, walked another two and was removed by the pitching coach Larry Rothschild in the middle of an inning, having already thrown 26 pitches.As he approached the dugout, Chapman received a pat on the back from Alex Rodriguez. Not that he needed any encouragement.Advertisement“Just because I didn’t have my control today doesn’t mean that I need to worry about that,” Chapman said. “This is spring training. All I need to focus on is to keep on doing my daily work, and I should be fine.”AdvertisementWhile the rest of his teammates are preparing for the season opener against the Houston Astros in a little more than three weeks at Yankee Stadium, Chapman has more time to get ready. At the start of the season he will serve a 30-game suspension under Major League Baseball’s domestic violence policy.Chapman followed Yankees pitchers Andrew Miller and Dellin Betances, giving spectators an early peek at what could be one of baseball’s most dominant bullpens. Chapman, Miller and Betances had the highest strikeout rates in baseball last season.“They’re the best in the business,” Blue Jays Manager John Gibbons said before his team’s 11-4 victory. He added, “They’re not going to give it up too much, that’s for sure.”Gibbons, noting that the Yankees had a dominant bullpen last year, also said: “This is a step up. You better get to them early or you’re in big trouble.”Miller had his troubles, too, surrendering four consecutive singles before striking out Jose Bautista and Troy Tulowitzki.Betances managed a 1-2-3 inning thanks to center fielder Ben Gamel, who made a diving catch of Russell Martin’s drive to the warning track in right-center field.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.Since the Yankees acquired Chapman just before New Year’s Day, they have endured the fallout from acquiring a player in the midst of a domestic violence investigation — the public criticism and the suspension.When Chapman, who is eligible to pitch in spring training, took the mound in the bottom of the fifth, there was no discernible reaction from the crowd. No cheers. No boos. It was as if another bottom-of-the-camp-roster prospect was taking the mound. The only sign of difference was the five photographers who lined up behind home plate, snapping photos as Chapman took his warm-up pitches.AdvertisementAfter striking out Darrell Ceciliani, Chapman hit Ryan Goins on the elbow with a 2-0 fastball and walked Kevin Pillar. He got Josh Donaldson, the reigning American League most valuable player, to pop up before hitting Bautista on the back foot. When Chapman walked Tulowitzki, Rothschild came out to relieve him.Though the Yankees and the Blue Jays reinvigorated their rivalry last year, the two hit batters did not lead to any retaliation — or ill will.Another sign of baseball’s new era came earlier when the former Yankees closer Goose Gossage, in camp as an instructor, called Bautista “a disgrace to the game” for his celebratory bat flips in a profanity-laced interview with ESPN.com. It was one of a handful of criticisms that Gossage leveled at today’s game.Chapman, like Gossage in the late 1970s, is considered baseball’s most intimidating reliever, one whose fastball has been clocked as fast as 105 miles per hour. It reached 98 m.p.h. on Thursday, just below the 99 m.p.h. that Nathan Eovaldi delivered during his two spotless innings in his first game since going on the disabled list last September with an elbow injury. Chapman made liberal use of his slider and changeup, the latter freezing Donaldson for an 84 m.p.h. first-pitch strike.Asked to describe Chapman’s repertoire, Ceciliani, a former Mets prospect, smiled. “Firm,” he said. “Everything’s hard. You’ve got to be ready to hit. He keeps that fastball up in the top of the zone. It’s kind of got that second life. You think you’ve got a chance and it just gets on you.”Though his fastball is his moneymaker, Chapman arrived from Cuba with the varied arsenal of a starter. Rothschild wants Chapman to rely more on the slider and the changeup, which might get him through innings more efficiently.“When you have that kind of arm, it’s hard to figure out when to throw them,” Rothschild said. “The mentality for a guy like that is he doesn’t want to get beat on those other pitches, but they’re quality pitches, so he doesn’t need to be too concerned about that.”Chapman will have plenty of time to work on them.A version of this article appears in print on March 11, 2016, on Page B10 of the New York edition with the headline: Suspended Chapman Confident Despite Shaky Debut.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.