By TIM CASEYMARCH 10, 2016
Monmouth’s men’s basketball team won at U.C.L.A. and Georgetown this season, and it beat Notre Dame and Southern California on a neutral court in Florida. But now its dream of ending its memorable season in the N.C.A.A. tournament, a prospect close enough to touch just a few days ago, is in jeopardy because of a loss much closer to home.When the Hawks (27-7) lost to Iona on Monday night in the Metro Atlantic Athletic Conference championship game, they failed to secure the league’s automatic berth in the N.C.A.A. tournament. Instead of packing their bags and waiting to learn their destination when the field is announced on Sunday, the Hawks must wait to find out if they will play in the tournament at all.It is a common predicament. Of the 12 postseason tournaments completed entering Thursday, only one top seed (Chattanooga in the Southern Conference) had claimed its conference’s automatic N.C.A.A. bid. A series of upsets followed a regular season in which six teams were ranked No. 1 in the Associated Press poll. The final conference tournaments to be completed could make a crowded N.C.A.A. tournament bubble even tougher to break through.“Why should we have expected anything else?” said Jerry Palm, a former computer programmer who projects the N.C.A.A. tournament field for CBS. “It’s been a crazy year at the top of the rankings. Why should it not be a crazy year with the nonmajors, as well?”AdvertisementMonmouth, Wichita State (24-8), St. Mary’s (27-5) and Valparaiso (26-6) are the midmajor conference regular-season champions that have the best cases of making the field despite postseason tournament losses. But as of Wednesday afternoon, Palm did not have any of those four teams in his brackets.Another so-called bracketologist, ESPN’s Joe Lunardi, said he had Wichita State as a No. 8 seed and Monmouth and St. Mary’s as No. 10s. But his analysis left Valparaiso out of the field.“I think they’re all sweating it out,” Lunardi said. “The committee’s history is not real positive with teams like this. Generally speaking, we see more bubble teams from the major conferences getting the last few spots.”AdvertisementJoe Castiglione, Oklahoma’s athletic director and the chairman of the Division I men’s basketball committee that will choose the field for the N.C.A.A. tournament, said on a conference call this week that the committee puts regular-season champions on its “under consideration” board.Castiglione noted that Monmouth won 13 of its 17 road games and 4 of 6 neutral-court games. Still, the Hawks also lost to Army (216th among 351 Division I teams in the Rating Percentage Index, another important criteria), Canisius (222nd) and Manhattan (227th).Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.“Their résumé is filled with road and neutral-court wins, which are important factors,” Castiglione said. “Those wins are over teams that will or perhaps will be part of the field. Plus, I think if you watch them, you can tell they’re a quality team. We certainly have watched them throughout the season. I can’t imagine a scenario where they won’t be discussed throughout the week.”The case of Wichita State, which has made four consecutive N.C.A.A. tournament appearances, is another that the committee probably will spend time debating. The Shockers won the Missouri Valley Conference regular-season title before losing to Northern Iowa in overtime in the semifinals of the league tournament. Wichita State is 11th in the KenPom.com advanced analysis ratings and 48th in the R.P.I. But it has only one victory over a team ranked in the top 50 of the R.P.I. and only four against teams in the top 100.The Shockers’ résumé also includes three losses in November when the senior guard Fred VanVleet, a two-time conference player of the year, was out with a hamstring injury. Notable absences like that, and others like the early-season suspension of Syracuse Coach Jim Boeheim, whose Orange went 4-5 without him in a 19-13 season, could play a role in the committee’s decisions, Castiglione said.“Generally speaking, player and coach availability is definitely a consideration for us when we’re evaluating a team’s performance throughout the season,” Castiglione said.He added that “the games all count,” but also said that it was “important to note” injuries and suspensions.The selection committee began meeting in New York on Wednesday and will spend the weekend watching games, discussing teams and analyzing data. The N.C.A.A. has become more transparent by making public the R.P.I. ratings, strength of schedules and the team sheets that the committee use to assess its selection and seeding decisions.“There’s no shortage of information, which is why ultimately it’s pretty hard to quibble at the end of the line,” Lunardi said. “It’s not like 10 guys going into a room, lighting up cigars and making back-room deals like maybe it was 20 or 30 years ago. There’s too much scrutiny of the process, too much open-source data that’s available.”A version of this article appears in print on March 11, 2016, on Page B9 of the New York edition with the headline: Midmajor Champions Are Crowding the Bubble.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.