By CHRISTOPHER MELEMAY 22, 2016
The 100 men, in black dress shirts and pants, formed two rows in center field at Petco Park in San Diego before the Padres played the Los Angeles Dodgers on Saturday night.The men, members of the San Diego Gay Men’s Chorus, had been invited by the Padres to sing the national anthem. In keeping with the team’s request, the chorus would not sing live but would perform to an amplified rendition it had recorded.The group waited for its cue, and after a prolonged pause, a recording began — of a young woman singing, said Bob Lehman, the executive director of the chorus.Before a near-capacity crowd announced at more than 40,000, the men awkwardly waited for the song to finish. There was no announcement or attempt to stop the recording, Mr. Lehman said. The men were then ushered off the field as fans taunted them with phrases like “You sing like a girl” and “You never sounded better,” Mr. Lehman said.Advertisement“They just kind of let us stand there,” he said, describing the moment as surreal and devastating.Get the big sports news, highlights and analysis from Times journalists, with distinctive takes on games and some behind-the-scenes surprises, delivered to your inbox every week.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.Mr. Lehman said he had bought $360 worth of tickets for family and friends, none of whom stayed for the game. He also said that he had thrown away a rally towel the team had given to chorus members, and that members and supporters were left feeling that the wrong recording had been played deliberately.AdvertisementIn a statement on Sunday night, the team said that it had found no evidence of malicious intent and that what happened was an “unintentional mistake.”
            Statement from the #Padres regarding last night's National Anthem: pic.twitter.com/xBlT6WdPa1 As a result, the team said it had ended its relationship with a contractor and disciplined an employee who was responsible for the game production on Saturday. The Padres accepted full responsibility and expressed deep regret, the statement said.Mr. Lehman said he had spoken with Mike Dee, the team’s chief executive, whom he described as sincerely apologetic. Mr. Lehman said he had been told that the regular technician was in a car crash the night before and that a substitute was in the control room.“Somebody didn’t know how to press the stop button?” he asked. “I couldn’t believe a professional organization like that didn’t know what to do.”On Twitter, the team said it had offered the chorus an opportunity to return.A version of this article appears in print on May 23, 2016, on Page D3 of the New York edition with the headline: Padres Apologize to Chorus for National Anthem Blunder.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.