By BILLY WITZMAY 21, 2016
OAKLAND, Calif. — When Ronald Torreyes walks among the tall trees of the Yankees’ clubhouse — Dellin Betances, Andrew Miller and C. C. Sabathia among them — he looks out of place, as if he should be riding horses this weekend at Pimlico.So when the diminutive Torreyes went to the plate in the fourth inning, with runners at the corners and the Yankees trailing by a run, it made perfect sense when he tried to push a bunt past Athletics pitcher Sonny Gray.What was harder to grasp was what Torreyes did with the next pitch — after he had fouled off the bunt attempt. It was far less modest: Torreyes ripped a line drive into the left-center gap that just eluded the grasp of center fielder Coco Crisp and rolled to the wall for a triple.Torreyes’s hit started off a five-run inning — the Yankees’ second most productive of the season — that helped make Sabathia a winner Friday night in his return from the disabled list with an 8-3 victory over Oakland. It was the Yankees’ third consecutive win, the first time this season they have reached that mark.Advertisement“That’s part of baseball,” Torreyes said through an interpreter, referring to following the fouled-off bunt with a triple. “Every time you go up there, you try to execute something, but sometimes it doesn’t happen. But following that, I was lucky enough to get a good swing in and bring in the two runs.”AdvertisementThey had plenty of heroes. Sabathia, with the bullpen short-handed, delivered a strong six innings, and Carlos Beltran contributed three doubles and three R.B.I. But none was more unexpected than Torreyes, who, after a scorching start to the season, had cooled considerably. He was 2 for his last 22 and had not played since Sunday.“I just kind of got in a groove as the game went on and I was able to hit my spots,” said Sabathia, who won his 100th game as a Yankee with a sizable contingent present from his nearby hometown, Vallejo. “I just want to stay healthy. I know what I’m capable of when I’m out there and I’m healthy.”In addition to his triple, Torreyes walked and singled in five trips to the plate.Torreyes, who won the utility infielder spot during spring training mainly because of his defensive versatility — he can play second, third or shortstop — is trying to establish himself with the Yankees. They are his fourth team in the last year after he made his major league debut with the Dodgers and played in the farm systems of Toronto and Houston in 2015.Get the big sports news, highlights and analysis from Times journalists, with distinctive takes on games and some behind-the-scenes surprises, delivered to your inbox every week.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.Torreyes weighs 150 pounds and acknowledges that he is shorter than the 5 feet 10 inches the Yankees list him at. The braces on his teeth make him look younger than 23.“The important thing is that he just does his job,” Manager Joe Girardi said of Torreyes. “It’s not easy for him to do what he’s doing, because he’s used to playing every day. I think he’s adjusted extremely well.”Friday was also a jubilant return for Sabathia, who had been sidelined with a strained groin but picked up where he had left off in his last start, on May 4, in which he pitched seven shutout innings against Baltimore. On Friday, he allowed one run, three hits and one walk and struck out eight — more than twice as many as in any of his previous five starts. Sabathia got particular usefulness out of his backdoor slider, especially when he was ahead in the count.With Betances, Miller and Aroldis Chapman each having pitched the previous two nights, the Yankees were able to close out the game with Kirby Yates and Chasen Shreve.AdvertisementBeltran, who was relieved that the Yankees had survived his base-running blunder on Thursday night, continued to swing the bat well as the designated hitter. Since Alex Rodriguez went on the disabled list, Beltran is batting .350 (14 for 40) with 13 R.B.I. Beltran’s hot bat and Aaron Hicks’s presence in the outfield have been factors in the Yankees’ 11-6 record since Rodriguez went out.It also may be a reason why Rodriguez has taken his time returning. Girardi said before Friday’s game that while Rodriguez had not had any setbacks — he was eligible to return from the disabled list on Thursday — he might not be activated until the Yankees return home Tuesday for a series with Toronto.“The important thing is you know that Alex is O.K., because the last thing you want is a setback — because if you have a setback, then you’re looking at four weeks,” Girardi said of Rodriguez. “He ran really hard today. We’ll see how he is tomorrow, and then we’ll move from there.”The only real blemish for the Yankees — who also ended their three-game streak of mental miscues — was the continuing slide of first baseman Mark Teixeira. He is now hitless in his last 14 at-bats (with eight strikeouts), left six runners in scoring position and watched his average drop to .196.INSIDE PITCHTo make room for C. C. Sabathia on the roster, reliever JAMES PAZOS was sent to Scranton/Wilkes-Barre. It is the second time this season that Pazos has been recalled and sent back down without pitching in a game.We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.