AdvertisementSupported byLightning 4, Penguins 3 | Series tied, 2-2By Tom SpoustaTAMPA, Fla. — The Tampa Bay Lightning locker room overflowed with so much self-analysis and cliché that it became nearly impossible to figure which team would show up Friday night.Would it be the resilient team that possessed arguably the shortest memory in the N.H.L. this season, capable of a clunker one night and brilliance the next? The Pittsburgh Penguins, after all, laced up their skates one at a time, as Tampa Bay Coach Jon Cooper said.Or would the lethargic Lightning make a third consecutive appearance and allow the Penguins to embarrass them once again and put a hammerlock on these Eastern Conference finals?Tampa Bay had little choice, of course, and decided to hit back with a prideful 4-3 victory at Amalie Arena to tie the series at two games each. Game 5 is Sunday in Pittsburgh.“I don’t think anybody in this room gives anything about what other people think about how we got here,” Tampa Bay center Brian Boyle said. “We know who we are as a team, and we have confidence in ourselves as a team. We’ve gone pretty far two years running now.”The Lightning appeared to have convinced themselves they could not play any worse than they had in Game 3, a 4-2 loss, and came out freewheeling, bolting to a 2-0 lead after one period and 4-0 in the third before holding off a furious rally by the Penguins.Phil Kessel scored the Penguins’ first goal to cut the deficit to 4-1 early in third. Then Evgeni Malkin and Chris Kunitz scored two goals in 1 minute 55 seconds to cut the Lightning’s lead to a goal with about six minutes to play, but Pittsburgh could not score again.“Ultimately, the goal is to win hockey games, and when you wake up in the morning, it’s not how they came back and made it a game, it’s that the series is tied, 2-2,” Cooper said.The Penguins’ depth and speed had proved decisive in their consecutive victories, but the Lightning flipped the script in Game 4. Ryan Callahan, Andrej Sustr, Jonathan Drouin and Tyler Johnson each scored for Tampa Bay, and Victor Hedman and Nikita Kucherov each had two assists.Tampa Bay had been so dominant that Penguins Coach Mike Sullivan decided to switch goaltenders after Johnson’s goal made the score 4-0 late in the second period. Sullivan viewed the third period as a chance to give the veteran Marc-Andre Fleury his first appearance since March 31. Matt Murray had led the Penguins this far, but the change in net could fuel a goaltender controversy.The Lightning easily played their best period of the series in the first and looked nothing like the team that had been outshot, 89-49, in back-to-back losses. Gone were the dumbfounding turnovers and the perplexing — and needless — extra passes. Instead of trying to be slick, they kept it simple and were determined from the start to recapture momentum and turn the series into a best-of-three contest.Indeed, 27 seconds into the game, Tampa Bay’s first shot found the back of the net. Hedman fired a slap shot from the left point, and Callahan tipped the puck in midair, redirecting it under Murray’s glove.“We got embarrassed in Game 3, and after that, you just want to make a stand,” Cooper said. “Callahan’s goal, that’s exactly what we needed, and we fed off the energy from there.”Less than a minute later, the Lightning had a power-play opportunity on a tripping call against Carl Hagelin. Although they did not score, they forced Murray to make four spectacular saves on point-blank shots and off rebounds.Sustr scored 14:28 into the first for a 2-0 lead, beating Murray at the crease after taking a crisp cross-ice pass from Kucherov. The relentless game plan continued, and Tampa Bay had fired 21 shots at Murray by early in the second period, matching its total for Game 3.“They’re in one of those playoff runs where they’re feeling it,” Cooper said after Game 3. “And when you are going like that, good things are going to happen to you.”Only good things happened to the Lightning on Friday night, and they now face the task of beating the Penguins two games in a row, something no team has done since mid-January.Advertisement