By ANDREW BRENNERMAY 21, 2016
ST.-BARTHÉLEMY, Switzerland — Entering the grounds of the Centre Social et Curatif, visitors are greeted by a gaggle of geese, ducks and chickens and a towering castle from the 11th century. On market day, a handful of its residents, adults with special needs, congregate around tables, where their vegetables, apple cider and handicrafts are for sale.It seems an unlikely environment in which to produce a tennis star, and yet it was here that Stan Wawrinka, the defending French Open men’s singles champion, was raised. The center is home to 75 adults with mental disabilities and is a self-sustaining facility fed by the 80-acre farm that his father, Wolfram, has run for nearly 35 years. Wawrinka’s mother, Isabelle, is in charge of the tea shop and bakery.Alongside the staff of 200, the residents work as farmhands, bakers and everything in between, while participating in activities that include gardening and woodworking.The farm is part petting zoo, with cows, goats, alpacas and emus, and part biodynamic agricultural operation that sustains the residents and their caretakers. Wawrinka grew up riding his father’s tractor and helping with the hay baling.“I had a very happy childhood,” he told the Swiss newspaper Le Matin in 2013. “I was lucky to grow up surrounded by nature and animals, to be outside all the time and to work on a big farm with my dad. By growing up at a center for people with special needs, I learned to always fight hard to achieve what I want. In this regard, I was incredibly lucky.”AdvertisementSigns at both entrances of the hamlet of St.-Barthélemy show Wawrinka’s picture and a message congratulating him on his French Open title. The town, with 680 inhabitants (nearly one-quarter of whom share the last name Favre), is 10 miles from Lausanne and 45 miles from Geneva, but it feels a world away. It is part of the Gros-de-Vaud, a region where 90 percent of land is farm or forest.AdvertisementThe Centre Social et Curatif was founded in 1946 for adults with disabilities to develop personal and professional skills and achieve autonomy and social integration. The center was based on anthroposophy, a philosophy developed by Rudolf Steiner that takes a holistic approach to mental health, education and agriculture. The farm follows the principles of biodynamic agriculture, also founded by Steiner in the 1920s.Wawrinka attended the Waldorf school in nearby Crissier, which encourages self-discovery and independent thinking, as envisaged by Steiner.Wawrinka’s tennis career was also developed through connections made at the center. Dimitri Zavialoff, a trained social worker, also worked there. Zavialoff and his brother Grégory became friends with Wolfram and Isabelle Wawrinka.Get the big sports news, highlights and analysis from Times journalists, with distinctive takes on games and some behind-the-scenes surprises, delivered to your inbox every week.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.At 8, Wawrinka and his older brother, Jonathan, took up tennis at the local club in Echallens. Dimitri Zavialoff quickly taught himself to be a tennis coach and guided Wawrinka until they parted ways in 2010. Zavialoff now works with Timea Bacsinszky, a Lausanne native who reached the French Open semifinals last year and rose to the top 10.Grégory Zavialoff peaked at No. 623 in the ATP rankings in 1999 and served as Wawrinka’s first manager. Jonathan Wawrinka also played professionally before becoming the head pro at the prestigious Tennis Club Stade-Lausanne.When Wawrinka was 15, the Zavialoff and Wawrinka brothers decided to test their fortunes in Spain. Stan Wawrinka turned pro at 17, and the next year, he won the French Open junior tournament and two Challenger events.St.-Barthélemy celebrated its homegrown champion with a parade that included a marching band and a carriage ride.Advertisement“I don’t take anything for granted,” Wawrinka said in a 2011 interview with the French edition of Tennis Magazine. “In the beginning, my parents put a lot of money on the table so I could live my dream, without putting any pressure on us. We made our own way.”He added, “But I’ve seen so many players come and go that I never, not for one minute, thought I could rack up millions on the tour.”Wawrinka did not break through on the tour until the relatively advanced age of 28, when he won the Australian Open in 2014, outlasting Novak Djokovic and Rafael Nadal in the quarterfinals and the final.At the 2015 French Open, Wawrinka marched his way to the final, sailing past Roger Federer and earning a matchup with Djokovic. A significant underdog, Wawrinka blasted 60 winners in a four-set victory.On Saturday, Wawrinka won the Geneva Open, beating Marin Cilic by 6-4, 7-6 (11) while playing his first final in Switzerland in 11 years. Wawrinka will now return to Paris, where he will try to defend his title as the No. 3 seed.Wawrinka, 31, has many nicknames, including the Stanimal, Stan the Man, Iron Stan and Tyson, but the former French player Henri Leconte may have said it best when he called Wawrinka the Bison after his French Open triumph in 2015. Slightly shorter and leaner than his peers, the barrel-chested Wawrinka says his strength comes from his core and his legs.He is decidedly country tough. The force he generates comes from the ground, and his deep roots in an unheralded hamlet in rural Switzerland.A version of this article appears in print on May 22, 2016, on Page SP8 of the New York edition with the headline: Wawrinka Climbs Rankings in a Laid-Back Country Way.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.