By FILIP BONDYJUNE 17, 2016
EAST RUTHERFORD, N.J. — It is, traditionally, one of the weirder features of the Copa América: There is no extra time in case of a 90-minute draw, in the quarterfinal and semifinal knockout rounds. Teams skip the 30-minute overtime and go directly to penalty kicks, unless a tie occurs in the tournament’s final.And so as the clock tick-tocked along at MetLife Stadium on Friday night, the possibility grew into the probability that this frustrating, scoreless quarterfinal between Colombia and Peru would end up in one of those unfortunate, nearly random shootout results.That is exactly what happened in a match that did not quite live up to the exuberance or expectations of the capacity crowd. Colombia somehow hung on for a 4-2 penalty-kick victory after goalkeeper David Ospina made an improbable diving save with his left foot off a shot by Peru defender Miguel Trauco to hold a 3-2 edge. The clinching miss occurred when Christian Cueva, Peru’s No. 10, leaned too far back and sailed an attempt high over the net.For that one kick save, Ospina, the keeper for Arsenal, was named player of the match.“The game was very intense, very divided,” Colombia Coach José Pékerman said. “I had no doubt this match would be like this. Luckily in the end, I think, we deservedly took the win, even if it was on penalty kicks. We know that we can do better.”AdvertisementPaulo Guerrero, arguably Peru’s best player, asked to take the team’s fifth penalty kick and never had a chance to step up to the spot.Get the big sports news, highlights and analysis from Times journalists, with distinctive takes on games and some behind-the-scenes surprises, delivered to your inbox every week.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.“To be eliminated by penalty kicks hurts more,” Peru Coach Ricardo Gareca said. “Both teams did a good job of holding back their opponent. We need to develop more goal-scoring opportunities. I think the game was less exciting than the three others we played.”AdvertisementEarlier in the tournament, it appeared that this scheduled quarterfinal might well feature a showcase Brazil-United States match. Then Brazil crashed out, losing to Peru on Raúl Ruidíaz’s infamous handball goal, and the Americans surpassed Colombia in the Group A standings. Suddenly, Friday night at the Copa América was an all-South American affair, and a fairly dreary one. The match became a soccer hater’s best argument against the sport. There were many exaggerated flops, and virtually no scoring chances.This turn of events did nothing to deter the crowd, announced at 79,194, which filled the stadium with cheers of hope at impressive decibels. Considering the dismal behavior by crowds at the European Championships in France, these supporters remained remarkably good-natured throughout, trading chants and sharing organized red-and-yellow waves.Colombia was the clear favorite and had the advantage in possession throughout the first half. When it came to penetrating the final line of Peruvian defenders, however, Colombia lacked the imagination or the commitment to create new lines of attack. Peru appeared to lack the skill or the nerve to take the necessary risks.By the FIFA rankings, Colombia, known as Los Cafeteros, or the Coffee Growers, was a heavy favorite. It was ranked No. 3 in the world before the start of the tournament, in its hundredth year. It also won the Copa América in 2001. Peru, which won the title in 1975, stands at No. 48 in the FIFA rankings.“We know that we can do better,” Pékerman said. “We’ll acknowledge the negative. Sometimes we were rushed. We have to have a sense of patience.”Colombia now advances to a semifinal next week in Chicago against the winner of the Chile-Mexico match. If Mexico wins that game, the Colombians can expect a decidedly more hostile crowd. Maybe an edgy atmosphere will create some sharper soccer.A version of this article appears in print on June 18, 2016, on Page D5 of the New York edition with the headline: Colombia Slumps to a Win Over Peru.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.