By THE ASSOCIATED PRESSMARCH 10, 2016
Now that C. J. Anderson is a Super Bowl-winning running back, the Miami Dolphins want to give him the ball.A restricted free agent, Anderson signed a four-year, $18 million offer sheet Thursday with the Dolphins.Anderson rushed for 720 yards last year for the N.F.L. champion Denver Broncos, who have five days to match the offer. They are considered unlikely to do so.The Dolphins’ new coach, Adam Gase, needs a replacement for running back Lamar Miller, who signed a free agent deal with Houston. Gase was offensive coordinator for the Broncos and Anderson in 2013-14.AdvertisementAnderson, undrafted out of California in 2013, rushed for 90 yards and one touchdown in the Broncos’ 24-10 win over the Carolina Panthers in the Super Bowl. He chose Miami to make his first free-agent visit.Advertisement“Oh man what a time. ... To be alive,” Anderson said on Twitter after signing the offer sheet.This week the Dolphins added defensive end Mario Williams, cornerback Byron Maxwell, linebacker Kiko Alonso, safety Isa Abdul-Quddus and tackle Sam Young. In addition to Miller, they lost defensive end Olivier Vernon, cornerback Brent Grimes and receiver Rishard Matthews.BRADY EXTENSION The two-year contract extension that Tom Brady and the Patriots agreed to will gives a $28 million signing bonus and adds $41 million to his deal should he play it out.Although Brady will earn only $1 million in base salary next season and in 2017, the bonuses will increase his cap hit to $14 million in each of those seasons.Brady has reworked his contract several times during his career. With the extension, Brady now ranks 14th among quarterbacks in guaranteed money.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.STEELERS REPLACE MILLER Pittsburgh has its replacement for the retired tight end Heath Miller, signing former Chargers tight end Ladarius Green to a four-year deal. Green, 25, is coming off a career year in which he set personal bests in receptions (37), yards receiving (429) and touchdown receptions (4). The deal is worth $20 million.FALCONS SIGN RECEIVER Atlanta filled a big spot on its offense, reaching terms with the former Cincinnati receiver Mohamed Sanu on a five-year deal. Sanu will compete with Justin Hardy for the No. 2 receiver role behind the All-Pro Julio Jones.COWBOYS ADD AN EAGLE Dallas added its first free agent, signing the former Eagles defensive lineman Cedric Thornton to a four-year contract worth up to $18 million. The addition comes a day after the Cowboys re-signed middle linebacker Rolando McClain.LIONS FINALIZE DEAL Detroit finalized its five-year, $40 million contract with the free-agent wide receiver Marvin Jones. After losing Calvin Johnson to retirement, they were in the market for a receiver.AdvertisementTWO CHIEFS SIGN The Chiefs began to announce their wave of free-agent signings, starting with vthe eteran linebacker Tamba Hali and defensive tackle Jaye Howard. Hali agreed to a three-year deal Tuesday, while Howard reached a two-year deal Wednesday. Both were valuable pieces to a defense that last season led the Chiefs to their first playoff victory in more than two decades.BENGALS RETAIN SAFETY Cincinnati signed the starting safety George Iloka to a five-year, $30 million deal, the first significant move to try to keep the core of its playoff team intact. Cornerback Adam Jones agreed to a three-year deal that could be signed Friday.NEW 49ER QUARTERBACK Quarterback Thad Lewis is being reunited with his former Eagles coach Chip Kelly, signing a one-year contract to join San Francisco.A version of this article appears in print on March 11, 2016, on Page B14 of the New York edition with the headline: Broncos’ Anderson Signs Offer Sheet With the Dolphins.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.