AdvertisementSupported byBy Marc TracyAfter years as the lone holdout among Division I conferences in not holding a postseason basketball tournament, the Ivy League announced on Thursday that starting next season its automatic bids to the men’s and women’s N.C.A.A. basketball tournaments would be decided by a season-ending playoff.The Ivy League tournaments will feature only the top four teams, out of the total eight, after the regular season, the conference said in a statement, and will take place shortly before the N.C.A.A. tournament bracket is released. Next season’s tournament will be at the Palestra in Philadelphia, Penn’s home court, on consecutive days — a Saturday and a Sunday — in March.“The structure of our basketball tournaments is consistent with our model of college athletics, and the format allows us to preserve the significance of the regular season,” the Ivy League’s executive director, Robin Harris, said in a statement.Besides announcing the postseason games, the Ivy League also said its teams’ regular seasons would be reduced by one game, though the 14-game conference schedule — which came to be known as the 14-Game Tournament, with each of the league’s eight members playing every other team home and away — will be unaffected.A league spokesman said the league must still develop a process for determining the tournament’s composition in the event of a tie for fourth place.Momentum for the Ivy League to hold a postseason tournament grew last season, when Yale and Harvard, who shared the league title, held a one-game playoff at the Palestra for the conference’s automatic bid to the N.C.A.A. tournament. Harvard won, 53-51.“I witnessed not only a great game at last year’s men’s basketball playoff, but also a perfect example of what the atmosphere for Ivy League tournaments will be,” Harry Sheehy, Dartmouth’s athletic director, said in the statement.Like many Division I conferences, the Ivy League generally receives no at-large bids to the N.C.A.A. tournament, so winning the regular-season title has been the only way to make the field.Postseason tournaments can introduce an air of unpredictability. On Wednesday night, Holy Cross, seeded ninth, upset No. 2 Lehigh to win the Patriot League tournament. The Crusaders are 14-19, but as conference tournament champions they are guaranteed the league’s automatic bid into the N.C.A.A. tournament.A postseason tournament could help three Ivy League teams currently enduring significant postseason droughts finally break through. Columbia and Brown have not played in the N.C.A.A. tournament since 1968 and 1986, respectively, while Dartmouth’s 57-year drought is the longest of any Division I team aside from the five charter members who have never played in the tournament.Asked if the Ivy tournament would give Columbia a better chance to end its drought, Peter Pilling, the university’s athletic director, said: “Yes, absolutely. This year we were right on the cusp on the men’s side. If you get hot, you can be in the tournament.”Yale had not qualified for the N.C.A.A. tournament since 1962 until last weekend, when it clinched the Ivy championship with a win at Columbia to finish with a conference record of 13-1.Advertisement