By SAM BORDENMARCH 9, 2016
LONDON —  About 30 minutes before kickoff at Stamford Bridge on Wednesday, the band of visiting Paris St.-Germain fans in the far end of the stadium sang out in unison. “On est chez nous,” they crooned in French, bragging to the Chelsea fans, “We are at home.”It was brash and bold. Cocksure and confident. But then, it also fit with the theme from P.S.G. ahead of this second-leg match in the Champions League round of 16. The Parisians seemed utterly unconcerned with tempting fate, riling their opponents or projecting an air of contentment.P.S.G.’s superstar striker wondered openly about the maturity of Chelsea’s players. The team’s coach called out Chelsea’s top scorer. So, too, did the club’s social media accounts in a bizarre series of posts involving movie characters. All of it could have come off poorly, if not for this overriding truth: Paris was superior.And so there was no comeuppance; there were no just deserts. P.S.G. won, 2-1, completing a 4-2 aggregate victory to eliminate Chelsea from the Champions League for the second year in a row. P.S.G., which has all but locked up the title in the French league with two months to go, advanced to the quarterfinals for the fourth consecutive season. Chelsea continued a disappointing season in which the Blues have dropped into the middle of the standings in the Premier League, fired their manager and faced the prospect of playing next season without continental competition.Advertisement“I think we controlled the game from the start to the finish,” P.S.G. Manager Laurent Blanc said. “Even when we conceded the goal, we weren’t overly concerned.”If Blanc seemed a bit giddy, it was understandable. He had stalked his sideline all evening, spinning and shouting and clapping and pumping his fist when P.S.G. scored first (after Zlatan Ibrahimovic crossed adeptly for Adrien Rabiot to finish), only to throw up his hands when Diego Costa evened the score for Chelsea before halftime.The game changed, though, at the hour mark. That was when Costa pulled up with what appeared to be a leg injury. Forced to replace its most dangerous attacker, Chelsea was suddenly vulnerable. Five minutes later, the Blues were denied — twice — by P.S.G. goalkeeper Kevin Trapp, who dived low to save a shot from Willian and then stood tall to beat away a follow-up from Eden Hazard. Two minutes after that, Ibrahimovic rammed home a beautiful pass from Ángel Di María to essentially seal the victory.Advertisement“They killed the game,” said Guus Hiddink, Chelsea’s interim coach. Reflecting on the depressed state of his team, England’s champion last season, Hiddink added: “Chelsea is now in a transition period. They have to see how to go on and try to regain the lost terrain where Chelsea used to be.”P.S.G. is going in the opposite direction. After being bought by Qatari investors in 2011, a mandate for success in Europe was made clear to management and the players. So far, there have been plenty of victories in the French league and cup competitions, but only a series of disappointments in the Champions League.This season, however, P.S.G. has been nearly invincible in its domestic competitions and, so far, has carried its success into the Champions League, too. Ibrahimovic, whose contract expires at the end of this season, said the players were aware of the club’s expectations.“We can’t stop now,” he said.If P.S.G. does go on to finally win the Champions League, it will be fitting that it had to go through Chelsea along the way. The teams have built quite a history over the past three years, and in addition to their matches, there has been a menagerie of incidents — ranging from the ugly to the bizarre — that has fueled the connection between them.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.In 2014, when Chelsea knocked out P.S.G. in the quarterfinals, the first leg was marred by nasty scenes of violence. English hooligans were seen throwing bottles, making Nazi salutes and shouting racist epithets in a tourist area of Paris before clashing with French counterparts in bloody battles.A year later, Chelsea fans were seen in a cellphone video pushing a black man away from the doors of a subway car in Paris and refusing to allow him to board while chanting in an inflammatory way. Four fans involved were barred from attending soccer matches in England in the aftermath.P.S.G. did advance in that quarterfinal meeting, though the Parisians’ victory was not without controversy. In the second leg, Ibrahimovic was given a red card after just half an hour for a debatable tackle and, after the match, raged against Chelsea’s players, calling them “babies” for shouting at the referee to eject him.Ibrahimovic did not back off that label this week, reiterating that he had never seen anything like Chelsea’s histrionics “from mature players.”Of course, Ibrahimovic did not need to inflame the matchup any more than it already had been; P.S.G.’s social media team took care of that on its own with an odd series of posts that, among other things, suggested Diego Costa was a fraud.AdvertisementCosta, who has a reputation as an ornery player renowned for his needling, is often seen trying to get under his opponents’ skin during matches. Blanc said he even warned his players about Costa’s techniques.“There are two facets to Diego Costa: the player and the man,” Blanc said, adding that he respected the player, “but we also know the man, a man who likes contact, challenges, even provocation at times.”In the end, he did not need to have worried much. Costa did score — a beautiful, whirling goal in which he spun away from a defender and finished powerfully — but was gone shortly after halftime. He looked downcast as he exited, and he could only watch as Ibrahimovic provided the difference moments later. After the final whistle, Ibrahimovic gleefully tossed his jersey into the section of delirious P.S.G. fans.By that point, the fans, again, were singing. “We are at home,” they crowed, and the Chelsea fans still in the stadium were silent. It was hard to argue.A version of this article appears in print on March 10, 2016, on Page B14 of the New York edition with the headline: P.S.G. Beats Chelsea in Champions League, and Its Brash Attitude Is Rewarded.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.