Mixed martial arts is a growing sport in Russia as competitors seek fame and fortune of the Ultimate Fighting Championship, the sport’s most prestigious battleground, a continent away in the United States.By JAMES HILLJUNE 16, 2016
MOSCOW — Inside the Fight Nights gym just off Kutuzovsky Prospekt, a street named after the Russian general who defeated Napoleon, a few dozen pugilists were in training recently. It was late morning, and an instructor barked commands to the men as they grappled, punched, ducked and sweated on the front line of Moscow’s mixed martial arts scene.To jump on the bandwagon for mixed martial arts, nearly all the fighters had left behind other, less glamorous, martial arts such as wrestling, kickboxing and, especially, Sambo, a Russian combat sport which is an acronym that translates to “self-defense without weapons.” Many of the competitors hoped Fight Nights, which is the largest promoter in Russia, would serve as a way station en route to the fame and fortune of the Ultimate Fighting Championship, the sport’s most prestigious battleground, a continent away in the United States.Some of their friends had already made the leap. The fighters in this gym had gravitated to Moscow from across the vast reaches of the Russian Federation with the desire to join them.There was Rasul Mirzaev, 30, a featherweight from Dagestan, the republic in the Caucasus famed for its fighters, including Olympic wrestling champions. There was Vladimir Mineev, 26, a light heavyweight from the Volga region. Both of them were undefeated, and hopeful, though Mirzaev (15-0) had a serious run-in with the law and Mineev (6-0) has yet to be tested by a top-notch adversary.In another corner, wearing a red-and-white Putin T-shirt and knocking dents into a punch bag, stood Vitaly Minakov. One of Russia’s best mixed martial arts fighters, Minakov, 31, is the former heavyweight champion of Bellator, a small, rival promoter to U.F.C. He is undefeated after 17 fights, and in his last match in December in Moscow, he crushed Josh Copeland of the United States, an ex-U.F.C. fighter, into submission in the second round.On Friday night, Minakov and Mirzaev will put their undefeated records on the line at a Fight Nights event at Sibur Arena in St. Petersburg, Russia.A version of this article appears in print on June 17, 2016, on Page B9 of the New York edition with the headline: Russians Are Making an Impact in M.M.A.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.