By TAL PINCHEVSKYMAY 21, 2016
Almost 15 years after breaking in as a coach with the Lowell Lock Monsters of the American Hockey League, Tom Rowe embraced a new challenge last week as general manager of the Florida Panthers.But that responsibility will probably pale in comparison with the job he took four years ago with Yaroslavl Lokomotiv of the Kontinental League, rebuilding a franchise while helping a city heal.“It really just seems like the other day,” said Rowe, a former N.H.L. player and scout. “To this day, it’s probably my coaching highlight.”On Sept. 7, 2011, a plane carrying almost the entire Yaroslavl club crashed shortly after takeoff in Minsk, Belarus. Forty-four people died, including many of the coaches and almost all of the players.AdvertisementAmong the dead was Yaroslavl’s coach, the longtime N.H.L. player Brad McCrimmon, a close friend of Rowe’s. Rowe, then an assistant with the Carolina Hurricanes, said part of his motivation in going to Yaroslavl, a city about 160 miles northeast of Moscow, was to continue McCrimmon’s legacy.Advertisement“He wanted to go there for one year with the hopes of being a National Hockey League head coach,” Rowe said of McCrimmon. “He would have gotten that opportunity. His way of running the team left a lasting impression on the front office.“He’s the one who set the standard. I knew Brad real well, and I knew what kind of guy he was. He and I probably coached the same way.”A year after the crash, Lokomotiv returned to the K.H.L. for the 2012-13 season with Rowe at the helm and the former N.H.L. players Nikolai Borschevsky and Dmitri Yushkevich as his assistants. Together they led a mix of longtime professional journeymen and players developed in Yaroslavl’s junior ranks.“Definitely our first home game was a big deal,” said Mark Flood, a Canadian defenseman who played for Yaroslav after a stint with the Winnipeg Jets. “The fans were going crazy. There were people who were emotional and happy, all kinds of emotions.”Flood added: “It was more than a coaching responsibility for Tom. The city and the organization and the league was still in mourning over the loss of the whole team. It was a big job for him and one that I think he took a lot of pride in, to rebuild the team into a contender.”Get the big sports news, highlights and analysis from Times journalists, with distinctive takes on games and some behind-the-scenes surprises, delivered to your inbox every week.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.After Lokomotiv opened the season with three straight wins and victories in nine of their first 11 games, Russia began to rally around the team. The more Lokomotiv won, the more the team was celebrated by local and opposing fans alike.“We had fans everywhere,” said Curtis Sanford, a former N.H.L. goaltender who played three seasons in Yaroslavl. “Every stop throughout the season, we’d get an awful lot of fan support from not only our fans but also our opposition’s fans. They weren’t there to cheer for us, but they were there to accept us and welcome Lokomotiv back into the league. Not that it ever left.”AdvertisementMarathon K.H.L. road trips, which involved crossing as many as seven time zones, were not just about winning over opposing fans. They also provided opportunities to honor the dead, with visits to the hometowns and graves of the victims.Leading that delicate balance between honoring the dead and winning hockey games was Rowe. A Massachusetts native unfamiliar with the local language and customs, he fully embraced the challenge of addressing the emotional needs of players and fans.“We wanted to win as many hockey games as possible, but I had to really be aware of a player if he was going through a tough day,” Rowe said. “You didn’t know if he was just having a bad day or if he was having a bad day because he was thinking of his buddy.“My wife and I were walking down the street in Yaroslavl, and we had two fans come up to us. One gentleman came up to me and gave me a big hug. He was crying. He was saying, ‘I can’t thank you enough for coming over to help our team.’”With 24 regulation wins, two overtime wins, eight shootout wins and 18 regulation losses, Lokomotiv finished second in the Tarasov Division in 2012-13. The team lost to Severstal in the first round of the playoffs but captured the imaginations of Russian fans.That success did not continue the following season. Rowe was fired after Yaroslavl lost five of its first six games. He accepted a coaching job the following season with Florida’s A.H.L. affiliate, the San Antonio Rampage. In a rise that few, including Rowe, expected, he is now at the forefront of one of the N.H.L.’s most exciting clubs.Formerly the team’s associate general manager, Rowe was promoted Monday and is now the centerpiece of a front-office collaborative that will include Dale Tallon, the Panthers’ president for hockey operations, and Bill Torrey, a Panthers adviser and an architect of the Islanders dynasty of the early 1980s.Rowe now directs a club that finished atop the Atlantic Division in 2015-16 with a franchise-record 103 points.Yet the people of Yaroslavl are never far from his thoughts.“When something happens in the office or somewhere in life and you think it’s the end of the world, a lot of times I’ll reflect back on things that happened in Russia,” Rowe said. “Just put it in perspective. You can’t let it consume every decision that you make. I think I learned a lot as a person over there.”A version of this article appears in print on May 22, 2016, on Page SP8 of the New York edition with the headline: Small Stakes for G.M. After Stint Amid Real Loss.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.