By ALEX DAUGHERTYMAY 21, 2016
OCALA, Fla. — Niokoa Johnson was 15, too young for a driver’s license but somehow old enough to race, when she landed a spot in her first auto racing competition.For days, Niokoa practiced on the back roads of Central Florida. On the afternoon of the race, she arrived early to circle the pits of Bubba Raceway Park, a dirt track built among horse fields.On her second practice lap, Niokoa lost control and slammed into a concrete wall, breaking her neck. She was not wearing a head-and-neck restraint, a device required in Nascar but not on most short tracks like this, a lower rung of the racing world.After a day on life support, she died.“It was the worst day of my life,” said her father, Richard Johnson, who rushed from the stands to pull her from the car. “If she had the head-and-neck device or something similar, it likely wouldn’t have happened.”AdvertisementIn the vast and unregulated world of short-track racing, Niokoa’s death was not an isolated event. Since 2002, when Nascar made head-and-neck restraints mandatory, at least 141 people have died on short tracks, and dozens of others have sustained major injuries, making this the most dangerous corner of American motorsports. Those figures — based on police reports and news media accounts — surpass previous estimates and highlight the consequences of lax rules and scant safety protections.AdvertisementShort-track racing, born in rural America in the 1930s, is a catchall phrase that refers to myriad competitions on dirt or asphalt ovals, from mile-long speedways fit for Nascar to smaller tracks that could fit in a yard. The vehicles vary, too, from a windowless school bus to $100,000 cars that can reach 160 miles per hour.The sport now comprises about 900 tracks throughout the country, populated with drivers of varying ages and ambitions. Some hope to ascend to the sport’s higher circuits, while others are hobbyists simply taking their souped-up cars or trucks for an adrenaline-fueled spin.Many short tracks struggle to attract fans and drivers every week, and track owners say they do not have the financial means to enact rigorous safety protocols.“Owners are not pushing safety because people won’t show up,” Richard Johnson said. “It’s not going to change unless more tragedy or state mandate happens.”Bubba Raceway Park, where Niokoa Johnson died, has no ambulance on site and one paramedic, who is not certified in lifesaving techniques. Other track owners, many of whom face little or no legal liability for a crash, have stopped providing professional safety personnel altogether.At the highest echelon of racing in the United States, Dale Earnhardt’s death in 2001 set off a cascade of safety improvements in Nascar, which has not recorded a death since. But few of those measures have trickled down to short-track racing.Whereas Nascar imposes a battery of safety restrictions — laying out its rules in a 172-page text — the safety measures for short tracks amount to a patchwork of lenient rules and mere suggestions. Protocols vary state by state, even track by track.AdvertisementThere is no national governing body or overarching league, like Nascar or the N.F.L. Only one state regulates short-track racing, and local officials generally focus more on policing noise and pollution than safety.“We want to leave it in the private sector’s hand and make it a driver’s decision,” said Earl Arnett, the Marion County commissioner, who represents the area encompassing Bubba Raceway Park.The few safety rules that do exist are routinely ignored. Drivers commonly race without fireproof gloves, fire extinguishers are often not present in cars, and fans stand in restricted areas.Many drivers said they wanted to keep it that way. While Earnhardt’s death prompted a sweeping safety overhaul in Nascar — and drivers embraced the change by wearing head-and-neck restraints — most short-track racers resist safety changes.Bubba Clem, the owner of the track where Niokoa died, said he had bolstered safety requirements in the wake of her crash. He also paid for her funeral.Clem, a radio personality known as Bubba the Love Sponge, said he now required minors to wear head-and-neck restraints. Still, he acknowledged that safety standards varied.“Most tracks are pretty good, but some tracks could have better lighting and a better warning system,” Clem said. “An average track owner on a Saturday night does the best he can.”Still, when deaths occur, the owners face little accountability.Insurance payouts are small, usually between $5,000 and $10,000. And successful lawsuits are rare, because of a single piece of paper that shields owners from liability.AdvertisementAnyone who enters a pit area is required to sign a document protecting the track from legal action. Even when tracks are negligent — like allowing a fence to collapse or failing to extinguish a fire — these liability waivers allow the owners to escape accountability, according to court records and copies of the waivers.Most deaths on short tracks receive little or no media attention. One notable exception occurred in 2014 when the Nascar driver Tony Stewart struck and killed a 20-year-old driver, Kevin Ward Jr., in upstate New York. Stewart was cleared of criminal wrongdoing but faces a civil suit from Ward’s family.“Twenty-five percent of tracks get it right; 70 percent take the money and hope you leave alive,” said the former Nascar driver Randy LaJoie, who now manufactures safety equipment.In the one-stoplight town of Bronson, Fla., among rotting palm trees and a mud bog, the dangers of short-track racing were on vivid display during a New Year’s Eve race.Scott McAllister, a first-time racer at Bronson Speedway, did not have a head-and-neck device or a fire extinguisher inside his car, though they are required, according to the track’s rule book. The prerace inspector asked for McAllister’s name and sponsor but did not look inside his car.“They let the rules slide here,” McAllister said.With fans and drivers at a premium, many tracks like Bronson Speedway throughout the country tend to overlook their own rules.Ann Young, a native New Yorker, bought the Bronson track with her husband as a retirement present after searching “race tracks for sale” on Google. Five years later, she said, she has yet to make a profit.“The racecar business right now is a dying sport,” Young said. “It has peaked.”As a sport set primarily in rural communities, short-track racing has felt the aftereffect of the recession in a painful way. Track owners struggle to attract paying fans and drivers who can afford the racecars.Advertisement“The owners need cars, and they need drivers, so they turn a blind eye toward safety to have a show,” said Chris Frost, a 40-year-old driver from Alabama.The Bronson track in Florida was the site of a fatal accident in 2014, when Buddy Howell, a track worker, was hit by a pickup truck in the infield while working as a flagman. Howell was killed during a spectator race, in which fans take their own cars onto the track. Bronson’s infield does not have a fence, and Howell had defied track rules by going into the infield.“That was because of his judgment and not following safety,” Young said of the fatality.During a recent practice at Bronson, cars reached full speed around the track with no ambulance or safety crews present. Just as racing began, an ambulance pulled into the track but left a few minutes later when a track official fell ill. It never returned.McAllister said he was not worried about the absence of an ambulance. He recently bought a car from a friend and was bullish about his chances that evening. His white Camaro had never raced on asphalt before.After a lackluster race, and hitting the wall, McAllister was all smiles while smoking a cigarette in the pits.“I had a third-place car but a seventh-place driver out there,” he said.There is at least one corner of the short-track racing world that adheres to a strict rule book: a circuit called the World of Outlaws, a group of short-track drivers who tour the country.World of Outlaws drivers are required to wear head-and-neck restraints and must use a racing seat with a halo-shaped headrest that prevents the neck from moving sideways during crashes.There has not been a fatality in a World of Outlaws race since 1999.Tyler Clem competes at the highest level of Florida dirt-track racing. He drives a late-model stock car modified to race on dirt. And just last year, he won the championship at the track where Niokoa Johnson had her fatal accident.AdvertisementTyler is 13 years old.Tyler, whose father is Bubba Clem, is one of the many young drivers who compete every weekend at short tracks across the country. Some stick to races designed for children, like go-karts and mini racecars, while others race in full-bodied cars alongside middle-age veterans.Bubba Clem is able to fund his son’s racing dream — and protect his safety — better than many parents. Tyler races with a head-and-neck restraint, containment seat and firesuit.“He’d feel naked without his head-and-neck system,” Clem said. “It would be remiss for anybody to put their kid in a car that didn’t have that. I would scrimp on my motor before safety.”Teenage racers are a microcosm of the short-track racing landscape, an unregulated universe where safety stems from money.Some, like Tyler Clem, are flush with cash, sponsors and safety equipment. Others are just scraping by.“It’s expensive, but not an opportunity to be a rich little brat,” Clem said.The young racers do not need licenses to compete on short tracks. In some cases, tracks require young racers to submit a résumé of their driving experience. Others allow anyone with a car to join the race.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.A few recent deaths raise questions about that approach. In addition to Niokoa, Tyler Morr, 12, was killed in 2012 during a race in Winter Haven, Fla., and Amanda Gambacorto, 21, died in 2014 after hitting the wall during a training session for new drivers in Wall Township, N.J.Jordan Fowler, 13, was a first-time racer at Bronson Speedway in Florida. He had experience on dirt tracks near his Jacksonville home, but his father had to call Bronson to get permission for Jordan to race on asphalt for the first time.“I’m intimidated because everyone is bigger than me, but I realized it was all the same once I got out on the track,” Jordan said.AdvertisementJordan made the trip to Bronson in a dilapidated Honda Civic. Despite the Civic’s mangled body and Jordan’s lack of experience on asphalt, he finished fifth. He did not wear a head-and-neck device or a containment seat.John Westbrook was not the first driver to flip his car at Williams Grove Speedway in Mechanicsburg, Pa. But he was the one to suffer some of the greatest consequences, becoming a quadriplegic after his sprint car tumbled over the guardrail and down a 16-foot embankment in September 2008.Westbrook sued Williams Grove for negligence, arguing that the track lacked a catch fence that would have prevented his car from flipping out of the racetrack.Six years later, a jury found that Williams Grove was not liable because Westbrook had signed a liability waiver, and Westbrook received no damages.“Unfortunately, if someone is hurt in the future, no matter how negligent the track is, if the release is signed, they are good,” Westbrook said. “If I was a track owner, I’d be feeling pretty good right now.”When anyone enters a pit area at a short track, he or she must sign a liability waiver. This contract protects racetracks from lawsuits, but the agreements go beyond absolving the track for accidents out of their control or honest mistakes.According to multiple waivers reviewed by The New York Times, track owners are released from “any loss, liability, damage or cost they may incur arising out of or related to the undersigned’s injury or death whether caused by the negligence of the releases or otherwise.”That piece of paper, plaintiffs’ lawyers and safety experts said, enables track owners to resist a safety overhaul.Advertisement“There’s zero regulation of tracks — that’s because of the waivers,” said Westbrook’s lawyer, David Inscho.Insurance companies perform spot checks at racetracks to ensure that fans who are not in the pits have a reasonable expectation of safety. This includes inspecting grandstands and fences.“If they didn’t have a catch fence, we would deny coverage,” said Tony Huth, a senior accident underwriter at K & K Insurance.Insurance underwriters point out hazards facing fans who don’t sign waivers, like dilapidated bleachers and dirty concession stands, to track owners before issuing policies, but they rarely require head-and-neck devices, according to interviews with track owners and insurance adjusters.“The insurance company manuals are geared toward spectators,” Inscho said, adding that he did not believe insurers were concerned with the drivers.Most crashes involved drivers, but fans and track workers have died, too. A 12-year-old spectator from Brookland, Ark., died last year when an out-of-control racecar struck him down in the area where cars enter the track. A 49-year-old track worker from Sarasota, Fla., died in 2014 after a skidding pickup truck slammed into him.Ross Curtner, 12, was at a race last fall at Crowley’s Ridge Speedway in Paragould, Ark., when a car on the track lost control and hit him, killing him instantly. He had been standing on top of a wall in the staging area where cars enter the track.Eleven days before the accident, the track owner Trent Francis posted on Facebook saying, “I need to install more fencing to make it safer for spectators, that’s supposed to be the staging area.”AdvertisementThe waiver agreements make no mention of the track’s insurance policy, leaving drivers, crew and fans in the dark about how much the track will pay in the event of an injury or death.Families of drivers who die in short-track accidents receive only a few thousand dollars on average, according to track owners. “Most tracks don’t pay out more than $5,000,” said Young, the Bronson Speedway owner.Drivers who sustain injuries are not fully covered by the track’s insurance.Bobby Arnold, a Georgia driver who had to crawl out of his burning racecar last summer after an accident, didn’t have health insurance. The track paid a lump sum, and Arnold was on his own for the rest of his medical expenses, which totaled around $140,000, he said.“They covered some of it; I wouldn’t say most,” Arnold said.Some short tracks operate without insurance at all.Thunderdome Speedway in Jasper, Ala., will not open for the 2016 season because its owner, Kenny Hogan, is short on cash. The track has not had insurance for years.Lawyers “could try to sue me, but what are you going to get out of a guy who is $250,000 in debt?” Hogan said. “I would never sue anybody if I got hurt at a racetrack.”Hogan said he made it clear to drivers and spectators that his track was not insured, which does not violate state law. He also posts signs to warn everyone on the premises that they assume their own risk.“When you show up to a track and have a damn phone book full of rules, I don’t want to race there,” Hogan said. “When you get lawyers and insurance companies involved, you’ll kill racing. Don’t kill each other and use common sense.”AdvertisementRichard Johnson chose not to sue Bubba Raceway Park even though track officials failed to check his daughter’s car before the race, he said. But he believes that it wouldn’t have made a difference because his daughter didn’t have a head-and-neck device.According to a Marion County Sheriff’s report, Niokoa Johnson broke her neck and sustained head injuries while traveling just under 40 miles per hour. Richard Johnson and two other men jumped on the hood of the car to pull the steering wheel and create enough room for Niokoa to be removed by medical personnel.“It was just a tragic accident; that’s all I can really say,” Bubba Clem said.A version of this article appears in print on May 22, 2016, on Page SP1 of the New York edition with the headline: Greater Danger at Every Turn.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.