By DAVID POLLAKMAY 21, 2016
SAN JOSE, Calif. — With a new goalie and a revitalized offense, the St. Louis Blues defeated the San Jose Sharks, 6-3, on Saturday night in Game 4 of the Western Conference finals, tying the best-of-seven series at two games apiece.The Blues had been shut out in the last two games, but the Sharks came out flat and did not find any energy until the third period inside SAP Center, their home rink, where they had won the previous six playoff contests.Blues Coach Ken Hitchcock decided to start the backup Jake Allen in net for the first time this postseason after the Blues allowed seven goals in the last two games.The strategy worked, as Allen stopped 31 shots, allowing St. Louis fans to breathe a sign of relief. Another loss would have put their team in the position of having to win three consecutive games to return to the Stanley Cup finals after a 46-year absence.Advertisement“He gave us exactly what we needed,” Hitchcock said of Allen, who replaced Brian Elliott. “He’s a competitive son of a gun. We needed a battler in there.”AdvertisementHitchcock added that the Blues needed to ignite their defense.“We played with more passion in front of him in our own zone because I made the goalie change,” Hitchcock said. “I had to make that decision.”By defeating the Sharks in San Jose, the Blues made up for their Game 2 loss at home.“This is a big step,” Hitchcock said. “This is catching our game again. We came here to win a hockey game. We did it. We got home ice back again. Now we’ve got to bring our emotional level up.”St. Louis forwards Troy Brouwer and Jori Lehtera scored in the first period, and when the fourth-line forward Kyle Brodziak added two more in the second, the Sharks made a goalie change of their own, pulling starter Martin Jones in favor of the backup James Reimer.The Sharks said they were not surprised by the Blues’ effort and were disappointed by their own performance.Get the big sports news, highlights and analysis from Times journalists, with distinctive takes on games and some behind-the-scenes surprises, delivered to your inbox every week.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.“We knew they would be better,” said Joe Pavelski, San Jose’s captain. “We knew they weren’t going to sit back. We weren’t as sharp as we could have been early. We create a few chances, but we don’t get enough off it.”The Blues bounced back from two lackluster performances with a strong first period, jumping out to a 2-0 lead.With Sharks defenseman Brent Burns in the penalty box for tripping, Brouwer fired a 17-foot shot past Jones at 6 minutes 14 seconds to break a shutout streak that had lasted 156:59.AdvertisementLess than four minutes later, St. Louis took advantage of a giveaway by San Jose defenseman Paul Martin deep in his own zone to double its lead. After making a stellar save on Blues forward Robby Fabbri, Jones was out of position when Lehtera buried the rebound at 10:11.The Sharks started to pick up a little momentum when they survived 47 seconds at a two-man disadvantage early in the second period, then went on a power play of their own. But Brodziak scored a short-handed goal at 6:09, then one at even strength at 10:11 to make it 4-0, chasing Jones.Pavelski scored his 10th goal of the playoffs at 1:05 of the third period, but the Blues restored their lead to four goals on Brouwer’s second of the game, this one on a power play at 3:55.Goals by Sharks forwards Chris Tierney and Melker Karlsson sandwiched around an empty-net tally by Blues defenseman Alex Pietrangelo wrapped up the scoring.Game 5 is set for Monday night in St. Louis.In addition to the change at goalie, Hitchcock juggled lines at the start of the game, in part because forwards David Backes and Robby Fabbri did not return to action after unspecified injuries. Hitchcock said both players were expected to be ready for Game 5.Brouwer, who scored his sixth and seventh goals of the playoffs, said he thought the Blues “went back to our roots — what made us successful in the regular season and in playoffs.”“We were able to create chances from below the goal line rather than off the rush,” Brouwer said.A version of this article appears in print on May 22, 2016, on Page SP10 of the New York edition with the headline: Offense Wakes Up, and Blues Even Series.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.