By THE ASSOCIATED PRESSMARCH 8, 2016
PALM HARBOR, Fla. —  Branden Grace held his arms about 3 feet apart to describe a relic he had found during a recent trip home to South Africa.It was his first golf club.“We lived on a farm outside Pretoria, and I was ball crazy — a rugby ball, soccer ball, tennis ball, golf ball, anything I could do,” Grace, 27, said. “So my dad cut down this 3-iron. We were fortunate. We had a sheep dog. So every time I would hit the ball, the dog would retrieve it. I told my dad, ‘It would have been nice if you had cut down a wedge.’ That 3-iron was hard to hit.”It had been so long since Grace had seen the club that he had forgotten how small it was.Its discovery also served as a reminder of how far he had come.Golf has lately been promoting a Big Three or a Big Four of top players. Just outside that group is Grace, who was one bad swing at the United States Open in June from joining the conversation.AdvertisementHe was tied for the lead with Jordan Spieth on the 16th tee at Chambers Bay when he was caught between a driver and a 3-wood. He decided on a 3-wood with a hard draw to get to the front left portion of the green. He had hit that shot beautifully on the range and on the par-5 eighth hole earlier in the round.“I wanted to start it on the right side and draw it up on the side of the green,” Grace said. “I came out of it. I flushed it; I just didn’t get the shape.”The ball shot to the right and stayed there, over the fence, beyond the railroad tracks, out of bounds, leading to a double bogey. Grace wound up two shots behind, a forgotten contender at the end of the day as Spieth won his second straight major and dealt Dustin Johnson another major setback.Grace has moved on, quietly but in the right direction.He finished third in the P.G.A. Championship at Whistling Straits, behind Jason Day and Spieth, and then was the International team’s star in a tight battle at the Presidents Cup in South Korea, becoming the first International player to win all five matches since Shigeki Maruyama in 1998.In a crucial fourballs match, in conditions so dark that Grace had no idea Louis Oosthuizen was in the water, Grace hit a 3-wood from 263 yards into a chilly wind. The ball cleared a bunker, settled on the edge of the green and led to a 1-up victory. The shot also led Oosthuizen to say of Grace, his longtime friend, “No moment is too big for him.”Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.Grace won the Qatar Masters in January for his ninth victory worldwide, and two weeks later he reached No. 10 in the world for the first time.AdvertisementBut there is work to be done, and it starts with winning on the PGA Tour.Grace has been coming over to America for the last four years for World Golf Championships events, majors and a few sponsor exemptions. His performance in the United States Open and the P.G.A. Championship allowed him to take up a full PGA Tour card for the first time this year.The next step for him is to win in America. His close call at Chambers Bay and his 15-under-par finish at Whistling Straits, he said, indicate he is not far off.And as Oosthuizen suggested, no moment is too big for him.In January 2012, at 23, Grace broke through in a manner he could never have dreamed of while practicing with that sawed-off 3-iron on the farm, or even during his junior days as a pupil under the Ernie Els & Fancourt Foundation: He won the Joburg Open in South Africa. That win, his first as a professional, earned Grace a spot in the Volvo Golf Champions event, which was held the following week at Fancourt. Grace wound up in a playoff with Els and Retief Goosen, his two golfing idols growing up, and he beat them both.During the Abu Dhabi Golf Championship this year, Grace was on stage with Els for a Q. and A. when they were asked the greatest moment of their careers. Els, who is in the World Hall of Fame with four major titles, said his was meeting Nelson Mandela.“I said, ‘I didn’t have the privilege of meeting someone like that, so my best moment was beating you and Goose,’ ” Grace said. “Ernie took it on a good note.”Grace is No. 12 in the world going into the Valspar Championship, a PGA event that starts Thursday, with the Dell Match Play event in two weeks on the way to the Masters in April. Grace, an aggressive player emboldened by his play in the United States Open and the P.G.A. Championship, said he had played too cautiously in his last three starts at Augusta National. But he is happy with his place in the game, even if not many are paying much attention.A version of this article appears in print on March 9, 2016, on Page B15 of the New York edition with the headline: A Player Is Creeping Up On His Sport’s Big Stars.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.