

 Karen Crouse
 

ON GOLF
JUNE 17, 2016
OAKMONT, Pa. — For an old, cantankerous blue blood of a course, Oakmont Country Club has shown a surprising tolerance of youth. It has accommodated a 22-year-old Jack Nicklaus’s coronation at the 1962 United States Open at the expense of the older, more popular Arnold Palmer; a 26-year-old Johnny Miller’s crowning in 1973; and a 24-year-old Ernie Els’s major title baptism in 1994.The deep-bunkered, hunchbacked dowager’s patience for golfers who got to the top in a mad rush has apparently worn thin. In the first round of the 116th United States Open, which took two days to complete, Oakmont smiled on the field’s elders and spanked some young stars.The Englishman Lee Westwood led the 40-something brigade with a three-under-par 67. Westwood, Henrik Stenson, Angel Cabrera, Jim Furyk, Retief Goosen, Phil Mickelson and Els average 44.9 years. Their first-round scores averaged 71.3.Westwood, whose sense of humor is drier than a baked green, said he would lean on his 20-plus years of experience to ride out a long week that became more mentally and physically challenging when the tournament lost almost a full day of play on Thursday to a series of electrical storms.Advertisement“Yeah, I’ll probably cut down on the gym sessions and save the energy in my legs,” he said with a straight face. Westwood later laughed when he finished describing himself as “the finely tuned athlete that I am.”AdvertisementIt is early, of course, but when the light turned green at Oakmont, the family sport-utility vehicles with the balding tires were off the line faster than the sleek, late-model sedans.The South Korean-born New Zealander Danny Lee led the 20-something upstarts with a 69. The drop-off after that was precipitous. Lee, top-ranked Jason Day, second-ranked Jordan Spieth, third-ranked Rory McIlroy, fifth-ranked Rickie Fowler, ninth-ranked Danny Willett and 11th-ranked Patrick Reed average 26.0 years. Their first-round scores averaged 74.1.After signing for a 72, Spieth said: “You’ve got to stay patient, recognize par’s a good score. That’s something we’re not used to.”Day, 28, came into the week head and shoulders above the rest of the field, with three victories and a 69.92 stroke average. Of his 37 competitive stroke-play rounds in 2016, 16 were in the 60s.“I feel good about where I’m at right now with regards to my game,” he said Tuesday, and Oakmont rolled her eyes. On Friday, he opened with a 76. A little over an hour later, Day returned to the course for his second round, where he needed to shoot a low number to make the cut.It was Day’s first competitive interaction with Oakmont, and she welcomed him by cutting him down like the tall trees on the course that distorted everybody’s view. Day’s first round was capsulized by his fortunes at the par-4 17th, where he hit his approach pin high and three-putted for bogey.Day found nine fairways and eight greens and had 31 putts, surprising numbers for someone who had posted only one round higher than two-over par all year, a 79 in the third round of the RBC Heritage the week after the Masters.AdvertisementBefore Oakmont swallowed up Day, he said the most stressful round he had endured in 2016 was the final round of the Arnold Palmer Invitational, where he scrambled for a closing 70 to hang on for the win.Get the big sports news, highlights and analysis from Times journalists, with distinctive takes on games and some behind-the-scenes surprises, delivered to your inbox every week.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.“I felt out of control,” Day said about that invitational. “It was just one of those weeks where I did not know where the ball was going.”His distress Friday took a different form. “Tee to green he was fine,” Day’s caddie, Colin Swatton, said between rounds. “He chipped it three times on one hole, twice on another, had two three-putts.”The first round was Day’s fifth in a major since he claimed the world No. 1 ranking from Spieth for the second time in late March. It was also his fifth since winning the P.G.A. Championship last year. His average score in those rounds was 73.0.Is Day trying too hard in the majors to live up to the super golfer image that he associated with being a major winner and the world No. 1 when he was a kid growing up in Australia?Swatton said he did not believe that was the case. But at his Tuesday news conference, Day acknowledged that the pressure didn’t peel away after his major breakthrough last August at Whistling Straits. It remains a constant companion.“I’m No. 1 in the world, I’m probably one of the favorites to win this week, still that’s a lot of pressure,” Day said. “But it’s good pressure to have. I’d much rather have that pressure than be at the end of the field and no one is expecting you to win.”Day’s strategy, he said, then, “is like, ‘O.K., I’ve just got to somehow survive this week and hopefully it works out.’”Perhaps Oakmont was less harsh to the old guard because she knows it has dealt with so much worse than her tangled rough: divorce; parents’ deaths; children’s disabilities; legal entanglements. Or maybe it takes decades of experience to handle a 113-year-old Oakmont, which still possesses all her teeth.A version of this article appears in print on June 18, 2016, on Page D5 of the New York edition with the headline: Upstart-Friendly Course Favors Wisdom, for Now, Over Youth.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.See More »