AdvertisementSupported byExtra BasesBy Tyler KepnerPHILADELPHIA — Position players in baseball have always been evaluated on five tools: hitting, hitting for power, speed, fielding and arm strength. More recently, scouts have hunted for sixth tool: plate discipline, supposedly as ingrained and unchanging as a player’s date of birth.“It’s just a mind-set; it’s who you are,” said Joe Maddon, the manager of the Chicago Cubs, whose hitters lead the majors in walks. “A lot of these guys have that chip. That’s part of their standard equipment. So if you don’t have that — believe me, man, it’s hard to teach.”There are exceptions, though, outliers who make the game more interesting. Odubel Herrera, the center fielder for the surprising Philadelphia Phillies, is one of them. Last Sunday, in his 38th game of the season, Herrera drew his 29th walk. That exceeded his total for all of 2015, when he played 147 games.The Phillies were 24-17 entering the weekend, one game behind Washington for the lead in the National League East. The back of their bullpen has been stingy, and their starters had the majors’ second-best ratio of strikeouts to walks, trailing only the Mets.But the Phillies had been outscored by 28 runs, and only the lowly Atlanta Braves had scored less frequently. Their meager offense depends heavily on Herrera, whose .443 on-base percentage trailed only the Nationals’ Bryce Harper and the Cubs’ Ben Zobrist in the National League. Herrera, a Rule 5 pick before last season, has defied convention to be there.“It’s been a learning experience,” he said last week through an interpreter. “Something that has helped me is to be selective and to be patient at the plate. Every time I’m facing a pitcher, I try to remember what he likes to throw, so I can decide what approach to take. That’s a strategy that I have. Depending on the pitcher, I decide if I can be selective or not. Some pitchers are very aggressive; they throw strikes all the time. Some other pitchers like throwing balls.”Herrera, 24, often caps his walks with a little spin or clap at the plate. He had a respectable on-base percentage last season (.344) but struck out 129 times. His goal this season was not so much to walk more, but to strike out less. His father, Odubel Sr., demanded it.“I feel like when I’m having my at-bat, it’s my dad, actually, having my at-bat, because I always have him in my head,” Herrera said. “One thing that he told me, and he was very specific about it, was that I needed to drop down my strikeouts. I struck out too many times last year. So what he wanted me to do was to put the ball in play, because once you put the ball in play, obviously, you have more chances to have a hit.”When he was growing up in Venezuela, Herrera said, his favorite player was Dave Concepcion, a native of the country who retired well before Herrera was born. Concepcion was the slick-fielding shortstop for Cincinnati’s Big Red Machine, and Herrera signed as a shortstop with Texas in 2008. He played mostly second base in the minors until the Phillies drafted him from the Rangers’ Class AA roster in December 2014.Herrera had just won the Texas League batting title, at .321, and said he expected to be picked. The rebuilding Phillies could spare the roster spot, and they had a coach, Juan Samuel, work with him on converting to the outfield.“I used to step out of staff meetings, excuse myself at 8:30, because that was when we had early work,” Samuel said. “There were times I wanted to give him days off, but he said, ‘No, let’s go.’ I said, O.K., my fungo never gets tired. Having somebody like that to work with is pleasing and rewarding, because they want it as much as you want it for them.”Samuel had made the same defensive transition in his 16-year major league career, but his offensive profile was essentially fixed as a rookie for the Phillies in 1984. Samuel was an electrifying player but rarely walked or resisted sliders off the plate. He led the majors in strikeouts across his first five seasons, struggling with the adjustments Herrera has learned to make.“I can look back now, and if there’s something I could have changed, it was probably that,” Samuel said. “But it was probably going to take away some of my aggressiveness. He’s different, I think. He’s got some power, he’s a strong guy, but he has so much confidence all the time. That’s the whole thing. Sometimes we might go into a little slump and you start doubting yourself a little bit. You don’t see that in him.”Herrera, a left-handed hitter, bats with an unusually wide stance, his right leg angled far toward first base, a reaction to the way pitchers in Venezuela used to beat him inside. It looks strange, but it works, mirroring the team in general. The Phillies had baseball’s worst record last season, and their winning record seems out of place. But their engine is not surprised.“We know what we’re capable of,” Herrera said. “We know we’re a great team and we have good chemistry in the clubhouse. We want to shut mouths. We want people to know we’re for real. It’s not all about the future. It’s also about the present.”The Cincinnati Reds have overhauled most of their roster and did not expect to contend this season. But injuries have made survival even tougher, with a full rotation’s worth of starters on the disabled list: Homer Bailey, Anthony DeSclafani, Raisel Iglesias, Michael Lorenzen and Jon Moscot. One of the more effective replacements, Tim Adleman, left his start in the fourth inning Thursday with a strained left oblique.The injury interrupts an unlikely major league career. Adleman, 28, was drafted by the Baltimore Orioles in the 24th round out of Georgetown in 2010. After a solid first season, the Orioles encouraged him to be quicker to the plate in 2011, and Adleman struggled so badly that he was released the next spring.After splitting a season with two independent teams, Adleman, who is from North Carolina, moved to Wilton, Conn. He could live there with family while working with weighted balls at a nearby training facility — the Clubhouse in Fairfield, Conn. — trying to increase velocity.“I’ll give it one more year,” Adleman said he told himself. “If I don’t think I’m making significant process or I’m back on the radar, I’ll probably go ahead and shut it down.”Adleman had gotten just a $2,000 bonus from the Orioles, and minor leaguers make a meager income. He developed a routine he has maintained ever since, working in the deli at the Village Market in Wilton in the mornings, then training in Fairfield in the afternoons. After he had been throwing 88 to 90 miles an hour, Adleman said, his fastball jumped to the 92-to-95 range.“Essentially, you train your arm to move like you have a two-ounce ball, but you have a five-ounce ball in your hand,” Adleman said. “The way that I did the program helped me believe that I would be able to sustain it.”The results showed in 2013, when Adleman had a 1.46 earned run average in 40 games for the independent New Jersey Jackals. He signed with the Reds, advanced quickly through their farm system and made his major league debut on May 1. He has gone 1-1 with a 3.72 E.R.A. in four starts — validating his decision to try to improve his fastball before giving up.“You can never predict what’s going to come of it,” Adleman said, “but I still was pretty confident that if I just got somebody to notice me, I’d have a chance.”The Texas Rangers announced plans Friday for a partnership with the city of Arlington on a $1 billion retractable-roof ballpark that would open by 2021. If they see the project through — public funding would be required — the Rangers will join the Atlanta Braves in abandoning a stadium built in the 1990s. The Braves are leaving Turner Field next season for a new home, SunTrust Park, in Cobb County, Ga.The Braves moved to Turner Field in 1997, after it was fitted for baseball following the 1996 Summer Olympics. The Rangers opened their stadium, now called Globe Life Park, in 1994. Both parks have hosted a perfect game — by Kenny Rogers in Texas and by Randy Johnson in Atlanta — and an All-Star Game, but have never been home to a World Series winner.Once SunTrust Park is finished, the oldest stadium in the National League East will be Citizens Bank Park in Philadelphia, which opened in 2004. The oldest in the American League West remains the creaky Oakland Coliseum, which greeted the A’s when they moved from Kansas City in 1968. The Rangers’ stadium will be their third since they moved from Washington in 1972, and the third retractable-roof ballpark in the division, after Safeco Field in Seattle and Minute Maid Park in Houston.Advertisement