By THE ASSOCIATED PRESSMAY 19, 2016
BUNKER HILL, Ind. — Adam Confer grew up watching his dad burn rubber while racing at the Bunker Hill Dragstrip in the 1970s.Little did he know that 40 years later he would end up owning the place and, at the same time, saving Indiana’s oldest continuously running dragstrip from closing forever.That’s just what he did last month, when he and his wife, Stacey, moved back to the area and purchased the track to become only the third owners in the dragstrip’s 60-year history.“I never really believed that this would happen,” Adam told The Kokomo Tribune. “Pretty soon you look around and you’re like, ‘We actually own a racetrack.’ I remember being here as a little kid, so it’s pretty surreal.”AdvertisementIn March 2015 the dragstrip’s previous owners, Steve and Darlene Daniels, put the 23-acre property on the market for an asking price of $650,000.AdvertisementAt that time, the Confers lived in Michigan. Adam had moved there in 1999 from Peru, and it was where he met Stacey.In 2002, Adam decided to follow in his father’s footsteps and started drag racing in Michigan. That led him back to the Bunker Hill Dragstrip for a race last year, when he learned the place was for sale.Purchasing the place was an intriguing prospect, Stacey said, and they decided to act on it in November.“We were at a position in our lives where we were able to do it,” she said.That included owning a successful finance and real-estate business in Michigan.But the Confers said they could not reach a deal with the Danielses at the time. Even so, they decided to follow through with their plans and move back to Indiana to be closer to family.Then, in April, the former owners finally accepted an offer from the Confers. Adam said the Danielses gave them the keys to the place and, just like that, they owned the dragstrip, along with a house and a full-service restaurant on the property.In a lot of ways, the Confers are the ideal owners for the track. They both have decades of business experience, and Adam has a life’s worth of racing experience, as well as an intimate knowledge of the area.Get the big sports news, highlights and analysis from Times journalists, with distinctive takes on games and some behind-the-scenes surprises, delivered to your inbox every week.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.Now they plan to use that experience to turn the dragstrip and restaurant into top-notch facilities. But that is going to take work, Adam said. A lot of work.AdvertisementAfter taking over, the Confers quickly realized the track was in dire need of an upgrade. Adam said the dragstrip was repaved five years ago, but some of the paving in the pit area was substandard, leaving parts of it in shambles.“It’s made it atrocious out here,” he said. “We’re celebrating our 60th year at the track, but that means your equipment is celebrating its 60th year, too. You can look around here and see that. This place needed some elbow grease to get going.”The subpar track has led many racers who called the place home to race at other dragstrips, like the ones in South Bend, Muncie and Indianapolis.Adam said he wanted to get the eighth-of-a-mile track back up to a professional-grade level and to start building back the list of racers who consider the dragstrip their turf.Stacey said she planned a big marketing push to get the track and restaurant back into public view. That is especially true for the restaurant, called Outpost Bar and Grill, which the previous owners opened about five years ago to diversify the business.“Our list is real long on what we want to work on and improve here,” Stacey said.That has led to some long days for the Confers, who are also still managing their real-estate and finance business. Adam said he has been working from 6:30 a.m. to midnight since buying the track to make sure it succeeds.“A lot of places come and go, but we’re sitting on 60 years of history,” he said. “We’ve got a gold mine here to work with. It’s just a matter of taking your washrag and cleaning it up. That’s all it needs.”AdvertisementOf course, the Confers are in the business to make money. But, Adam said, it’s more than that. He said it’s about keeping alive a landmark in the area that was an important part of his life when he was a child.And if no one would have bought the place when it was still up and running, Adam said, there’s a good chance the dragstrip would have closed and never opened again.“So many people felt that this wouldn’t be here,” he said. “For me, this had a lot to do with preservation. If this isn’t here, where else are people going to race? This track going away would have been bad. I don’t think it ever would have come back.”Adam said that not only is the dragstrip back in business, but he also plans to make it better than it has ever been. He said that may take a year or two, but racers and spectators can expect some major upgrades in the future.“In the next five years, we’re going to build this up to become a premier organization that knows what it’s capable of,” Adam said. “I want this track to be as big as it’s capable of being. I’m excited. Not so much about where we are today, but where we’re going. There’s so much opportunity here.”A version of this article appears in print on May 20, 2016, on Page B13 of the New York edition with the headline: Back Home, Reviving a Dragstrip.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.