AdvertisementSupported byBy The Associated PressTALLAHASSEE, Fla. — When Miami and Florida State meet on the baseball diamond this weekend, more than bragging rights will be on the line.Besides solidifying their seeds for next week’s Atlantic Coast Conference tournament in Durham, N.C., the Hurricanes and the Seminoles are seeking to bolster their résumés for a national seeding in the N.C.A.A. tournament.Before the Seminoles and the Hurricanes were both A.C.C. members, they used to play six times per year, including a series early in the season. That total was reduced to one three-game series when Miami joined the conference in 2004. This is the first time since 1976 that the rivals have closed the regular season against each other.“It’s big for both of us,” said Jim Morris, Miami’s manager. “We have a chance to win the A.C.C. regular-season title, which is huge, and they have a chance to improve their seeding.”The Hurricanes (42-9, 20-6 A.C.C.) appear to be the team that is gaining momentum. They have won eight straight games, including a come-from-behind, 4-2 victory in Thursday’s series opener. A win on Friday or Saturday, or a Louisville loss to Wake Forest, would give Miami its third regular-season A.C.C. crown.“Our team right now is the kind of team that has a lot of confidence in ourselves,” said outfielder Willie Abreu, who is tied for the team lead in R.B.I. with 48. “We really don’t know when it’s going to happen, but we know it’s going to happen.”Miami, which advanced to the College World Series last year, is ranked second in the College Baseball poll and fourth in the Baseball America poll, which should put it in solid position to host both an N.C.A.A. regional and a super regional.Florida State is slumping at the wrong time, having dropped five of six. The Seminoles appear to be safe as a regional host but would need to take the last two games against Miami and win the A.C.C. tournament to revive their super-regional hopes.The Seminoles (33-18, 15-9) led the Atlantic Division for most of the season, but with Thursday’s loss, Louisville clinched the division title and at least a second seed in the A.C.C. tournament. The Seminoles have dropped to 14th from seventh in the Baseball America poll and to eighth from fourth in the Collegiate Baseball rankings.If Florida State is going to turn things around, it needs to do a better job with runners in scoring position. It was 1 of 14 in those situations on Thursday. The Seminoles also need better starting pitching. Over the past six games, their starters have a 4.23 E.R.A.Manager Mike Martin has stressed not giving teams extra opportunities. The Seminoles have committed five errors in the past five games.“Any wins going into the postseason is huge,” third baseman John Sansone said. “It just gains a lot of momentum, especially against Miami.”Time is also running out if Florida State wants to extend its streak of seasons in which it has won 40 games or more. The last time that did not happen was in 1977, when the Seminoles were 37-13.Advertisement