By THE ASSOCIATED PRESSMARCH 8, 2016
Mats Zuccarello had a goal and two assists on Tuesday night, and the visiting Rangers defeated the Buffalo Sabres, 4-2, after nearly blowing a three-goal lead.J. T. Miller sealed the win with a backhander into an empty net with a minute left after he lost a glove on the rush up the right wing. Derrick Brassard and Jesper Fast also scored for the Rangers, who extended their winning streak over the Sabres to nine.“We didn’t play our best game,” Zuccarello said.“I think we’re just happy to do what we had to do to win, and Raanta played good,” he added, referring to the backup goaltender Antti Raanta, who stopped the final 24 shots he faced in replacing the injured Henrik Lundqvist.The Rangers built a 3-0 lead on their first 12 shots before losing much of their momentum against a Sabres team that was playing on consecutive nights. BRUINS 1, LIGHTNING 0 Brad Marchand scored 10 seconds into overtime, Jonas Gustavsson made 42 saves, and visiting Boston edged Tampa Bay in a matchup of Atlantic Division leaders.AdvertisementPatrice Bergeron sent a pass from the right wing through the slot that Marchand redirected past Ben Bishop.CANADIENS 4, STARS 3 Alex Galchenyuk got his second goal of the game 1 minute 59 seconds into overtime, and host Montreal survived Dallas to end a four-game skid.Max Pacioretty and Phillip Danault also scored for the Canadiens. Ben Scrivens made 30 saves.BLUE JACKETS 5, RED WINGS 3 Cam Atkinson scored twice in the third period, Boone Jenner had a goal and an assist, and host Columbus topped Detroit.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.David Clarkson and David Savard also scored for the Blue Jackets, while Joonas Korpisalo made 32 saves.Tomas Tatar and Andreas Athanasiou scored 46 seconds apart late in the third period to pull the Red Wings to 4-3.PREDATORS 4, JETS 2 Craig Smith scored twice, and Nashville hung on to win at Winnipeg.Colton Sissons and Ryan Johansen also scored for the Predators. Pekka Rinne turned away 21 shots.AdvertisementDrew Stafford and Jacob Trouba had goals for the Jets.HURRICANES 4, SENATORS 3 The rookie Jaccob Slavin scored in the fourth round of a shootout, and Carolina edged Ottawa in Raleigh, N.C.Jeff Skinner scored twice for the Hurricanes, including one with 0.2 of a second remaining to force overtime, and Jay McClement had a short-handed goal.Cam Ward made 21 saves for Carolina.A version of this article appears in print on March 9, 2016, on Page B15 of the New York edition with the headline: Big Lead Nearly Dissolves as Rangers Survive Sabres.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.