By DAVID WALDSTEINMARCH 8, 2016
LAKE BUNEA VISTA, Fla. — Matt Harvey had a good day of spring training Tuesday. It was not the kind of good day he is hoping for in the regular season, during which the goal is to dominate the opposition into submission.It was a day with challenges, when he had to summon a wide array of pitches to escape minor difficulties. He dealt with base runners, pitched out of jams, sweated under a bright sun and jogged in the outfield on a routine day of preparation.At a Mets camp that has been dominated by Yoenis Cespedes and his various modes of transportation, Harvey had slipped quietly into the background until he stood on the mound to face an opponent.Harvey threw 41 measured pitches over three innings, gave up a run, three hits and a pair of walks and faced 13 Braves batters, loading the bases twice.AdvertisementHis fastball touched 97 miles per hour on the radar gun, and mostly hovered between 94 and 96 m.p.h.Best of all, Harvey had a good feel for his slider, the complementary pitch that eluded him most of last summer as he made his comeback from Tommy John surgery in 2014.Advertisement“I think the spin and the swing and misses I have gotten between here and live batting practice has definitely shown it’s where it needs to be,” he said. “It wasn’t that case for three-quarters of the year last year.”Mallex Smith, a top Braves prospect, was one of Harvey’s on-schedule slider victims. Harvey set Smith up with a fastball, then a two-seam fastball, and struck him out on a check swing with the slider.“It was violent,” Smith said after the Braves’ 5-4 win. “It started above my waist and ended up in the dirt. It’s pretty nasty, I’ll give him that.”Manager Terry Collins was thrilled to see Harvey’s knee-buckling secondary pitch this early in the spring.“It’s nice to see that slider back,” Collins said.Last spring training, Harvey was pitching in games for the first time since surgery, and great attention was paid to the health of his arm. That was not the case Tuesday. He had long ago shoved aside most of the arm worries with another good season in 2015.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.Even without full use of the slider last year, Harvey still went 13-8 with a 2.71 earned run average. And after much debate over innings limitations, he ended up throwing 1891/3 innings over 29 starts, then went 2-0 with a 3.04 E.R.A. and 27 strikeouts in the postseason.Tuesday was the first time he had pitched in a game since Game 5 of the World Series. Harvey threw eight brilliant innings until Lorenzo Cain walked to lead off the ninth and Eric Hosmer doubled him home. That knocked Harvey out of the game and ended his season.What followed over the next few innings was a 7-2 Series-clinching win for the Kansas City Royals and scrutiny over Collins’s decision to send Harvey out for that fateful ninth inning.AdvertisementBut four months removed from that game, the stakes had changed significantly, even if the ultimate goal is the same.“As far as this spring training, I definitely think we all realize there is still a lot of time to work in order to get to where you need to be,” Harvey said, “and the end result is pitching into November.”Harvey came out firing fastballs in a 1-2-3 first inning against the Braves. Then he began to use his breaking pitches more, especially to Nick Swisher, who saw only two fastballs while drawing a seven-pitch walk in the second.“As you get older and get into more spring trainings, you realize how long it is until the season actually starts and also how long into the season that we want to go,” Harvey said. “I think last year I was pretty excited to get back in there and let it all out.”INSIDE PITCHDAVID WRIGHT is expected to fly back to New York to attend a memorial service at Citi Field at 3 p.m. Wednesday for Shannon Forde, a longtime team employee who died of cancer last week at age 44.A version of this article appears in print on March 9, 2016, on Page B13 of the New York edition with the headline: In His Debut, Harvey Shows His Slider Is in Peak Form.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.