By THE ASSOCIATED PRESSMARCH 9, 2016
DeMar DeRozan had 25 points, Kyle Lowry added 23 points and 9 assists, and the Raptors beat the Nets, 104-99, in Toronto on Tuesday night.Brook Lopez had 35 points, one shy of his season high, for the Nets, who lost the season series to the Raptors for the first time since 2009-10.“He’s our horse; he’s our guy,” the Nets’ interim coach, Tony Brown, said of Lopez. “He had a great game tonight, and we try to do as much as possible to get him the ball because he’s one of the few guys who had it going.”The Raptors rallied from a 16-point halftime deficit to get back on track after their franchise-record, 12-game home winning streak ended Sunday against Houston.AdvertisementToronto’s 58-42 halftime hole equaled its biggest of the season, which had come in a loss at Golden State in November.AdvertisementThe Raptors pulled to 2 points behind courtesy of a 22-9 run over the final 5 minutes 55 seconds of the third quarter and finally jumped in front on a Patrick Patterson 3-pointer to open the fourth.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.Three quick 3-pointers from Terrence Ross and Lowry enabled Toronto to turn a 2-point deficit into a 10-point lead during a three-minute span. The Nets eventually closed that gap to 3 points on a couple of occasions down the stretch but could get no closer.“That’s a very good team,” Lopez said. “They’re in a great position in the East. They’re definitely contending in the East and contending in the league, and we had a good showing. Unfortunately they went on that huge run, and we weren’t able to claw quite back into it.”Thaddeus Young had 10 points in the first quarter as the Nets jumped out to an early lead. But the Raptors never let the Nets get more than 4 points in front, and took the lead themselves for the first time on a 3-pointer by Ross with 1:43 remaining, ultimately taking a 28-23 edge into the second quarter.The Nets responded by turning to their bench, and their reserves scored 20 points as the Raptors misfired, hitting just 20 percent from the floor on 3-of-15 shooting while the Nets built up a 16-point edge.A version of this article appears in print on March 9, 2016, on Page B16 of the New York edition with the headline: DeMar DeRozan, Kyle Lowry and Raptors Top Nets Despite Brook Lopez’s 35 Points.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.