AdvertisementSupported bySports BriefingBy The Associated PressJoe Kelly pitched no-hit ball into the seventh inning in his first start after a month on the disabled list to lead the Red Sox to a 9-1 win over Cleveland in Boston on Saturday.Relying mostly on fastballs with an occasional curveball and slider, Kelly struck out seven and walked three.“I just felt super strong out there,” Kelly said. “All the work I’ve been putting in since I went out on the D.L. in getting the shoulder stronger in the training room, it was good to go out there and not even think about it.”Kelly got plenty of support from Boston’s bats. Mookie Betts had a grand slam and a solo homer, and Jackie Bradley Jr. extended his majors’ best hitting streak to 26 games with an infield single. Dom DiMaggio owns the Red Sox record with a 34-game hitting streak in 1949.Kelly (2-0) came off the 15-day disabled list earlier in the day after being out with a right shoulder impingement since April 20. He shut down the Indians until Juan Uribe’s double with two outs in the seventh.Manager John Farrell immediately pulled Kelly at 104 pitches after the hit. He left to a long, loud ovation.Cubs Fall to Giants Matt Cain pitched six strong innings and helped himself with his bat, Buster Posey added a two-run homer, and the San Francisco Giants beat the visiting Chicago Cubs, 5-3.Cain (1-5) got his first victory since July 22, 2015, ending a streak of 15 consecutive winless starts. He contributed to his cause with a two-run double in the second inning.Chicago’s Jon Lester (4-3) allowed five runs on six hits and three walks in his worst outing of the season. The Cubs are 2-3 so far on a nine-game road trip.Fight Jersey for Sale, MaybeThe Washington Nationals star Bryce Harper said an auction house had the wrong shirt. Lelands.com is offering a jersey Harper is said to have worn during a dugout dust-up last season with his teammate Jonathan Papelbon, but Harper said he still had the jersey.Around the Majors Lorenzo Cain hit a solo home run, and five Kansas City pitchers helped the visiting Royals beat the slumping Chicago White Sox, 2-1. Chicago has now lost eight of its last 10. Williams Perez took a two-hitter into the seventh and Atlanta beat host Philadelphia, 2-0, for its second series win of the season. • Michael Fulmer struck out 11 and Cameron Maybin, James McCann and J. D. Martinez homered to give Detroit a 5-4 win over visiting Tampa Bay. The Rays’ Kevin Kiermaier broke his glove hand trying to make a diving catch in the fifth. • The fill-in shortstop Eduardo Nunez homered to cap a five-run eighth inning as Minnesota beat visiting Toronto, 5-3, for just its fourth win in 21 games.Brooks Koepka overcame two early bogeys and the huge shadow of playing alongside Jordan Spieth in his home event to take the lead into the final round of the Byron Nelson in Irving, Tex.Koepka shot a five-under-par 65 to match the best 54-hole score at the Nelson — a 16-under 194 — and finish his round two strokes ahead of Spieth, who shot 67.Spieth, a native of nearby Dallas, played his first PGA Tour event at the Nelson as a 16-year-old amateur six years ago. His image is everywhere at the tournament, including 8,000 bobblehead dolls that were given away Saturday.McIlroy Leads in Ireland Rory McIlroy could be on the cusp of his first Irish Open victory if the heavens permit him to finish. Lightning storms bedeviled the third round at the K Club in Straffan, Ireland. Play was suspended for the night with McIlroy ready to tee off at the 16th hole with a three-stroke lead over the Masters champion Danny Willett.McIlroy protested to officials amid heavy rain that fading light had prevented him from seeing the course properly. Officials had already suspended play twice and evacuated the course for nearly four hours because of lightning.Jutanugarn Seeks a Streak Ariya Jutanugarn moved into position for her second straight L.P.G.A. Tour victory with a bogey-free six-under 65 to take the third-round lead at the Kingsmill Championship in Williamsburg, Va.The 20-year-old Jutanugarn had three birdies in a four-hole stretch on the front nine, then birdied three of the last six holes. She won two weeks ago in Alabama to become Thailand’s first winner in L.P.G.A. Tour history.Nneka Ogwumike had 25 points and visiting Los Angeles rallied past the Liberty, 79-72, in overtime.Candace Parker added 14 points and 12 rebounds for the undefeated Sparks, who had won their first two games of the season by an average of 30 points.After the Sparks rallied from a 7-point deficit in the fourth, Tina Charles had a chance to win it for the Liberty in regulation, but her 15-foot jumper bounced off the rim. Charles had 17 points and 16 rebounds for the Liberty (2-1).Finland beat Russia, 3-1, in Moscow to set up an ice hockey world championship final against Canada, which beat the United States, 4-3.The Finns, the only unbeaten team, are on course for their first world championship since 2011.Forward Sebastian Aho, 18, helped Finland win with two goals he attributed to “great passes to me,” adding that he was looking forward to the gold medal game. “I like to win, and I hate to lose,” he said.Top-seeded Dominic Thiem of Austria beat the German teenager Alexander Zverev, 6-4, 3-6, 6-0, to win the Nice Open in France, clinching his third ATP title of the year.Thiem broke Zverev’s serve six times on his way to a sixth career title. Zverev, 19, who was seeded eighth and was playing in his first career final, double-faulted nine times — four in the deciding set.French Player Wins Caroline Garcia of France defeated Mirjana Lucic-Baroni of Croatia, 6-4, 6-1, to win the Strasbourg International in France for her second career title. Lucic-Baroni, 34, was back in the Strasbourg final 19 years after losing to Steffi Graf there.James Hinchcliffe, who nearly died last year from a life-threatening leg injury sustained in a practice crash for the Indianapolis 500, took the top seed heading into the nine-car pole shootout for this year’s race.Hinchcliffe barely held onto the top seed with a four-lap average of 230.946 miles per hour. Ryan Hunter-Reay was second at 230.805.Advertisement