By THE ASSOCIATED PRESSJUNE 27, 2016
Eric Lindros was elected to the Hockey Hall of Fame on Monday as part of the class of 2016, which also included the Soviet star Sergei Makarov and goaltender Rogie Vachon. The player and coach Pat Quinn, who died in 2014, made it as well.Because concussions and other injuries shortened his career, Lindros was passed over for the Hall six previous times. But his Hart Memorial Trophy season as the N.H.L.’s most valuable player with the Philadelphia Flyers in 1995, and his 865 points in 760 games, proved too much to keep him out.Makarov scored more than a point a game for the Soviet national team, and he won the Calder Trophy as the rookie of the year with the Calgary Flames in 1991.Vachon won the Vezina Trophy as the league’s top goalie and won two Stanley Cups with the Montreal Canadiens.AdvertisementQuinn led Lindros and Canada to the gold medal at the 2002 Salt Lake Olympics and coached the 1979-80 Flyers, who went a record 35 consecutive games without a loss.AdvertisementSIGNINGS The Nashville Predators signed forward Filip Forsberg to a six-year, $36 million contract, locking up one of their brightest young stars for the long term. Forsberg will make $6 million each of the next six seasons.  The Arizona Coyotes signed goaltender Louis Domingue to a two-year deal. The terms of the contract were not released.  The Detroit Red Wings re-signed forward Drew Miller to a one-year deal. Miller, 32, will make $1.025 million plus as much as $350,000 in bonuses.Lonnie Chisenhall hit a three-run homer, Trevor Bauer gave up two runs in six innings, and the visiting Cleveland Indians beat the Atlanta Braves, 8-3, for their 10th straight win.The Indians, who lead the American League Central, extended the major leagues’ longest winning streak of the season. The streak is Cleveland’s longest since the Indians closed the 2013 regular season with 10 straight victories.BIG NIGHT FOR CUBS’ BRYANT Kris Bryant became the first major league player to hit three home runs and two doubles in a game, Jake Arrieta added a solo shot in the ballpark where he threw a no-hitter in April, and the Chicago Cubs outlasted the host Cincinnati Reds, 11-8.Arrieta, a right-hander, struggled in his return to Cincinnati, giving up a season-high five runs in five innings, but Bryant drove in six runs to help him pull through. Bryant’s 16 total bases were a Cubs record, and his five hits were a career high.DODGERS RALLY TO EDGE PIRATES A. J. Ellis hit a tiebreaking, two-out infield single that capped a four-run fifth inning, and the visiting Los Angeles Dodgers rallied to beat the Pittsburgh Pirates, 5-4, and salvage the finale of a four-game series.Scott Kazmir (6-3), who entered the game with an 11.17 E.R.A. at PNC Park, won despite allowing four runs on four hits, with four walks, in five innings.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.RAYS HALT 11-GAME SKID Nick Franklin homered and drove in a career-high five runs as Tampa Bay ended an 11-game skid with a 13-7 victory over the Boston Red Sox in St. Petersburg, Fla.AdvertisementARIZONA TAKES GAME 1 AT C.W.S. FINALS J C Cloney pitched a four-hitter and Ryan Aguilar drove in two runs, leading Arizona to a 3-0 victory over Coastal Carolina in Game 1 of the College World Series finals in Omaha.The Wildcats (49-22) can wrap up their second national championship in five years with a win Tuesday.Cloney (8-4), a junior left-hander, allowed four singles, walked three and struck out six in the second complete game of his career. He extended his scoreless innings streak at the C.W.S. to 16.Denise Michaels, a spokeswoman for quarterback Johnny Manziel, said a lawyer who accidentally sent The Associated Press a text message with details related to Manziel’s domestic violence case has resigned from the defense team.Michaels confirmed that Bob Hinton had withdrawn from the case, which is being led by the lawyer Jim Darnell of El Paso.The A.P. reported last week that Hinton’s inadvertent text indicated he had doubts about Manziel’s ability to stay clean and that Hinton was given a receipt that indicated Manziel may have spent more than $1,000 at a Dallas drug paraphernalia store the day after a hit-and-run crash.Manziel, 23, a Heisman Trophy winner, faces a misdemeanor assault charge involving his former girlfriend Colleen Crowley in January.Thermal cameras will be used at the Tour de France to help eradicate the threat of mechanical doping, said Thierry Braillard, France’s junior minister for sports.A leading French science and technology research organization into atomic energy, called C.E.A., will provide the technology at the request of the sports ministry.AdvertisementThermal cameras help to detect heat produced by a small hidden motor inside a bicycle.The International Cycling Union said that it has enough resources to carry out up to 4,000 tests for technological fraud at the Tour, which begins Saturday.Because of an editing error, a report in the Sports Briefing column on Tuesday about this year’s Hockey Hall of Fame selections described incorrectly a streak by the 1979-80 Philadelphia Flyers, who were coached by Pat Quinn, one of the selections. They went 35 consecutive games without a loss, with 25 wins and 10 ties; they did not win 35 consecutive games.A version of this article appears in print on June 28, 2016, on Page B14 of the New York edition with the headline: Lindros Makes Hall of Fame After Six Misses.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.