By THE ASSOCIATED PRESSJUNE 14, 2016
Maria Sharapova appealed her two-year doping ban to the highest court in sports on Tuesday, and an expedited ruling will be issued next month ahead of the Rio de Janeiro Olympics.Sharapova filed an appeal to the Court of Arbitration for Sport in Lausanne, Switzerland, seeking to overturn or reduce the suspension imposed by the International Tennis Federation last week. Sharapova tested positive for meldonium at the Australian Open in January, having taken it before each match even though the substance was banned at the beginning of 2016.If the suspension is thrown out, Sharapova will be eligible to compete for Russia at the Rio Games, which open Aug. 5.MURRAY SURVIVES AT QUEEN’S CLUB Top-seeded Andy Murray of Scotland struggled to a 7-6 (8), 7-6 (1) victory over Nicolas Mahut of France to begin the defense of his title at the Aegon Championships at the Queen’s Club in London.AdvertisementSecond-seeded Stan Wawrinka lost to the Spanish left-hander Fernando Verdasco, 6-2, 7-6 (3).The American mare Tepin won the Queen Anne Stakes at the Royal Ascot in England, her first race in Europe.AdvertisementTrained by Mark Casse and ridden by Julien Leparoux, the 5-year-old Tepin won by a half-length at 11-2 odds in front of Queen Elizabeth II.Tepin won the Breeders’ Cup Mile last year, and Casse said he was planning to run her there again in November.Josh Donaldson hit a grand slam and finished with five R.B.I., Edwin Encarnacion hit a two-run homer, and the Toronto Blue Jays routed the visiting Philadelphia Phillies, 11-3.Donaldson doubled and scored in the first, doubled home a run in the second, and hit his third career grand slam in the third. He reached for a fourth time in the seventh, when he walked and scored on Encarnacion’s homer.CUBS EDGE NATIONALS Albert Almora Jr. drove in the go-ahead run with a ninth-inning double, Dexter Fowler had two hits, and visiting Chicago defeated Washington, 4-3, to even a three-game series between division leaders.LONGORIA KEYS RAYS’ RALLY Evan Longoria and Corey Dickerson had three R.B.I. apiece, and Tampa Bay came back from an early four-run deficit to beat the Seattle Mariners, 8-7, in St. Petersburg, Fla. Longoria’s seventh homer in his past 10 games, a three-run shot off Nick Vincent, tied it at 7-7 in the seventh.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.FISTER PROPELS ASTROS Doug Fister pitched effectively into the eighth inning and gave Houston breathing room with a two-run single in a 5-2 victory over the Cardinals in St. Louis. Fister (7-3) allowed five hits and two runs in seven and a third innings, his longest outing of the season, to win his sixth consecutive decision.As their contract stalemate with Von Miller dragged on, the Denver Broncos locked down another key defender, signing linebacker Brandon Marshall to a four-year, $32 million extension.AdvertisementMarshall will make about $2.5 million in 2016, and his new deal kicks in the next year and runs through 2020.Marshall posted back-to-back 100-tackle seasons for the Broncos.Anaheim rehired Randy Carlyle, welcoming back the team’s only Stanley Cup-winning coach four and a half years after firing him.Carlyle replaces Bruce Boudreau, who replaced Carlyle on Nov. 30, 2011, and was fired on April 29.Carlyle, 60, led the Ducks to the 2007 Stanley Cup title.Tina Charles scored 28 points and Sugar Rodgers added 18 to help the Liberty (6-4) defeat the visiting Dallas Wings, 91-88.Charles broke an 85-85 tie with a jumper from the top of the key with 40 seconds remaining after Kiah Stokes’s offensive rebound. Dallas (3-7) had a chance to take the lead, but Plenette Pierson’s 3-pointer was short, and Stokes grabbed the rebound with 21 seconds left. Rodgers hit two free throws a few seconds later to make it a two-possession game.The Slovak Peter Sagan maintained the overall lead at the Tour de Suisse as the Argentine Maximiliano Richeze led a South American one-two finish ahead of Sagan during the fourth stage.Richeze crossed the finish line ahead of his Etixx Quick Step teammate, Fernando Gaviria of Colombia, with Sagan finishing third after a 120-mile run from Rheinfelden to Champagne, Switzerland.(AGENCE FRANCE-PRESSE)A version of this article appears in print on June 15, 2016, on Page B14 of the New York edition with the headline: As Olympics Near, Sharapova Appeals Ban.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.