
On Baseball By                     
 TYLER KEPNER
 
SEPT. 8, 2016
Nathan Eovaldi stood by his locker at Yankee Stadium the other day, all dressed up with nowhere to pitch. Eovaldi, the Yankees right-hander, was in full uniform for the official team photograph but will not pitch for the rest of this season, or next. He underwent his second Tommy John operation last month.The scourge of pitching injuries struck again on Wednesday night in Washington, when Stephen Strasburg winced in pain and left his start in the third inning with elbow discomfort. Strasburg had Tommy John surgery in 2010, and a strained flexor mass was found in a magnetic resonance imaging exam on Thursday. The Nationals said the injury was not season-ending. But until he returns, Strasburg, who is 15-4 and signed a $175 million contract extension in May, is another damaged pitcher in an industry full of them.“I don’t know, I really don’t,” Eovaldi said, struggling to explain why so many pitchers seem to break down. “There’s guys that don’t throw as hard and they need it. There’s guys that don’t work as hard as others, and they’re fine. Other guys work hard, and they need it. I don’t know what the good combination is. It’s just one of those things, I feel like — good mechanics and staying healthy, it’s hard to do.”The game’s best pitcher, the three-time Cy Young Award winner Clayton Kershaw of the Los Angeles Dodgers, has been out since late June with a herniated disk in his back. He is scheduled to return on Friday in Miami, most likely for four or five innings, a critical start for a team seeking its fourth consecutive National League West title.AdvertisementA healthy Kershaw would be a welcome sight in a landscape of untested and unfamiliar arms. Expanded September rosters always bring a new batch of pitchers, but teams are finding it harder than ever to shepherd a staff through the grind of 162 games. The schedule may be shortened a bit in the next collective bargaining agreement, which is being negotiated. But for the moment, the answer is disquieting: more pitchers, fewer innings.According to the Elias Sports Bureau, 727 players had thrown in at least one game through Wednesday, eight shy of the record total set last season. Starters were averaging only 5.702 innings per start, according to Elias, which would be the lowest on record (since 1900). The previous low was 5.787 innings per start, in 2007.Advertisement“There just seems to be so much more wear and tear on this generation of kids, whether it goes back to Little League or youth baseball,” said the former pitcher David Cone, now a broadcaster for YES.“Too much, too soon, maybe,” Cone added. “I only pitched during the baseball season. I didn’t do the year-round thing, didn’t do fall ball. I was playing other sports. By the time I signed professionally, I really didn’t have a lot of miles on my arm. These kids have more miles on their arms at a younger age than ever before.”Cone pitched a complete game in his final start of 1988, in the playoffs for the Mets when he was 25 years old. He said he had felt off the next season; not hurt, exactly, but not as crisp with his command as he had been. His earned run average rose by more than a run, but Cone still made all his starts and would continue to do so for years.This year’s Mets rotation has been ravaged by injuries after the team rolled to the World Series last fall. For now, only Noah Syndergaard is healthy, and he has been pitching with a bone spur in his right elbow. The Mets have compensated with a second wave of young starters — Robert Gsellman, Seth Lugo and Rafael Montero — and the oldest player in baseball, the 43-year-old Bartolo Colon.Get the big sports news, highlights and analysis from Times journalists, with distinctive takes on games and some behind-the-scenes surprises, delivered to your inbox every week.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.Buck Martinez, the former catcher and manager who now broadcasts for the Toronto Blue Jays, cited Colon when asked why so many pitchers now struggle to slog through the schedule. He said pitchers do not work enough innings in the minors to learn how to navigate through trouble with anything but maximum-effort fastballs.“Everybody’s lighting up the radar gun and not pitching,” Martinez said. “Bartolo Colon, right? He’s pitching forever. How much effort does he put into it? Mark Buehrle never put more than 80 percent effort into any pitch he’s ever thrown. Never missed a beat. Now everybody’s so concerned about the radar gun because nobody’s going to get signed unless you touch 95 to 98.Advertisement“So that’s the emphasis of it. Nobody ever says, ‘Can he get people out?’ It’s always: ‘How hard does he throw?’ But what do you want in the big leagues? People who get people out. So they don’t train them for this.”According to Fangraphs, Syndergaard has the hardest average fastball of any pitcher with at least 100 innings this season, at 98 miles per hour. Eovaldi is second, at 97.1 m.p.h., and Strasburg, at 94.9 m.p.h., ranks 10th. Velocity — specifically, throwing too hard, too often, at a young age — is widely believed to be a leading cause of arm trouble.Dr. Glenn Fleisig, research director at the American Sports Medical Institute in Birmingham, Ala., said many young pitchers had optimized their strength and conditioning to get the most out of their bodies. But it comes with a cost.“If you’ve got a kid and you do everything to make him max out at 100 miles per hour, his muscles have been trained to do it, his bones can handle it, his brain can handle it — his ligaments and tendons cannot handle it,” Fleisig said.“So why we’re getting more injuries now is essentially because we have more people playing for the radar gun, from the pro leagues to the high school leagues. If you want to get drafted as a high school kid, it might matter more what your ball speed is than what your E.R.A. is, and minor leaguers as well.”Dependable, durable starters have been richly rewarded. The top three in the majors in innings pitched through Wednesday — Boston’s David Price, Washington’s Max Scherzer and Detroit’s Justin Verlander — have contracts averaging at least $28 million per season.Because such pitchers are so valuable, said Blue Jays General Manager Ross Atkins, the industry will continue to seek ways to produce more of them. Nobody wants five-inning starters and a raft of relievers to be the new normal.“I think front offices will get better and better at determining what makes guys, year in and year out, not only effective, but also durable,” Atkins said. “Maybe in the past, teams have been more focused on performance and not as focused on durability, but I think now you’re seeing multiple teams doing a very good job of thinking about things from a longevity/recovery/overall-health standpoint.”The effects of those efforts could take a while to emerge. For now, the Blue Jays have been forced to get creative, using a six-man rotation at times to keep their best young starters, Aaron Sanchez and Marcus Stroman, on the mound. It is a temporary fix, not a trend — they hope.Advertisement“I don’t think any of us would like it,” Manager John Gibbons said, “but it’s something we had to do to keep this thing running.”A version of this article appears in print on September 9, 2016, on Page B13 of the New York edition with the headline: Mounting Injuries Mean More Pitchers and Fewer Innings  .  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.See More »