By THE ASSOCIATED PRESSAUG. 3, 2016
The San Antonio Spurs have signed the two-time All-Star David Lee.Terms of the deal announced Tuesday were not disclosed.Lee, 33, won an N.B.A. championship with the Golden State Warriors in 2015. He has averaged 14.2 points, 9.2 rebounds and 2.3 assists over an 11-year career that began with the Knicks.A forward and center, Lee finished last season with the Dallas Mavericks, averaging 8.5 points, 7.0 rebounds and 1.2 assists. Lee started last season with the Boston Celtics, making 30 appearances before being waived on Feb. 19.Lee is one of three N.B.A. players to total at least 10,000 points, 6,000 rebounds and 1,500 assists over the last 10 seasons, along with the current Spur Pau Gasol and the former Spurs forward Tim Duncan.AdvertisementJAMES STILL CHASING JORDAN LeBron James has often avoided talking about trying to match Michael Jordan’s accomplishments. Now he’s chasing “the ghost” of perhaps the greatest player in N.B.A. history.AdvertisementFresh off leading the Cavaliers to an N.B.A. championship and bringing Cleveland its first title since 1964, James, in a story posted online by Sports Illustrated, recently told young players at a camp in Los Angeles that his motivation “is this ghost I’m chasing. The ghost played in Chicago.”“My career is totally different than Michael Jordan’s,” James told Lee Jenkins of Sports Illustrated. “What I’ve gone through is totally different than what he went through. What he did was unbelievable, and I watched it unfold. I looked up to him so much.”While James is only halfway to matching Jordan’s number of titles, ending Cleveland’s drought in historic fashion — the Cavaliers overcame a 3-1 deficit to beat the Golden State Warriors in the N.B.A. finals — will always separate him from other players.“This was bigger for me than the first and the second,” James told Sports Illustrated, “because of everything it represents.”The Los Angeles Dodgers optioned Yasiel Puig and Ross Stripling to the minors to make room for their new additions, outfielder Josh Reddick and reliever Jesse Chavez.The Dodgers told Puig not to go to Dodger Stadium on Monday ahead of the team’s departure to Colorado for a series against the Rockies. The Dodgers were trying to trade Puig before the nonwaiver trading deadline on Monday but could not complete a deal.Puig was an All-Star in 2014 after a meteoric rise with the Dodgers, who signed him to a seven-year, $42 million deal in June 2012. He hit 35 home runs and drove in 111 runs while batting .305 in 2013 and 2014, but his average slipped to .255 last season, and he played in just 79 games because of hamstring troubles.AdvertisementTIGERS WIN SEVENTH STRAIGHT Miguel Cabrera hit his third home run in two games, Victor Martinez also homered, and the hostDetroit Tigers won their seventh straight game by beating the Chicago White Sox, 11-5.Andrew Romine and Cameron Maybin tripled in a six-run fifth inning for the Tigers, and Anibal Sanchez (5-12) won for the first time as a starter since April 28 — a span of 11 starts.Get daily updates during the Olympics as well as a weekly roundup of sports news.BAUTISTA HITS 300TH HOME RUN Jose Bautista and Edwin Encarnacion homered, and the visiting Toronto Blue Jays beat the Houston Astros, 2-1. Bautista’s homer, the 300th of his career, put Toronto up,1-0, in the third.Encarnacion hit his 29th home run of the season to lead off the fourth — a monstrous shot that bounced off the railroad tracks at Minute Maid Park before landing in left field.Lance McCullers (6-5) allowed two runs in four and two-thirds innings before leaving with discomfort in his right elbow. He was to be evaluated Wednesday.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.McCullers was replaced by Joe Musgrove, who struck out eight in four and a third shutout innings. The eight strikeouts tied a major league record for a reliever making his big league debut, a mark set by Barry Jones of the Pirates on April 20, 1986.SALAZAR HEADS TO D.L. Cleveland will be without the All-Star pitcher Danny Salazar for two to three weeks, a blow to the momentum of the A.L. Central-leading Indians. Salazar was placed on the 15-day disabled list with right elbow inflammation, a day after the shortest outing of his career. A magnetic resonance imaging test showed no structural damage.Rafael Nadal committed himself to playing singles, doubles and mixed doubles at the Olympics despite serious concerns over whether his left injured left wrist will cope with the challenge.“I have decided I will play everything that I can,” said Nadal, a 30-year-old Spaniard.Nadal hasn’t played since he was forced to quit the French Open before the third round after damaging tendons in his left wrist, missing Wimbledon in the process.AdvertisementThe 14-time Grand Slam title winner was the gold medalist at the 2008 Beijing Olympics but missed the 2012 London Games because of a knee injury.The Atlanta Falcons have attempted to address their persistent pass-rushing problem by agreeing to terms on a deal with the free-agent linebacker Dwight Freeney.The 36-year-old Freeney hasn’t had a double-digit sack total since 2010. Even so, his eight sacks in 11 games with the Arizona Cardinals last season would have easily led Atlanta.The Falcons were last in the league with only 19 sacks last season. They have ranked no higher than 28th in sacks since 2012.Freeney had 107½ sacks in 11 seasons with the Colts, including a career-high and N.F.L.-leading 16 in 2004.Freeney’s 47 forced fumbles rank third in N.F.L. history, according to Stats L.L.C. He led the Cardinals with three forced fumbles last season.MATHIEU AGREES TO EXTENSION The Arizona Cardinals and the All-Pro defensive back Tyrann Mathieu have agreed to a five-year contract extension, according to multiple news media reports. ESPN.com and The Associated Press reported that the contract is worth $62.5 million, with $40 million guaranteed. The agreement has not been officially announced.Mathieu’s first contract had $800,000 guaranteed with a multitude of drug tests, but much of the money was spread over four seasons because of concerns about his earlier problems. Mathieu missed his final season at Louisiana State because of numerous off-the-field incidents.The new contract would be the largest for a safety in N.F.L. history.A version of this article appears in print on August 3, 2016, on Page B12 of the New York edition with the headline: David Lee Agrees to Join San Antonio Spurs.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.