By PAT BORZIMARCH 18, 2016
DES MOINES — No one pulled a Yale. None of the lower seeds morphed into Arkansas-Little Rock.All four of the blue-blood teams assigned to this N.C.A.A. tournament site — Kansas, Connecticut, Indiana and Kentucky — did what many expected them to do Thursday. All won their first-round games at Wells Fargo Arena. Only UConn, which trailed by 11 points in the first half, faced significant opposition. So the anticipated marquee matchups on Saturday, Kansas versus Connecticut and Kentucky versus Indiana, will come to pass.The No. 1 overall seed, Kansas (31-4) broke the century mark in a 105-79 rout of Austin Peay, a No. 16 seed that never mustered a challenge. Indiana, the No. 5 seed in the East Region, nearly hit triple figures as well, shooting a blistering 64.9 percent from the field to beat 12th-seeded Chattanooga, 99-74.The Hoosiers (26-7) might have broken 100 themselves had they taken a shot on their final possession instead of running out the clock.“We had no answer for anything they were doing offensively,” Chattanooga Coach Matt McCall said.The ninth-seeded Huskies (25-10) came back to beat No. 8-seeded Colorado, 74-67, in the South Region, making Coach Kevin Ollie 7-0 in tournament play. Ollie coached UConn to the national championship in 2014, his second season after replacing Jim Calhoun.Advertisement“They’ve done a beautiful job,” Ollie said of his players and staff.Kentucky (27-8), the No. 4 seed in the East, trounced 13th-seeded Stony Brook (26-7), the America East champion, 85-57.AdvertisementA No. 16 seed has never beaten a No. 1 seed since the tournament expanded in 1985 to 64 teams. Hundreds of Jayhawks fans seated in the section behind their team’s bench watched Kansas quickly quash any chance of an upset. The Jayhawks built a 21-point lead in the first half and shot 73.7 percent in the first 12 minutes of the second.Sviatoslav Mykhailiuk, a sophomore reserve guard from Ukraine who played extended minutes when Wayne Selden Jr. and Devonte’ Graham found early foul trouble, posted a career-high 23 points in 24 minutes on 9-for-11 shooting. He came in averaging only 5.2 points per game. The senior forward Perry Ellis added 21 points. Coach Bill Self cleared his bench in the final minutes.The ending was especially tough for the Governors (18-18), who had won their previous six games and swept through the Ohio Valley Conference tournament as a No. 8 seed. They expected better from themselves.“I couldn’t sleep last night,” the junior forward Kenny Jones said. “That’s all I was thinking about. A win over Kansas would have blown up the world. We would have messed up Obama’s bracket.” (This week, President Obama picked Kansas to win the tournament.)Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.Yogi Ferrell, Indiana’s standout senior guard, contributed 20 points and 10 assists to the Hoosiers’ victory over Chattanooga (29-6), along with plenty of fun. He celebrated a 3-pointer in the second half by firing an imaginary arrow, mimicking a gesture the Kentucky freshman Jamal Murray made this month against Louisiana State.And Ferrell’s three sisters, sitting in the crowd, drew attention for their cheeky T-shirts, one of which read, “Yogi isn’t famous, he’s my annoying brother.”“I only heard about the shirts,” Ferrell said. “I’ll have to talk to them about that.”Indiana managed to shoot even better in the second half (69 percent) than in the first (60.7 percent), adding 10 3-pointers and 15-for-19 shooting from the foul line. The Hoosiers’ overall 64.9 percent was not even a season best. Indiana shot 67.2 percent in beating Alcorn State on Nov. 30.“I think our guys did a fantastic job in the second half, especially on the 3-point line,” Indiana Coach Tom Crean said. “We did a great job on the 3-point line all game, and that’s big for us.”AdvertisementColorado (22-12) led UConn by 9 at halftime, and the Huskies’ sleepy start prompted a talking-to from Ollie at halftime.“I think they were still back at the hotel,” he said.The Huskies rallied with strong defense and foul shooting. The junior guard Rodney Purvis finished a 24-6 run with a 3-pointer to give the Huskies a 9-point lead with about eight minutes to play, then playfully tapped Ollie in the midsection as he headed upcourt.“I think he was saying, ‘Bad shot,’ and I was like, ‘I got you,’ ” Purvis said.Colorado pressed late, scoring 10 consecutive points to trim a 13-point lead to 3.“UConn tried to give it back to us,” Colorado Coach Tad Boyle said. But the Huskies, outstanding from the foul line all game (22 for 23), went 8 for 8 in the final 41.9 seconds, including 6 by guard Sterling Gibbs.We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.See More »