By HUW RICHARDSMARCH 18, 2016
Getting eliminated early as host of a global championship is bad enough, but one thing that can make it worse is when it happens at the hand of your bitterest rival. That’s the prospect facing India as it plays Pakistan in the World Twenty20 in Kolkata, India, on Saturday.India already lost its first match of the tournament against New Zealand Tuesday, when it was bowled out for only 79 runs. Pakistan, meanwhile, opened with a victory over Afghanistan.India will not be eliminated if it loses Saturday, but would need to win its two remaining pool matches against Australia and Afghanistan, and for other results to break in its favor, to have any chance of progressing as one of the top two from the five-team pool.This is not what either India’s vast cricketing public, or the oddsmakers who made it a clear favorite, expected. But World T20s are hard to predict.Advertisement“If you look at the World T20 events that happened before, none of the teams that won were thought of as favorites before the event began,” said Pakistan’s coach, Waqar Younis, before the tournament. “If you play well in those three weeks, you can win the cup.”AdvertisementOne reason for this is that while franchise-based T20 events are proliferating around the leading cricketing nations, international matches in the short format remain a comparative rarity. India has played 16 T20 matches since losing in the 2014 final to Sri Lanka, compared with 43 one-day internationals. West Indies, the winner in 2012, has played eight T20s and 21 one-day tests over the same time.Few international sporting rivalries carry greater baggage than India versus Pakistan, and this meeting has had the usual share of external worries. Security concerns placed doubts over Pakistan’s participation in the tournament, and led to Saturday’s match being moved from Dharamsala to Kolkata, formerly called Calcutta, after the region’s chief minister said he could not ensure that there would be adequate security in Dharamsala.Sunil Gavaskar, a former India star batsman, has suggested this works in Pakistan’s favor since it played its opener and a practice match in Kolkata.“So though India are the home side, it is Pakistan who are more aware of the conditions,” he told the Indian broadcaster NDTV. “And it would be an advantage going into Saturday’s match.”Gavaskar also warned that India’s batsmen should beware of Pakistan’s pace bowler Mohammad Amir, who has looked highly effective since his return to international cricket following a five-year ban.“He has been able to swing the ball back to the batsmen, something that the other left-handers have not been able to do,” Gavaskar said.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.If Amir, still only 23, does dominate Saturday, it will be a break with the first few days of the tournament, in which veteran batsmen shone. Pakistan’s captain Shahid Afridi and West Indian opener Chris Gayle, both 36, played match-winning innings, as did the 39-year-old Sri Lankan Tillakaratne Dilshan.Gayle produced a performance in keeping with his reputation as the most dangerous player in T20 when he scored 100 runs, including 11 boundary-clearing hits for six, from only 47 deliveries against England. It made England’s total of 182, usually a formidable score, look a simple target, and West Indies won with 11 balls to spare.Advertisement“I think he is up there with Sir Viv in the way he tears apart attacks,” said the West Indies coach, Phil Simmons, referring to Viv Richards, widely regarded as the greatest ever West Indian batsman.All three of the veterans have captained their country in test cricket, but Gayle played his last five-day international in 2014, Dilshan in 2013 and Afridi in 2010.The proliferation of franchise-based competitions means T20 can offer a lucrative living for veterans who no longer want to deal with the demands of the five-day game. There are also players who fit T20 better than the longer formats.The England team that lost to West Indies contained only three players — Joe Root, Moeen Ali and Ben Stokes — who are regulars in five-day tests. There are also players like the West Indian spin bowler Samuel Badree, whose career has been defined by the short game.Badree, 35, took only 14 wickets in first-class cricket for Trinidad and Tobago, but was a World T20 winner with West Indies in 2012, topped the world rankings in the format in 2014 and has played overseas in T20 competitions in India, Bangladesh, Australia and Pakistan.The tournament should offer some familiar subplots as the perennial underachiever South Africa and the persistent overachiever New Zealand seek their first global championships, Afghanistan aims to crack cricket’s world order and the consistent contender Sri Lanka goes after its sixth final appearance in nine World Cup and World T20 tournaments held since 2007.And don’t rule out India yet, either. Of five previous winners, including India in the first-ever tournament in 2007, only Sri Lanka in 2014 won its first match. It may be “quick cricket” to some observers, but in World T20s, coming slow out of the blocks often equates to a fast finish.We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.