AdvertisementSupported byBy Tim Rohan and Peter MaySPOKANE, Wash. — The University of California basketball team won 23 games this season, earning a No. 4 seed in the N.C.A.A. tournament and a chance to improve the program’s standing on a national stage. But the Golden Bears will arrive here for their opening game expecting uncomfortable questions after the firing of an assistant coach who was accused of pressuring a female journalist for sex.Yale can relate. The Bulldogs won the Ivy League title this season to end a 54-year tournament drought, but their on-court accomplishments have been overshadowed in recent weeks by anger on campus from students who have criticized the team for publicly supporting its former captain, Jack Montague, after he was expelled after being accused of sexual misconduct involving a fellow student.All of this is will come to a head this week at the N.C.A.A. tournament, where the stakes are highest and the news media attention is most intense. Yale (22-6) was among the first teams to meet the news media, in Providence, R.I., where it will play Baylor on Thursday, but the Bulldogs had no interest in discussing anything but basketball.In the locker room, players asked about Montague offered dull variations of “no comment.” Justin Sears, Yale’s best player, demurred at a news conference, saying, “I really can’t comment on the Jack situation.”Yale has had several weeks to prepare for the questions; Montague, 22, left the team in February. Cal fired the assistant coach accused of sexual harassment, Yann Hufnagel, on Monday, and in the days since has faced questions about how the university and Coach Cuonzo Martin handled the case. But neither situation is a comfortable one for players who thought their seasons had reached a high point.Dan Beebe, a former N.C.A.A. investigator and Big 12 commissioner, runs a consulting firm that works with major universities dealing with human resources and crisis management situations like the ones at Yale and Cal. He said in a phone interview that there was a general blueprint for how colleges handled such cases.As Yale demonstrated, players and coaches are often advised on what to say to reporters and which questions to avoid. In the longer term, Beebe said, a university typically conducts a review of some sort, examining its policies and practices and where it went wrong, and possibly hiring an outside organization, like Beebe’s, to carry out that examination.“You can’t probably ever protect against the rogue employee, the rogue student-athlete or the rogue booster,” Beebe said. “But you can at least demonstrate that you took all the steps that were reasonable to try to protect everybody in your organization and that they knew what you stood for, what your culture was.”At Cal, a report prepared by the university and released on Tuesday contained a trove of ugly details that needed to be explained. A little more than year ago, the report said, Hufnagel went on what he perceived to be a date with a female journalist. He had her wait as he finished a postgame meeting, and they went to a bar.At the end of the night, according to the woman, Hufnagel claimed to be too drunk to drive and asked for a ride to his apartment, where, inside a parking garage, he instructed her to park her car, an indication that she should stay, too.“With all candor, I was trying to trick her into going upstairs,” Hufnagel admitted to investigators, according to the report. The woman described the garage door closing behind them and Hufnagel repeatedly propositioning her for sex.The journalist — who investigators said covered the Golden Bears regularly, and whose name and publication were redacted in the report — also accused Hufnagel of sending her text messages containing sexual innuendo on a regular basis from about November 2014 until May 2015.In late May 2015, the woman said, she contacted the coach, Martin, about Hufnagel. She said that Martin had told her he was angry, would take the accusation “very seriously” and would speak to Hufnagel “right away.”The investigators’ 23-page report, prepared over seven months, concluded that Hufnagel had violated the school’s sexual harassment policy, and the university announced Monday that it had fired him. But it also said that it had opened another investigation into the actions of Martin to examine whether, after the woman approached him with her accusations in May, he had taken the proper steps to address them. In early July, the woman emailed Martin a detailed description of Hufnagel’s actions and a copy of their text message conversations. Martin forwarded the note to a superior, and the day after the woman sent it, the school cataloged it as a complaint.Hufnagel, through posts on his Twitter account this week and in a statement released by his lawyer Wednesday night, has denied wrongdoing.“The report is wrong,” he wrote on Twitter.Cal said in a statement on Wednesday: “The university is reviewing whether anyone had reason to believe that Hufnagel was in violation of the campus’s sexual harassment policy prior to July 5. Coach Martin is included among this group of people, but is not a target of an investigation.”At Yale’s news conference on Wednesday, Coach James Jones tried to shift the media’s attention from the sexual misconduct allegations of his former player and back to his current ones. He said he and his players were happy to talk about such subjects as Sears’s development into the Ivy League player of the year; the singing talents of forward Brandon Sherrod, who is a member of the famed a cappella group, the Whiffenpoofs; or the team’s excellent rebounding.“We are one of the best defensive teams in the country,” he said. “We are one of the best rebounding teams in the country. So I think that’s a great story.”Martin and his Cal players will have their own news conference in Spokane on Thursday afternoon, ahead of the Golden Bears’ opening-round game against Hawaii on Friday. As Yale learned on Wednesday, many of the questions for Martin will not be about basketball.Tim Rohan reported from Spokane, Wash., and Peter May from Providence, R.I.Advertisement