By BRAD SPURGEONMARCH 18, 2016
Eleven teams with two drivers each will be racing in the 2016 Formula One season. Here is a look at the teams and drivers that will start on the grid at the year’s first race, the Rolex Australian Grand Prix, on Sunday in Melbourne. The teams are listed in the order of their final position in the series last year, except for Haas, which is a new team and has been added at the end.Mercedes During winter testing in Spain last month, the Mercedes was not the fastest car. But it looked as if the team that has dominated the last two seasons might have been trying to give a bit of false hope to fans of other teams at a time of year when finishing first doesn’t count. The Mercedes cars covered the most miles in long runs to ensure reliability, rather than putting on the softest, fastest tires and going for a fast lap. And there is little doubt that the team and its drivers, Lewis Hamilton and Nico Rosberg, will be ready to fight for the title for a third year in a row. But it remains to be seen whether Hamilton still has the hunger to fight for a fourth drivers’ title — a third at Mercedes — or whether he is more interested in his status as an international star and in indulging his hobbies of music and fashion. At the same time, Rosberg, after two seasons of losing the title to his childhood friend and teammate, can be counted on to do everything he can to not lose another shot at following in the footsteps of his father, Keke Rosberg, as world champion. Rosberg has shown that he can dominate: He won the final three races last year, after making an error while leading the United States Grand Prix that handed the victory and the title to Hamilton.Ferrari  In 2015, Ferrari was reinvigorated by the arrival of Sebastian Vettel, a four-time world champion, and his three race victories for the team. The legendary Italian team had thereby surpassed its goal of scoring at least two victories, one more than it scored in its disastrous 2014 season. The car’s performance was greatly improved last year from that of the previous year. But that left a big goal for 2016: The team would have to improve by at least that much again with its new model in order to challenge Mercedes for the championship. Judging by its results in winter testing, where the Ferrari set the fastest time, the car has indeed been improved. There is still the question of how it measures up to the Mercedes, which probably did not reveal its true potential during winter testing. Aside from the Ferrari’s clear improvement, one of the most important signs for the team this winter came from the other driver, Kimi Raikkonen, who is notorious for losing motivation with a car that is not to his liking. The Finn gave high marks to the new car, saying in particular that its front end was behaving the way he likes it — unlike the previous car. Perhaps Ferrari can now count on both drivers to contribute more regularly to podium finishes, which is essential to its challenge for the constructors’ title.Williams Mercedes  Two seasons ago, other than the dominant Mercedes team, Williams was the star as it emerged from several nightmare years to finish third in the series. The decision to use the Mercedes engine had come at the perfect moment, with the German manufacturer immediately dominating the new hybrid era, and Williams seemed to be heading for a renaissance. But last year the team lost momentum, eclipsed by Ferrari before eventually clawing back to finish third again. So the coming season could be a make-or-break one for Williams. It wisely kept both Valtteri Bottas and Felipe Massa as drivers, not only to ensure continuity but also because Bottas is fast, hungry and still at a relatively early point in his career, while the veteran Massa brings experience.Red Bull TAG Heuer  In its second season out of the limelight after four years of domination, Red Bull showed that the transition from champion to also-ran is not easy. In 2014, the team won the only three races in which Mercedes failed to triumph. Last year, that honor went to Ferrari. Red Bull spent the season blaming the French car manufacturer Renault, which provided its engine, for its lackluster performance. After failing to find an engine to replace the Renault, the team agreed to continue using them, but the engine will be branded TAG Heuer — the team’s new sponsor — and Red Bull has the right to work on the engine itself rather than relying on Renault engineers. The team’s drivers, Daniel Ricciardo and Daniil Kvyat, form one of the most competitive duos in the series.AdvertisementForce India Mercedes While the owner of the team, Vijay Mallya, is facing legal and financial challenges outside the series, the team is continuing its efforts. No doubt because ever since it started in Formula One, as the Jordan team in 1991, it has always been among the best of the underfunded teams. It has proved that not only does it know how to survive, it also knows how to thrive. The consistency of using the same drivers this year, Nico Hülkenberg and Sergio Pérez, and the strong Mercedes engine should mean another good, if not great, season.Renault Although this team used a Mercedes engine last year and was called Lotus, the entity behind its full takeover is the Renault team, based in Enstone, England. The French car manufacturer has a long history of winning championships, but it probably won’t add one this year. The new driver combination — the British rookie Joylon Palmer and the Dane Kevin Magnussen, who spent a year racing at McLaren in 2014 but had only one race for that team last year — will be among the most interesting teammate dynamics: Each driver needs to prove himself for different reasons. But the biggest challenge may involve adapting the car to the Renault engine. Lotus had been using the Mercedes engine, for which the current car was designed.AdvertisementToro Rosso Ferrari  At 17 and 20, they started last year as the youngest teammates ever to race in Formula One. But Max Verstappen and Carlos Sainz Jr. frequently outraced many of the other drivers on the grid. The real test comes this season, though, because the car that was such a success in 2015 has a different engine, the Ferrari. While it might have been considered better than the Renault last year, it’s not certain that it will fit the package as well this year.Sauber Ferrari  The Swiss team improved last year, emerging from its worst year since it began racing in the series in 1993. But it started this year without a title sponsor, and the February salaries of two-thirds of its 300 staff members were not fully paid until well into March. But Sauber remains a team that knows how to achieve great things with a small budget. There has been little development of the car since last year, though, and Sauber risks sinking lower in the standings as it focuses on survival. The driving pair of Marcus Ericsson and Felipe Nasr has been maintained.McLaren Honda Last season was a catastrophe for McLaren, the second most successful team in the history of Formula One, after it renewed a relationship with Honda to provide its engines. The team and its two world-champion drivers, Fernando Alonso and Jenson Button, managed to remain stoic in the face of terrible results, constant car and engine breakdowns, and a lack of engine power. Honda has hired a new director for the program, indicating that it is determined to overcome the difficult start to its return to Formula One.Manor Mercedes  Over the winter, Manor lost its two founding directors, John Booth and Graeme Lowdon, the heart and soul of the team. But the team has since made progress, adopting the Mercedes engine this year — after using an old Ferrari engine last year — and hiring Dave Ryan, a longtime McLaren manager. It has also made an intelligent compromise on its drivers, hiring the Mercedes protégé Pascal Wehrlein of Germany and Ryo Haryanto of Indonesia, as well as Alexander Rossi of the United States as a reserve driver.Haas Ferrari For the first time in 30 years, Formula One will have a Formula One team based in the United States. The Haas team is the brainchild of Gene Haas, who also has a Nascar team. Haas has taken a clever route into the series by signing a deal to use not only Ferrari engines but also other car parts that the Italian team can provide within the rules. This means the Haas team can keep a small staff and be immediately effective. As drivers, the team has hired the up-and-coming Mexican Esteban Gutiérrez and the more experienced Frenchman Romain Grosjean, betting on a combination of youth and experience. A footnote: The previous American team, racing in 1985 and 1986, was also called Haas — after Carl Haas, who is no relation to Gene.We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.See More »