By BRAD SPURGEONMARCH 17, 2016
No other track in Formula One is quite like the Albert Park Grand Prix circuit, which hosts the Rolex Australian Grand Prix on Sunday. For the racing teams, Melbourne is one of the favorite cities in the series, and so is the track, providing a unique combination of temporary street circuit and permanent road track.Running around the man-made Albert Park Lake, just south of Melbourne’s central business district, the track is bumpy, its grip changes throughout the weekend, and the side barriers are close to the track.The weather is often hot and humid this time of year in Melbourne. But the track is beside the ocean, so conditions are often changing, with light to moderate winds. There is a 45 percent chance of rain on Saturday, but not much chance of it on Sunday.The circuit has been the site of the Australian Grand Prix since 1996, after it moved to Melbourne from Adelaide, making this year the 20th anniversary of the race in Albert Park.AdvertisementThe Formula One race is the only car race run on the track. That means that rubber from the tires is laid down in qualifying and racing throughout the weekend, which changes the track’s grip.AdvertisementBut it is the track layout that guarantees the biggest challenges. It is 3.2 miles long, with 10 right-hand corners and six left-hand corners, with many of the right-hand ones taken in second gear and putting most of the stress on the left rear tire.There are few reference points or landmarks for the drivers to use when learning how best to drive the track, which is another added difficulty.“Going down the main straight and heading into Turn 1, you always get the sun in your eyes,” Romain Grosjean, a veteran driver now at the new Haas team, said in describing how it is to drive a full lap of the track. “It’s quite a nice corner, right inside corner, fourth gear with a little bit of inside curb then outside curb.”“Turn 3 is a bit of a tricky corner,” he continued. “You have to be careful on exit and well placed for the next left, which is Turn 4. Turn 5, if you’ve got a good car, it’s flat out. Turn 7 is then a right inside corner in third gear. It’s quite a good corner as well, with a bit of a tricky curb on exit. Turn 9 requires big braking. Total application is very important because you’ve got the back-straight and you’re very close to the wall on exit.”“Then you have my favorite corners, between Turns 11 and 12 and 13,” Grosjean said. “It’s high speed, sixth gear probably. It’s a good feeling. Going into Turn 14, you have lots of braking as you’re carrying quite a bit of speed in there. Turn 15 needs just a bit of a lift off the throttle, right inside corner, pretty cool to drive. You then need to be well positioned for the last braking point into the left-hand side, where it’s quite tight. The last corner you want to stay flat out, but it’s a bit of a tricky one, with a bump in the middle.”The weather can change from hot to cold from one day to the next, and with all of the evolution of the track itself, there can be as much as three seconds per lap faster during qualifying on Saturday afternoon than during the first practice session on Friday morning.The fastest speed in qualifying in 2014 was 197 miles an hour; that increased in 2015 to 204 m.p.h., and the cars have become even faster this year. Last year, the Italian tire manufacturer Pirelli provided the teams with only medium and soft tires, whereas this year they will also be given supersoft tires, allowing them to go faster.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.Two of the most important parts of the track are the last two corners, Turns 15 and 16, which are slow but where drivers may make up lap-time. A 5 percent grip increase in that corner alone can help deliver 0.2 seconds per lap, which in Formula One terms is considerable.AdvertisementThe Melbourne circuit is, in fact, a medium-to-high downforce track, meaning the teams try to set the wings for a lot of downward aerodynamic force to help the cars gain speed through the corners.“The track is fun, I love street circuits, so for me Melbourne’s got really good flow, really good corner combinations, lots of left/right, left/rights which is cool,” said Daniel Ricciardo, an Australian driver at the Red Bull team.It is also for that reason, along with the bumpy nature of the track, that it is important for the cars to have good stability in braking and good change of direction.The cars run at full throttle for more than 50 percent of the circuit and about 22 percent of the lap is run under braking, so the track is hard on the brakes. The longest period on full throttle is nine seconds, on the main straight“As a circuit, it provides a few engineering challenges,” said Pat Symonds, the technical director of the Williams team. “The entry to Turn 1 has been notoriously bumpy in previous seasons, although due to some resurfacing work, it should be smoother this year.”“The high-speed change of direction through Turns 11 and 12, which require an agile car, coupled with the relatively low grip that improves significantly throughout the weekend, leaves teams chasing a setup that provides good low-speed grip with high-speed stability,” he added.There are 10 areas of acceleration, where the car will go from approximately 90 m.p.h. to about 185 m.p.h. in less than three seconds.At Turn 13, the car brakes from roughly 185 m.p.h. to about 80 m.p.h. in 2.5 seconds, which creates peaks of 4 G-force, or about the same G-force level that a jet pilot undergoes.Overtaking is difficult because of the dirt off the racing line. Turn 3 is the best for passing, but drivers also have to hope that the car ahead makes a mistake or exits the corner too slowly.We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.See More »