By KAREN CROUSENOV. 22, 2016
Hours after the news broke on Monday of more failed drug tests by medal-winning athletes at the 2008 and 2012 Olympics, Shirley Babashoff and two of her 1976 U.S. Olympic relay team members ascended to the stage in the ballroom of a midtown Manhattan hotel to present an award at USA Swimming’s annual Golden Goggles gala.Babashoff, beaten in three individual events and one relay by East German women later found to have been part of a state-sponsored doping program, stepped to the microphone and said, “Thank you, Lilly King. I don’t know you, but I love you.”At the Rio de Janeiro Games, King won the gold in the 100-meter breaststroke after criticizing the presence in the event of the silver medalist, the Russian Yulia Efimova, who twice had failed drug tests and served a 16-month suspension. Babashoff’s outspoken censure of the East Germans in 1976 earned her the nickname Surly Shirley from an American press contingent that took umbrage at her lack of sportsmanship. She won four silvers and one gold, as the anchor of the 4 x 100-meter freestyle relay that upset the East Germans in the final women’s event of the Montreal competition.The other members of the relay were Wendy Boglioli, Jill Sterkel and Kim Peyton. Peyton died of a brain tumor in 1986 but Boglioli and Sterkel accompanied Babashoff to the stage to present the Relay Performance of the Year award to the men’s victorious 4 x 100 freestyle team of Michael Phelps, Caeleb Dressel, Ryan Held and Nathan Adrian. Boglioli also thanked King for speaking out for clean sport.King, who won the Breakout Performer of the Year award, said she was humbled to be acknowledged by Babashoff and Boglioli. “It’s weird knowing that they know who I am,” she said. “It’s super cool to know that I’ve made an impact on the generations that came before me.”Allison Wagner, a 1996 Olympian, was also a presenter, and she used the occasion to plead for the standards of the World Anti-Doping Agency to be adhered to. Wagner earned the silver medal in the 400-meter individual medley only to see the gold medalist later banned for a failed test taken out of competition. “I was inspired to say and do something,” said Wagner, who described the Atlanta Games in which she participated as “the dirtiest Olympics yet.”We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.