By DAVID WALDSTEINJUNE 1, 2016
PARIS — On Tuesday, Novak Djokovic held an umbrella and danced along the baseline. On Wednesday, he wore a yellow rain hat in a postmatch interview.Djokovic, the No. 1 seed, was in good spirits as he overcame intermittent downpours, heavy conditions and a sluggish start to defeat 14th-seeded Roberto Bautista Agut, 3-6, 6-4, 6-1, 7-5, over two days to advance to the quarterfinal round.It is the 10th time Djokovic has reached the quarterfinals at the French Open, one shy of Roger Federer’s record for the Open era. It is also the 28th consecutive time Djokovic has reached the quarterfinals of a major tournament, passing Jimmy Connors, who made it to 27 straight. Federer leads that category with 36.More important, the top-ranked Djokovic is seeking his first French Open championship to go with his 11 other Grand Slam singles titles. For the last two days, though, all he wanted was just a few hours without rain.Advertisement“I remember early in my career I played a match against Kiefer in Wimbledon for five days,” Djokovic said. “That was the longest I have played one match. This is probably the second longest. Same reason. Raining.”AdvertisementDjokovic was referring to his four-set marathon against Nicolas Kiefer in 2007. His match against Bautista required only two days, but it featured a few key momentum swings coinciding with the interruptions.On Thursday, weather permitting, Djokovic will play seventh-seeded Tomas Berdych, who beat 11th-seeded David Ferrer, 6-3, 7-5, 6-3. In the other quarterfinal matchup that was finally settled on Wednesday, 13th-seeded Dominic Thiem will face 12th-seeded David Goffin.Get the big sports news, highlights and analysis from Times journalists, with distinctive takes on games and some behind-the-scenes surprises, delivered to your inbox every week.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.Goffin finished off Ernests Gulbis, 4-6, 6-2, 6-2, 6-3, in a continuation of their suspended match from Tuesday. Thiem did the same to Marcel Granollers, 6-2, 6-7 (2), 6-1, 6-4.In quarterfinal matches Wednesday, second-seeded Andy Murray won his 10th straight match on clay, overcoming No. 9 Richard Gasquet, 5-7, 7-6 (3), 6-0, 6-2. In the semifinals, he will face the defending champion, Stan Wawrinka, who beat Albert Ramos-Viñolas, 6-2, 6-1, 7-6 (7).Now the big issue for the men is whether they will be able to cram in all their matches and conclude with a Sunday final, as scheduled. Or will the final will be pushed to Monday?Djokovic said he had spoken with tournament and tour officials about the scheduling, which could include his playing four days in a row with a day of rest before the final.“That’s an ideal scenario right there,” he said. “Let’s see, first of all, whether or not I can win my quarterfinals and put myself in a position to play semis and maybe final. That’s No. 1. And No. 2 is whether we’re going to have rain or not.”AdvertisementOn Tuesday, Djokovic played very poorly and lost the first set. He seemed perfectly happy when play was suspended for about three hours because it gave him a moment to relax and reassess. During the rain delay, he had fun with the umbrella, but once back on court with a racket, he dominated Bautista, at least until the next delay caused a suspension for the remainder of the day.Back on court Wednesday under dark clouds but no real rain, Djokovic wrapped up the third set but found himself in trouble in the fourth. The key game came after Bautista broke Djokovic to take a 4-2 lead. Had he been able to consolidate that by holding serve and eventually winning the set, it would have put tremendous pressure on Djokovic in the fifth.But Djokovic broke back when Bautista double-faulted at 0-40. The rest was fairly routine.“It was a great mental test for all of us, really, yesterday, the entire day,” Djokovic said of the rain Tuesday. “I’m, in a way, glad to have a match like this because it’s a challenge that you need to overcome mentally, mostly.”An earlier version of this article misstated the number of times Novak Djokovic has reached the French Open quarterfinals. It is 10, not 11. And he is one behind Roger Federer’s Open era record in the category; he did not match it.We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.