By KAREN CROUSEAUG. 3, 2016
RIO DE JANEIRO — Nathan Adrian was stressed, but for reasons unrelated to having to defend his Olympic 100-meter freestyle crown.Adrian, a captain for the United States men’s swimming team, was assigned to speak in front of American representatives from other sports and make a case for his teammate Michael Phelps to be the United States’ flag-bearer at the Rio Games’ opening ceremony on Friday. Phelps is the most-decorated Olympian, with 22 medals, including 18 golds.“I thought that he deserved it,” Adrian said, “and if he didn’t get it, it was going to be on my shoulders.”To Adrian’s great relief, and to Phelps’s apparent disbelief, that argument carried the day. Phelps, the first American male swimmer to qualify for five Olympic teams, became the second swimmer, after Gary Hall Sr. in 1976, to receive the honor of leading the United States delegation into the stadium for the opening ceremony of a Summer Games.AdvertisementHall, who was appearing in his third Olympics, was a new father in 1976, as is Phelps, who has a 3-month-old son with his fiancée, Nicole Johnson.AdvertisementPhelps was informed of the honor Tuesday night, and the announcement was made Wednesday morning.“I honestly never thought a swimmer would get it again,” said Phelps, 31, who had other reasons to believe that he would not be the one to end the drought.Along with his 22 Olympic medals, Phelps has had two arrests on charges of driving under the influence. The more recent one came in September 2014 and prompted his removal from the United States team that competed at last summer’s world championships.Chuck Wielgus, U.S.A.’s Swimming executive director, who oversaw Phelps’s removal from the 2015 squad, said in a statement that there was no better person than Phelps to lead the American team into the Olympics and that “I can’t wait to see him parade in our delegation.”After his second arrest, Phelps spent six weeks at a treatment center in Arizona and emerged, he said,  with a sense of self that was not just predicated on his swimming success. He has been open about his past struggles and the coping mechanisms he has since acquired.“When they first told us in the team meeting that he was being nominated, everybody got so excited because it feels so right to have the most decorated Olympian of all time being our flag-bearer and leading us,” said Missy Franklin, a two-time Olympian. “And outside of the pool, having someone who has overcome so much internally, externally, and shared that with everyone and just shown people what an inspiration he is.”Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.Phelps has never walked with the United States team in the opening ceremony. In his last three Olympic appearances, he competed in the 400-meter individual medley, which he described as the “decathlon of the sport.” The event is held in the first two sessions of swimming, which start the day after the opening ceremony, precluding him from spending hours on his feet the night before.However, Phelps’s first individual event of these Games is on Monday. He is also in the mix for a berth in the 4x100-meter freestyle relay on Sunday.Before the United States trials in June, Phelps said he doubted he would take part in the opening ceremony.Advertisement“It’s a lot of standing on your feet, six hours, seven hours on your feet,” he said. “Getting older now, so I don’t know if I can handle that.”When Phelps realized he was a flag-bearer candidate, he sought the advice of his longtime coach, Bob Bowman. On a scale of 1 to 10, he asked Bowman, how strongly did Bowman feel that he should lead his American teammates in the parade? If Bowman said 8 or above, Phelps said, “there was no question I’m doing it.”And what did Bowman say? “He said 7.8,” Phelps said with a laugh.Phelps has never been one to ignore Bowman’s instructions at major meets, but this time he made an exception.“It’s a no-brainer,” he said. “I have to do it.”One of Phelps’s suite-mates in the Olympic Village is Ryan Lochte, his longtime rival in the individual medley events. When Phelps told Lochte he had been chosen to carry the flag, Lochte was happy for him but also a little envious. The American flag-bearer will wear a jacket that glows with electroluminescent panels, which greatly appealed to Lochte, who dyed his hair blue for these Games and has been known to wear bejeweled grills on his teeth on awards podiums.“I kind of want to steal that jacket,” Lochte said with an impish grin.Get daily updates during the Olympics as well as a weekly roundup of sports news.A version of this article appears in print on August 4, 2016, on Page B13 of the New York edition with the headline: To His Surprise, Phelps Is Picked to Carry U.S. Flag at Opening Ceremony.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.See More »