By JAMES WAGNEROCT. 27, 2016
CLEVELAND — What Jake Arrieta did in rotten weather on Wednesday night during Game 2 of the World Series against the Cleveland Indians made little sense. He threw a first-pitch strike to only half the batters he faced. He fired 98 pitches in all, but only 55 were strikes. He walked three batters.“Maintaining a consistent feel on a night like this, with the weather the way it was, can be tough,” he said.Yet there he was at the start of the sixth inning, carrying the longest no-hit bid in a World Series game since the Mets’ Jerry Koosman in 1969. By the time Arrieta left the mound in the sixth, he had allowed only one run and two hits. In a sloppy four-hour game that nonetheless finished before heavy rain arrived, Arrieta guided the Cubs past the Cleveland Indians at Progressive Field in a 5-1 win that tied the series at one game apiece.“He was just attacking them,” Cubs third baseman Kris Bryant said. “It’s tough to hit in the cold, especially with his stuff moving all over the place.”AdvertisementArrieta’s outing was not pretty or graceful, but he overcame his early problems with command to neutralize the Indians’ lineup. The home team did little to help its cause, with the Indians’ starter, Trevor Bauer, lasting only three and two-thirds innings because of a pitch count ballooned by a feisty Cubs lineup.Advertisement“I kind of had my foot on the gas a little too much at the start, trying to do more than I needed to,” Arrieta said. “Then I really got back to just executing good pitches towards the bottom of the strike zone.”The Indians committed two official errors, but they made many more miscues. Two mistakes by right fielder Lonnie Chisenhall and an error by second baseman Jason Kipnis contributed to three Cubs runs. The normally stout Indians bullpen was not as sharp as it has been through the postseason.“For us to win, we generally need to play a clean game, and we didn’t do that,” Indians Manager Terry Francona said.The Cubs’ offense was powered by the veteran Ben Zobrist and by Kyle Schwarber, the 23-year-old hitting prodigy who was thrust into the lineup after missing six months because of knee surgery. Two days earlier, Schwarber was playing in front of 900 people in the Arizona Fall League. On Wednesday, only his fourth major league game of the season, he drove in two runs in front of 38,172 spectators.“I’m just going to keep riding the wave till it ends,” Schwarber said.The Cubs had a 2-0 lead in the third inning, but the game felt more lopsided. Francona, who had never before lost a World Series game, began cycling through relievers in the fourth, and the Cubs padded their lead with a three-run fifth inning.The series will shift to Chicago for Game 3 on Friday. Both teams will work out at Wrigley Field ahead of the first World Series game there since 1945. The Indians will turn to Josh Tomlin, the final starter in their three-man World Series rotation, and the Cubs will start Kyle Hendricks, the National League’s E.R.A. leader this season.“They’re probably just as excited if not more excited than we are to see that game played there,” Zobrist said of Cubs fans. “It’s been a long time and they’ve been waiting patiently. They deserve to have these games played there at a Wrigley.”AdvertisementThe Cubs tore through the regular season and reached the World Series for many reasons. They have one of the best defenses in recent memory and a lineup stuffed with talented young hitters. Most important, statistically they had the best starting rotation in the majors.Get the big sports news, highlights and analysis from Times journalists, with distinctive takes on games and some behind-the-scenes surprises, delivered to your inbox every week.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.A year after winning the N.L.’s Cy Young Award, Arrieta was surpassed by his teammates Jon Lester and Hendricks. Arrieta struck out fewer batters and walked more than he had in 2015, but he logged fewer innings with the hope of having a bigger and more positive impact in October.Arrieta’s two postseason starts entering Game 2 of the World Series were simply solid. But on Wednesday he delivered his best outing of the playoffs, even if it looked initially as if he would struggle.Arrieta threw 23 pitches in the first inning and walked two batters, perhaps a sign he was going to be as inconsistent as Bauer. Unlike his Indians counterpart, Arrieta honed his pitches enough to take charge of the game.“Once he got in a groove, he was dominant,” Zobrist said. “They weren’t taking good swings off him. He did a great job of moving the ball around.”Major League Baseball moved the start of Wednesday’s game up by an hour because the weather forecasts called for rain later in the night. The temperature at first pitch was 43 degrees, but Arrieta pitched in short sleeves while Bauer was in a red undershirt that covered his arms to his elbows. Arrieta kept his body warm by riding an exercise bike in between innings. It was still hard to grip the ball.“It was cold,” Francona said. “It was so cold I tried to go to the bathroom in the fourth inning and couldn’t.”With both starters struggling with their command, the game dragged and the rain grew closer. It took one hour to complete the first two innings. Although the Indians chewed through relievers, Arrieta’s improved pitching sped up the game. His two-seam fastball was effective against the Indians’ left-handed batters, and his slider produced outs.AdvertisementThe Cubs provided Arrieta some early wiggle room. Kris Bryant singled off Bauer in the top of the first and scored on a double by Anthony Rizzo for the Cubs’ first run of the series when Chisenhall elected to throw to the infield instead of trying for a play at the plate.“That’s probably where the ball should have gone,” Francona said.The Cubs took a 2-0 lead in the third when Schwarber drove in Rizzo with a single. From first base, Schwarber flailed his arms in glee, pointed at the Cubs’ dugout and at Theo Epstein, the Cubs’ president for baseball operations, who gave Schwarber a chance to complete his improbable return to action in time for the World Series.Chisenhall had another misadventure in the field in the fifth. With Rizzo on after his second walk of the game, Zobrist lined a ball into the right-field corner off reliever Zach McAllister. Chisenhall slipped chasing down the ball. He recovered in time to throw the ball back into the infield for a relay home, but Rizzo scored easily.Another run scored on a single by Schwarber off reliever Bryan Shaw. Willson Contreras reached base when Kipnis muffed a ground ball that could have been the third out of the inning. Shaw then walked the next two batters, including Addison Russell with the bases loaded, to give Chicago a 5-0 lead.The Cubs were less focused on what Arrieta was doing on the mound.“We didn’t realize he had a no-hitter until the fifth inning,” second baseman Javier Baez said.Barely after they noticed, with one out in the sixth, Arrieta gave up his first hit of the game, a double by Kipnis, and Cubs Manager Joe Maddon did not need to push him further. Arrieta allowed a run on a wild pitch and was hooked after giving up a single to Mike Napoli.Light rain fell during the eighth inning, worsening once the game was over. Maddon brought in closer Aroldis Chapman to get the final four outs, protecting Arrieta’s work and capping a slog of a game.A version of this article appears in print on October 27, 2016, on Page B13 of the New York edition with the headline: Cubs Pull Even as the Indians’ Play Proves Sloppier Than the Weather.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.