By VICTOR MATHEROCT. 27, 2016
Twenty-six of the 30 N.B.A. teams have played their openers. An 82-game season is long, but sometimes you can pick up trends from just one game. Here are 10 things we may have already learned about the coming N.B.A. season.Russell Westbrook is going to have to do it all. (And the 76ers are an actual N.B.A. team.)Thunder 103, Sixers 97The Thunder took the Warriors to seven games in the playoffs last season. But Kevin Durant and Serge Ibaka are gone. That leaves only Westbrook to star for the Thunder, and he obliged Wednesday night, leading the team in points, rebounds and the unusual combination of shots and assists.The Sixers nearly set an N.B.A. futility record last season. On Wednesday, the franchise savior Joel Embiid did not shoot especially well (6 for 16), but he led the team with 20 points and offered some hope, if he can stay healthy. Surely the Sixers will win more than 10 games this year. Surely!AdvertisementAnthony Davis is really going to have to do it all.Nuggets 107, Pelicans 102You want a one-man team? Take a look at the Pelicans. Coming off a crushing 30-win season, the team did not do a whole lot to improve in the off season. Anthony Davis duly tallied 50 points, 16 rebounds and seven steals Wednesday night ... and the Pelicans lost at home. Davis shot 34 times, seven more than any other player in his opener. That’s a lot for a guy who has had some niggling injury issues over the years. He could rely more on his teammates, but with a supporting cast of Tim Frazier, E’Twaun Moore, Solomon Hill and Omer Asik, riding Davis hard still seems like the Pelicans’ best bet.AdvertisementThe Heat might hang in there.Heat 108, Magic 96No team was expected to have a bigger fall than Miami, which lost Dwyane Wade to free agency and Chris Bosh to health issues. But Justise Winslow and Hassan Whiteside dominated in the paint to win a tricky road game. No one expects a championship, but predictions of a complete collapse may have been premature.The post-Kobe Bryant Lakers are getting it together.Lakers 120, Rockets 114Kobe Bryant’s retirement tour sucked up all the energy (and an awful lot of the shots) last season, and Los Angeles staggered to 17 wins. The post-Bryant era began with 25 points off the bench for Jordan Clarkson and 9-for-11 shooting by Julius Randle. Throw in 20 from D’Angelo Russell and you’ve got a team worth watching for something other than an aging star’s last hurrah.Get the big sports news, highlights and analysis from Times journalists, with distinctive takes on games and some behind-the-scenes surprises, delivered to your inbox every week.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.Don’t jump on the Timberwolves’ bandwagon just yet.Grizzlies 102, Timberwolves 98Just about every prognosticator was expecting a big leap forward from Minnesota, which has not made the playoffs since 2004. Its opener, on the road against a consistent playoff team, seemed like a good test. And when the Wolves went up, 16-1, visions of a huge season had to be dancing in Minnesota fans’ eyes. Then the Wolves gave almost the entire lead back before the first quarter ended.Karl-Anthony Towns and Andrew Wiggins are a great 1-2 punch, but they were pretty good last season, too, and the Wolves won just 29 games.The Warriors are going to need some time. (And the post-Tim Duncan Spurs aren’t going to sink.)Spurs 129, Warriors 100Take a team with the best ever regular-season record, then add a bona fide superstar. What do you get? An opening night loss.The Warriors won their first 24 games last season and lost only twice at home. Yet in their home opener, they were blown out by the Spurs, 129-100, on Tuesday night. Kevin Durant seemed to fit in all right, and scored 27, but Stephen Curry was 3 for 10 from 3-point range, Klay Thompson shot worse and Zaza Pachulia was a wan replacement for Andrew Bogut at center, shooting the ball just once in 20 minutes and picking up three rebounds compared with Bogut’s career average of nine.AdvertisementOf course, the surprising result also reflects on the Spurs’ chances this season. The retirement of Tim Duncan and the aging of Manu Ginobili, 39, and Tony Parker, 34, had many thinking San Antonio was in for a down season after so many consecutive years of excellence. No chance. Kawhi Leonard cemented his status as a top five (or better?) player with a career-high 35 points, LaMarcus Aldridge had 26 and the second-year shooting guard Jonathon Simmons appeared to be the latest Spurs find with a career-high 20.The Spurs did not seize Western favoritism from the Warriors in one game, but they surely closed the gap.The Cavs still have it. (And the Knicks haven’t solved all their problems.)Cavaliers 117, Knicks 88Will the Cavs suffer a hangover after their stirring comeback in last season’s N.B.A. finals? It sure doesn’t look like it. LeBron James had a triple-double, and Kyrie Irving had 29 points and Kevin Love 23. The main concern was the 3-for-13 performance by guard J.R. Smith, who played a crucial role last season, but at 31 may not be able to repeat it.Fans were expecting a big improvement in the Knicks this season. And there were some signs of hope. Derrick Rose seems to have shaken off his recent legal woes to score 17. But the team shot poorly (do you want 7-foot-3 Kristaps Porzingis shooting 5 for 13?) and did not do much on defense. Two of their starters, Courtney Lee and Joakim Noah, failed to score a point.You can’t really fault a team for losing to the N.B.A. champion on the road, but those expecting the Knicks to vault into contenders may have overreached.We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.