By THE ASSOCIATED PRESSOCT. 25, 2016
Carlos Alberto Torres, the captain of the Brazilian team that won the World Cup in 1970 and the scorer of one of soccer’s most memorable goals, died on Tuesday in Rio de Janeiro. He was 72.A statement posted on his Facebook page confirmed his death. TV Globo, which employed him as a soccer commentator for the SporTV cable channel, said that Torres, who was known as the Captain, died after a heart attack.Carlos Alberto was one of the best defenders of his generation, and one of the first to attack the opponent’s goal as aggressively as he defended his own. That style of play allowed him to score his famous goal in the 1970 World Cup, blasting in a pass from Pelé in a 4-1 win over Italy in the final.The goal, scored after the ball was touched by almost every Brazilian player on the field, is seen as the signature moment for a team that was so dominant that it made its yellow shirts into a global brand.AdvertisementPelé, one of Carlos Alberto’s closest friends, said in a statement that they had a “winning partnership” as teammates and remained close even after they retired.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.“He was more than a leader, he was an innovative player; that is why he is our eternal captain,” said Carlos Alberto Parreira, who played on that 1970 team and was the coach when Brazil won the 1994 World Cup.Carlos Alberto made 53 appearances for Brazil. His club career in Brazil was primarily with Santos, but he later played in the United States for the New York Cosmos. He also played for the Rio de Janeiro clubs Fluminense, Botafogo and Flamengo. He retired in 1982.AdvertisementHis coaching career was not as impressive, although he did win a Brazilian championship with Flamengo in 1983. He was also a member of the City Council in Rio from 1989 to 1993.A version of this article appears in print on October 27, 2016, on Page A22 of the New York edition with the headline: Carlos Alberto Torres, 72, Whose Goal Defined a Team.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.