By THE ASSOCIATED PRESSOCT. 27, 2016
NEW ORLEANS — Anthony Davis opened his N.B.A. season with a dominant performance to start his N.B.A. season, with 50 points, 16 rebounds, 7 steals, 5 assists and 4 blocks on Wednesday. But it was not enough for a victory, as the New Orleans Pelicans fell to the Denver Nuggets, 107-102, in the teams’ regular-season opener.Davis’s outstanding production helped New Orleans trim a 14-point, second-quarter deficit down to 2 in the waning minutes. But he simply did not have enough help.
            Anthony Davis has a game-high 40 points so far tonight! Some highlights#Pelicans pic.twitter.com/0ZJt6TcN14 The rest of the Pelicans combined to shoot 21 of 58 from the field. Tim Frazier scored 15 for the Pelicans. E’Twaun Moore added 10 points, but missed a 3-point attempt that would have tied the score with 24 seconds left.Danilo Gallinari scored 15 for Denver, and Wilson Chandler added 12 points.Nuggets Coach Mike Malone said he decided his team would not deviate from its standard defensive strategy despite the threat from Davis.Advertisement“When you play against a great player, you have a problem you need to answer,” Malone said. “Are you going to shut him down and create problems elsewhere, or are you going to let him get his and hope nobody else goes off?”As it turned out, no one else on the Pelicans did. Davis did not fault his teammates for the loss, saying their shot selection was decent but that they missed shots they often make. He was more inclined to criticize himself for a few missed shots from close range and his late turnover.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.“I’m going to have to — probably not 50 every night — but try to get somewhere along those lines every game to give ourselves a chance,” Davis said.Denver built its largest lead when Barton hit a 3-point shot and a layup, starting a 9-2 run that gave the Nuggets a 60-46 lead in the final minute of the second quarter.The Nuggets held an 87-77 lead after Kenneth Faried hit a hook shot from five feet away to begin the fourth quarter, but New Orleans managed to keep its deficit within single digits for most of the final period, pulling to 98-84 on Frazier’s driving layup. A few possessions later, Davis cut into the lane for a layup that pulled the Pelicans to 100-98 with 2 minutes 32 seconds to go, bringing the crowd to its feet.Denver, which shot 46.9 percent (30 of 64) through three quarters, made just 7 of 19 field goals in the fourth quarter as New Orleans tightened its defense. But the Nuggets played solid defense of their own, forcing two missed shots and a turnover by Davis in the final half-minute.Denver also made 7 of 8 free throws in the final 1:39.We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.