OCT. 25, 2016
Joe Namath apologized Tuesday for criticizing Jets quarterback Geno Smith for not returning to Sunday’s game against the Baltimore Ravens after Smith injured his right knee and stood on the sideline for the second half.Smith was hurt while being sacked in the second quarter. A magnetic resonance imaging examination on Monday revealed that Smith had torn the anterior cruciate ligament in his knee, which ended his season.“My bad Geno,” Namath wrote on Twitter to Smith. “In the dark ages we players had the say. I hope you heal and play as long as you choose!”Smith started his first game since the 2014 season finale in place of the benched Ryan Fitzpatrick.Crimson Tide safety Eddie Jackson had surgery Tuesday to repair a fractured left leg.AdvertisementNick Saban, the coach of No. 1 Alabama, said the operation “went really, really well.”Saban added that Jackson should not have any problems in the future and that he had overcome a similar, but unrelated, injury early in his career with the Crimson Tide.AdvertisementJackson, a senior, was injured on a punt return early in the fourth quarter during a 33-14 victory over Texas A&M on Saturday.Travis Zajac scored twice in the final 2 minutes 1 second to lead the Devils past the Arizona Coyotes, 5-3, in Newark.Taylor Hall scored twice and Adam Henrique also had a goal for the Devils, who are 3-0-0 at home.Hall, acquired by the Devils in a trade with the Edmonton Oilers in June, has scored all five of his goals this season at Prudential Center.Get the big sports news, highlights and analysis from Times journalists, with distinctive takes on games and some behind-the-scenes surprises, delivered to your inbox every week.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.Cory Schneider made 28 saves for the Devils.PENGUINS 3, PANTHERS 2 Sidney Crosby scored in his season debut, and host Pittsburgh rallied to edge Florida. Crosby, who scored on a power play, missed the team’s first six games with a concussion. Carl Hagelin and Eric Fehr also scored for the Penguins, who extended their unbeaten streak against the Panthers to seven games.LIGHTNING 7, MAPLE LEAFS 3 Steven Stamkos matched a career high with four points — two goals and two assists — and visiting Tampa Bay thumped Toronto.Manny Pacquiao said he remains undecided about his future in boxing beyond this year, insisting that he is not looking past his upcoming world title bout with Jessie Vargas.Pacquiao returns to the ring to face Vargas, the World Boxing Organization’s welterweight champion, on Nov. 5, three months after ending his retirement after four months.AdvertisementPacquiao, 37, a world champion in eight divisions, said he has not thought about his plans after the Vargas fight as he continues to juggle the demands of the sport and his duties as a newly elected member of the Philippines Senate.“Right now, my focus is on this fight,” Pacquiao said. “Then I go back and do my job, then I could think about 2017.”(AGENCE FRANCE-PRESSE)OLYMPIAN TO MAKE HER PRO DEBUT The two-time Olympic boxing gold medalist Claressa Shields will make her professional debut Nov. 19 in Las Vegas. Shields, 21, will fight on the undercard of the Olympic gold medalist Andre Ward’s showdown with Sergey Kovalev. Her opponent has not been selected.Monarchos, whose winning time at the 2001 Kentucky Derby was second only to Secretariat’s, died Saturday. He was 18.Charles Nuckols III, the owner of Nuckols Farm in Midway, Ky., said Monarchos died after emergency surgery on Friday to repair a ruptured intestine.Monarchos’s time of 1 minute 59.97 seconds in the Derby was just shy of the 1973 Triple Crown champion Secretariat’s 1:59.40, the race’s record.A version of this article appears in print on October 26, 2016, on Page B12 of the New York edition with the headline: Namath Admits Criticism of Jets’ Smith Was ‘My Bad’.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.