
On Baseball By                     
 TYLER KEPNER
 
OCT. 25, 2016
CLEVELAND — This was two decades ago, long before Theo Epstein built the Chicago Cubs into a World Series team. He did not yet know Terry Francona, now his rival as the manager of the Cleveland Indians but once his colleague in glory.Epstein was just out of college, in his first full-time job in baseball, with the San Diego Padres, absorbing all he could about the industry. On the bench before a game one day, he learned an important lesson from Craig Shipley, a veteran utility infielder.“He said every player’s been lied to by management — or thinks they’re about to be lied to by management,” Epstein said. “That helped the light bulb go off that, yeah, you can get a real advantage just by being honest with your players all the time.“That’s something we try to do here, and tried to do in Boston. It’s the only way to operate. It’s the right thing to do, first of all, but it also helps you because you end up building better relationships with players, they start to trust you, and you can ask more out of them when they trust you.”AdvertisementEpstein’s candor has served him well in the clubhouse, in the front office and with the public. It is, perhaps, the trait that most strongly bound him to Francona, the manager he hired in December 2003 when he was the general manager of the Red Sox. One championship quickly followed, and then another in 2007.AdvertisementBoth moved on after the 2011 season, when the Red Sox collapsed down the stretch and relationships with ownership frayed. Epstein dived into a five-year rebuilding plan as the Cubs’ president for baseball operations. Francona spent a year at ESPN and then joined the Indians as manager. His team reached the playoffs in his first season, and now he is back in the World Series.Like Epstein, Francona succeeds by building absolute trust with players conditioned to view authority figures with suspicion.“He’s a genuine person, and you can talk to him about anything,” Indians first baseman Mike Napoli said. “He’s going to tell you the truth. He wants you to do good, he wants to talk to you, and that’s for everybody in the clubhouse. It’s nice to come to the park every day knowing that’s your leader and he has your back.”The Cubs’ Jon Lester, who lost Game 1, 6-0, to Corey Kluber on Tuesday night, won a World Series with Francona with Boston. He said Francona never made him feel like just a player.“I was part of his family,” Lester said. “I think that’s why he’s very, very good at his job, and that’s why guys love playing for him.”Francona’s background helps him communicate well. His father, Tito — whose name Francona uses among baseball people — played 15 seasons in the majors. Francona was a star at the University of Arizona, winning the Golden Spikes Award as the nation’s top college player in 1980 and reaching the major leagues the next season. But injuries turned him into a bench player for most of his decade-long career.After managing in the minors — Michael Jordan was one of his Chicago White Sox prospects — Francona guided the Philadelphia Phillies from 1997 to 2000. The team was bad, but Francona established himself as a manager who could connect with players. He would rather be in a clubhouse, playing cribbage at noon before a night game, than anyplace else.AdvertisementCurt Schilling played for Francona in Philadelphia and joined the Red Sox at the same time as Francona. He stressed to his new teammates that Francona would be real and genuine, and Francona won their trust immediately.“Every spring training, he opened up with a speech,” Schilling said by phone on Tuesday. “No. 1, he would say, ‘I respect you, and you’re never going to play for someone who cares more about you than I do.’ And 2, he would say: ‘I will not lie to you. A lot of times I’m going to tell you something you don’t want to hear. But I’m not going to lie.’ And Theo is from the same ilk.”When Pedro Martinez started on opening day in 2004 and left the ballpark before the game ended, Francona took the blame, saying he did not properly tell Martinez that doing so was wrong. Everybody knew the rule, of course, but it was an early signal to players that Francona would shield them from public criticism — and the next day, in private, Francona chewed Martinez out.Get the big sports news, highlights and analysis from Times journalists, with distinctive takes on games and some behind-the-scenes surprises, delivered to your inbox every week.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.To Schilling, the incident underscored Francona’s willingness to adapt to the changing culture of baseball. As the son of a player, Francona had the old ways in his blood. But he recognized what modern players needed — and what modern executives like Epstein valued.“He’s too smart and too driven not to succeed,” Francona said. “I mean, if some people could see two or three things at once, he can see 10 or 12, and you need to keep up, or he’ll let you know.”Indeed, while Epstein had a keen awareness of analytics, he also valued traditional scouting. The success of the 2004 Red Sox, who broke an 86-year streak of futility, seemed to add another component to his vision. Schilling called Epstein the only general manager he ever played for who truly understood his place in the clubhouse — when to be there, when not to be there, and what it all meant.“He could see, in the clubhouse, that character was something you can’t put a dollar figure on,” Schilling said. “That’s why it was so important for him to have guys like Doug Mirabelli and Mike Timlin, and in Chicago why he was so desperate to get David Ross — because there are certain things you have to have to be world champions, and only certain guys have it.”Epstein and Francona did not agree on everything, but their arguments never devolved into petty territorial wars. Ultimately, Epstein gave Francona the right players, and Francona found a way to get them to want to give their best.AdvertisementIt was no easy task, given the expectations and demands in Boston. But Francona’s experience helped him, as Epstein had expected when he hired him over Joe Maddon, now his manager with the Cubs. Maddon, who had never managed in the majors before, would later thrive with Tampa Bay, where his eccentricities played better.“I think it worked out best for both, and he could go to Tampa, which was really like a petri dish at that time, and try things out and grow into it with young players and blossom,” Epstein said. “And for us, having Tito, who had already managed in the big leagues, worked out great.”Epstein and Francona have the championship rings to prove it. One will earn another very soon. The Indians must topple another Epstein roster deep in talent and sharp in temperament. The Cubs must thwart a manager who now has won all nine World Series games he has managed.“I’m really proud of him and the job that he’s done over there,” Epstein said. “The only misgivings I have about it is that, as great a manager as he is, he’s an even better postseason manager. So maybe we wish we were going up against someone else.”A version of this article appears in print on October 26, 2016, on Page B11 of the New York edition with the headline: Epstein and Francona Built Success by First Winning Trust.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.See More »