By JAMES WAGNEROCT. 26, 2016
CLEVELAND — As the World Series opened on Tuesday night, a matchup between the two teams with the longest championship droughts in the major leagues unfolded before a once-in-a-lifetime backdrop for this city.The night began with Cleveland Cavaliers unveiling their N.B.A. title banner and rings before their first game of the new season. And 30 minutes later, the Indians resumed their own pursuit, led by the pitcher who has flawlessly guided them through these playoffs.Already in the midst of a dominant postseason, the Indians ace Corey Kluber, the 2014 American League Cy Young Award winner, outdueled another October hero, the Chicago Cubs’ Jon Lester, en route to a 6-0 victory.“He’s as good as they come,” Indians reliever Andrew Miller said of Kluber.An expected pitchers’ duel was decidedly lopsided as the Indians were powered by an unlikely source, the light-hitting catcher Roberto Perez’s two home runs, and Kluber buzzed through a potent Cubs lineup with ease. The Indians seized on Lester’s wayward command for an early lead, while Miller reined in his own to extinguish two potential game-changing rallies by the Cubs.AdvertisementIn a city once known for miserable losing, the Indians capped a joyous day and moved one victory closer to securing their first World Series title in 68 years.Advertisement“The city right now is pretty alive,” said Indians shortstop Francisco Lindor, who became the youngest player to have three hits in a World Series game since 1997, the last time the Indians played in the Series. “I like the way people are talking and doing their things.”Although the Indians entered the World Series as betting underdogs to the Cubs, they have controlled the playoffs. The Indians have lost only once this postseason. More than 63 percent of teams that have won the first game of the World Series have claimed the title. In his career, Indians Manager Terry Francona, who led the Boston Red Sox to two titles, improved to 9-0 in the World Series.His streak was extended on Tuesday in large part because of Kluber’s stellar World Series debut. With a dizzying array of dancing fastballs and darting curveballs, Kluber struck out eight of the first 11 batters he faced, becoming the first pitcher in Series history to fan that many in three innings.“Every young pitcher, even every professional pitcher, should watch him pitch,” Miller said. “It’s just a treat. The way he can manipulate the ball is incredible.”With six dazzling innings, Kluber shut down a Cubs offense that had exploded past the Los Angeles Dodgers in the National League Championship Series. He allowed four hits, throwing 88 pitches while becoming the sixth pitcher in World Series history to strike out at least nine and walk none. He has allowed only two runs and struck out 29 batters in 24 1/3 innings this postseason.“He prepares so hard,” Francona said. “That’s why, here late in October, and the needle on the gas tank doesn’t point toward empty.”Lester, on the other hand, gave up two runs in a shaky first inning and could not complete the sixth, halting his streak of stout pitching this postseason. Only once in 17 previous playoff starts had Lester come out of the game earlier.Advertisement“When you’ve got a guy like Kluber, who’s locked in from Pitch 1, two runs in the first makes his job a lot easier,” Lester said. “I know the feeling from the other side: you’re just able to attack differently, you’re able to go about things differently. We get out of there with nothing and maybe things are different.”The weight of history was significant on Tuesday in many ways. Dexter Fowler, the Cubs’ leadoff hitter, became the first African-American player to appear in a World Series game for the Cubs when he took ball one from Kluber to start the game. The pitch also opened the first World Series game that the Cubs, who last appeared in the title round in 1945, have played at night, as well as on television.The moment, however, was not meaningful for only the Cubs. Across the street from Progressive Field, the Cavaliers were beginning their defense of their N.B.A. title at Quicken Loans Arena.When the video board at the basketball game showed that the Indians had seized a first-inning lead, the crowd there roared. Back at Progressive Field, a brief clip of the Cavaliers’ ring ceremony and a speech by their star LeBron James were shown on the gargantuan screen in the middle of the sixth inning, and that drew loud cheers.“We really enjoy playing here,” Indians closer Cody Allen said.The noise paled, however, in comparison with the roars at three critical moments: when the Indians took control in the first inning, when Kluber left the game to a standing ovation and when Miller wriggled out of two potentially game-changing jams with the score 3-0.In the first inning, Lindor singled and then exploited one of Lester’s weaknesses — his inability to throw anywhere but home plate — by stealing second base. That may have rattled Lester, and he undid himself, walking Mike Napoli and Carlos Santana to load the bases.With a swinging bunt chopper to third base, Jose Ramirez drove in a run. Lester pushed the Indians’ lead to 2-0 when he hit Brandon Guyer on the leg with a two-strike pitch.Three innings later, Perez, known more for his defense, smashed a solo shot off Lester. He clobbered a three-run blast in the eighth inning, becoming the first Indians player and first Puerto Rican native to hit two home runs in a World Series game.Get the big sports news, highlights and analysis from Times journalists, with distinctive takes on games and some behind-the-scenes surprises, delivered to your inbox every week.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.“I’ve come a long ways,” Perez said. “I’m just playing with a lot of confidence right now. I’m not trying to do too much at the plate. I’m just trying to control my emotions.”AdvertisementAfter Lester notched the second out of the sixth inning, Cubs Manager Joe Maddon pulled him with his pitch count at 97. Despite Lester’s unevenness and Kluber’s brilliance, the Cubs still threatened in the seventh inning.There have been no more ominous words this postseason than “entering the game is Andrew Miller.” Acquired by the Indians in a midseason trade with the Yankees, Miller has given a lift to an already-strong bullpen and helped carry the team.When Kluber gave up a single to Ben Zobrist to start the seventh, Francona emerged from the dugout. Kluber’s pitch count was relatively low, but Francona had Miller ready and wanted the option to start Kluber on short rest in Game 4.“I’ll pitch whenever he asks me to,” Kluber said. “At this point in time, it’s all about doing whatever we can to get four wins before they do. If that means pitching on short rest, then I’m more than willing to do that.”Normally stoic, Kluber flashed a smile when Francona reached the mound. He exited to a rousing applause from many of the announced 38,091 in attendance. In came Miller, who promptly walked Kyle Schwarber and gave up a single to Javier Baez to load the bases.For a few moments, Miller appeared human. But he snapped back into his brilliant form, getting Willson Contreras to fly out and striking out Addison Russell and David Ross on wicked sliders.Miller again backed himself into a corner in the next inning by surrendering a walk and a single, but he wriggled out again. He fired 46 pitches over two innings, paving the way for Allen to toss the final inning in Cleveland’s first World Series win since Game 6 in 1997.A version of this article appears in print on October 26, 2016, on Page B8 of the New York edition with the headline: Wait Over, Indians Strike Quickly.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.