By NEAL E. BOUDETTEAPRIL 5, 2017
PLYMOUTH, Mich. — When the women’s ice hockey world championships opened here a week ago, the focus was on the American players and their fight for increased financial assistance and support from their governing body, U.S.A. Hockey.But as the tournament heads into the semifinals, the spotlight has shifted to the Canadian team, which is in a different kind of struggle.After a 2-0 loss to the United States in their opening game last week and a stunning 4-3 setback against Finland the next day, the Canadian women are fighting for the pride of their hockey-obsessed nation. Thanks to an 8-0 rout of Russia on Monday, Canada escaped with a semifinal berth on the strength of its goal differential.Canada’s self-image as the world’s leading hockey-playing country means the expected result in any international competition is a gold medal, and anything less is a major disappointment that generates front-page headlines from Halifax to Vancouver.Advertisement“Hockey is a part of who we are,” said Tessa Bonhomme, a former Canadian team player who is anchoring broadcasts of the tournament on the Canadian network TSN. “I don’t know many people in Canada who don’t know how to skate. After school my skates were in my backpack, and the rink was my babysitter. That’s just how we grow up.”AdvertisementForward Bailey Bram added, “Everyone knows when Canada has a tournament, whether world juniors or our team or the men’s, everyone tunes in.”Canada gets a rematch with Finland in one semifinal on Thursday afternoon. Later, the United States takes on Germany, the tournament’s Cinderella team.A year ago, Germany did not qualify for the top-division world championships, contested by the eight teams with the highest rankings. But Germany defeated Sweden and the Czech Republic in the preliminary round and upset Russia, 2-1, in a quarterfinal on Tuesday. The winning goal in the third period came from Marie Delarbre, a forward at Merrimack College and one of three German players who played college hockey in the United States this past season.The United States and Germany last met for the world championship in 2008, when the Americans cruised, 8-1.Get the big sports news, highlights and analysis from Times journalists, with distinctive takes on games and some behind-the-scenes surprises, delivered to your inbox every week.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.The Americans are undefeated so far, having outscored their opponents by 14-3 in three games. Brianna Decker and Kendall Coyne have three goals apiece, and Hilary Knight has two.Although Canada is still in contention despite a 1-2 record, its path forward is much tougher than anyone had expected, especially given the events leading up to the tournament. In December, Canada defeated the United States in two exhibition games, lifting Canadian hopes that the team could end the Americans’ run of three consecutive world championships.When the American team threatened to boycott the tournament amid its battle with U.S.A. Hockey, it was not clear if Canada would play its archrival at all. Once the Americans reached a settlement, Canada seemed to have an edge going into the opening game because the United States players had only two on-ice practices as a team before the clash. But the Americans were faster and better at setting up scoring chances, and they prevailed.AdvertisementIn its second game, Canada encountered the Finns, who had lost the previous 20 women’s world championship games between the two teams. But this Finnish team plays a gritty, physical style and is backed up one of the world’s best goalies, Noora Raty.Canada outshot Finland, 38-26, but shaky goaltending by Canada allowed Finland to lead most of the game. Canada clawed back to tie the score at 3-3 in the third period. Then, with less than two minutes left, a wrist shot from Ronja Savolainen slipped past Geneviève Lacasse, Canada’s goalie.The Finns consider the victory the greatest accomplishment in the team’s history.“I personally tried for 13 years, and it finally happened,” Raty said. “There’s players that tried ever since the ’90s. I think it’s good for the sport. It’s not just the U.S. and Canada, and that game showed that. It’s more confidence for us. Now we know we can battle back and give them a good battle.”The Canadians are going into the semifinal rematch with something to prove.“I think we’ll be playing with a little bit of a chip on our shoulder,” Bram said. “I don’t think we were happy after we lost, and I don’t think we played our best game.”She added, “We just have to show the world we’re here to play and we want that gold medal just like everyone else.”On Wednesday, a day off from tournament play, the Canadian veterans kept the mood loose by ambushing the team’s rookies with whipped-cream pies in the face.Haley Irwin, a forward, said the shenanigans should help the team stay relaxed heading into the showdown against Finland.“It’s a little bit of a tradition on our team to get the rookies, and it’s a fun way to welcome them,” Irwin said, wiping melting whipped cream from her forehead. “Once you get the pie in the face, you’re in.”A version of this article appears in print on April 6, 2017, on Page B16 of the New York edition with the headline: Stumble Into Semifinals Leaves Canada With Much to Prove.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.