By BILLY WITZAPRIL 6, 2017
ST. PETERSBURG, Fla. — As Greg Bird stood at his locker late Wednesday night, it was clear he was not in Scranton/Wilkes-Barre, Pa., any more. Or Milwaukee. Or Pittsburgh. Or Seattle. Or just about any place in the big leagues.As Bird patiently explained to more than a dozen reporters how, after everything had gone so right for the last six weeks, it could go so wrong over the last three games, it was a Welcome-to-the-Yankees moment.This honeymoon season for the Yankees, as they embrace a long-awaited youth movement, has begun with a swoon for the leading characters — first baseman Bird and catcher Gary Sanchez.In three games against Tampa Bay, two of which the Yankees lost, Bird and Sanchez managed one hit apiece and were a combined 2 for 26 with seven strikeouts. They left 10 runners on base.AdvertisementSigns of their small-sample struggles were evident elsewhere as well: Sanchez, a superlative defender, threw a bunt away in the season opener and allowed a passed ball on Wednesday, and Bird, who hit seven home runs in spring training, tried to bunt his way on against an infield shift.AdvertisementAsked if he was surprised that after such a strong spring, he and Sanchez had stumbled out of the gate, Bird said: “I don’t know. Obviously, we had some success in spring, now we got off to a slow start. We’ll get it figured out; we’ll get it right. Gary’s a great hitter; he’s put in a lot of work. We’ll get after it and get it right.”Bird, whose right ankle was wrapped in ice — the result of a ball he fouled off his foot last week in an exhibition game — said it, too, was nothing to worry about.The Yankees, who will begin a three-game series in Baltimore on Friday, have placed a great deal of faith in Bird and Sanchez, who clearly warranted it after bursting into the major leagues in the last two Augusts.They seem to be ideal complements, the brute strength of the right-handed Sanchez paired with the left-handed Bird, whose silky-smooth swing is ready-made for Yankee Stadium.When Bird quickly showed during spring training that he had recovered from the shoulder surgery that sidelined him last season, Manager Joe Girardi wasted little time in making changes, dropping Jacoby Ellsbury down in the lineup and hitting Sanchez second and Bird third.His reasoning: to get his best two hitters, even if they are both just 24, to the plate in the first inning.“It speaks volumes of what they think of those two guys for them to think of them as a two-three combo, especially for a team like the Yankees who have always prided themselves on being a predominantly veteran team,” Tampa Bay catcher Derek Norris said. “Just giving them that opportunity that this is yours for the taking tells you they’re thinking of being there for a long time.”AdvertisementAs Norris alluded to, this is a different Yankees team. The veterans who anchored the lineup — and the clubhouse — in recent years are gone. No more Alex Rodriguez, Carlos Beltran, Brian McCann and Mark Teixeira. As a result, Girardi acknowledged at the start of spring training that he would have to manage this group differently, especially when the inevitable slumps hit.Get the big sports news, highlights and analysis from Times journalists, with distinctive takes on games and some behind-the-scenes surprises, delivered to your inbox every week.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.Sanchez, who was not in the clubhouse when it was opened to reporters after Wednesday’s 4-1 loss to the Rays, would seem to require greater attention.Last year’s spectacular ascent, when he hit 20 home runs faster than any player in major league history, bought the Yankees’ commitment to youth a great deal of credibility. But lost in the tsunami of enthusiasm was that Sanchez far outperformed his six-and-a-half-year minor league track record, posting an on-base-plus-slugging percentage that was nearly 200 points better than anything he had put up since rookie ball.Bird, at least, knows what it is like to have to wear a pinstriped hair shirt.Two years ago in Boston, with the Yankees locked in a pennant race, he struck out twice in the late innings with the bases loaded and committed an error that led to the decisive run in a September loss. He homered in his next game, one of 11 he hit over the final six weeks of the season.“When you’re playing in New York, it doesn’t matter if you’re a young kid playing in a situation like that or if you’re a guy that’s been around a long time,” said left fielder Brett Gardner, who was vigorously booed two years ago at the stadium in the Yankees’ wild-card loss to Houston. “Everything’s been magnified in New York.”Of the slow start by Sanchez and Bird, he added: “They’re mature beyond their years, and they have a lot of confidence that they’re going to be just fine. I wouldn’t read too much into it.”Girardi said late Wednesday night that he was reasonably pleased with the at-bats from Sanchez and Bird, noting that “they’re not just going up there swinging, swinging, swinging.” The results were just not there, but he was not worried.This happens, of course, in baseball. There is no reason to get antsy three games into the season. You can admire the swings of Sanchez and Bird, look at their history and take solace in the words of their teammates and manager that their slow start is nothing to worry about. But the best place to read what the Yankees are thinking about their two young cornerstones is on the lineup card.A version of this article appears in print on April 7, 2017, on Page B13 of the New York edition with the headline: Slow Start by 2 Young Cornerstones Is Early Test of Yankees’ Faith.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.