By DANIEL E. SLOTNIKAPRIL 5, 2017
Ruben Amaro Sr., an infielder who won a Gold Glove with the 1964 Philadelphia Phillies, a team infamous for its spectacular collapse during the pennant race, died on Friday in Miami. He was 81.His death was announced by the Phillies.Amaro, a rangy fielder and slap hitter, played in the major leagues for 11 seasons, including a stint with the Yankees, and worked in baseball for decades afterward.He began his career with the St. Louis Cardinals in 1958 and was traded to the Phillies after that season. He joined the Phillies in 1960 and stayed with the team for the next six seasons under Manager Gene Mauch.Mauch was known for playing small ball and focusing on defense, an approach that complemented Amaro’s skills. Mauch was also known for bringing three teams within sight of the pennant but never to a World Series. The first of those teams was the 1964 Phillies.AdvertisementDuring that season, Amaro mostly played shortstop, platooning with Bobby Wine. He batted .264 that year with four home runs, each figure a career best, and made only 11 errors.AdvertisementThe Phillies were considered a lock for the World Series that season on the strength of strong defense and a pitching staff that included the future Hall of Famer Jim Bunning, who pitched a perfect game that June. By Sept. 20, they led the National League by six and a half games with 12 games remaining.Get the big sports news, highlights and analysis from Times journalists, with distinctive takes on games and some behind-the-scenes surprises, delivered to your inbox every week.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.But the team imploded, losing 10 in a row and finishing a game behind the Cardinals, who went on to win the World Series against the Yankees.Amaro was traded to the Yankees after the 1965 season, but he was badly injured early in 1966 in a collision with his teammate Tommy Tresh.Amaro missed most of that season but returned in 1967 and then played partial seasons with the Yankees and the California Angels. His career fielding percentage was an exceptional .969; his career batting average was a much less impressive .234.Ruben Mora Amaro was born in Nuevo Laredo, Mexico, on Jan. 6, 1936. His father, Santos, played professional baseball in Cuba and Mexico; his mother, the former Josefina Mora, played on a women’s pro team in Veracruz.Amaro played in Mexico and attended the University of Veracruz before joining the Cardinals. He held various positions in baseball after his playing days, working as a scout in Latin America and the United States and as a major league coach and a minor league manager.His survivors include his wife, Lilia; four sons, David, Ruben Jr., Luis Alfredo and Ruben Andrés; a daughter, Alayna; and seven grandchildren. Three of his sons and one grandson played professionally. Ruben Jr. was the Phillies’ general manager for more than a decade and is now the first-base coach for the Boston Red Sox.Amaro was also a first-base coach, for the Phillies. It was in that role that he finally made it to a World Series with the team, in 1980, under Dallas Green, who died on March 22. The Phillies prevailed, beating the Kansas City Royals, four games to two, to win their first championship.Read more obituaries and follow our coverage on Twitter.A version of this article appears in print on April 6, 2017, on Page A25 of the New York edition with the headline: Ruben Amaro Sr., Infielder on ’64 Phillies, Dies at 81.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.