By MARC TRACYNOV. 23, 2016
With one more week’s worth of regular-season games plus the conference championships, there is still plenty more that could happen in the College Football Playoff rankings, and more still that the 12-member selection committee could do to confound, elate and enrage college football fans.On Tuesday night, the committee released its latest round of rankings, seeding Alabama first, Ohio State second, Michigan third and Clemson fourth. After Louisville’s 36-10 blowout loss to Houston last Thursday night, the Cardinals dropped from sixth to 11th in the playoff rankings (which are used throughout this article). Oklahoma’s dominant 56-28 win over West Virginia, which is now 18th, elevated the Sooners from ninth to eighth, giving them a chance to qualify for the playoff after a slow start for the second consecutive season.There is much we already know, aside from the fact that Alabama will never lose a game again. We know from past years that the committee smiles upon conference champions and weights winning percentage highly. We know this year that it thinks the Big Ten is, at the top, the most competitive conference, with four teams in the current top seven.By breaking up the contenders for the final four playoff spots into categories of teams, we can game out who is most likely to reach one of the coveted spots in the national semifinals — and who will be left on the outside.AdvertisementNo. 1 Alabama (10-0) is in a category apart. As it is the lone undefeated Power 5 team, with wins over two ranked teams and several others with good records, coming out of the typically dominant Southeastern Conference — oh, and as it is the defending national champion — it is difficult to envision the Crimson Tide being left out of the playoff. If Alabama beats No. 13 Auburn this weekend at home and then Florida, currently 15th, in the Southeastern Conference championship game, it will receive the No. 1 seed and play in the Peach Bowl in Atlanta. Even if the Tide lose one game — particularly if it is to Auburn and they still go on to beat Florida and win the SEC — they will probably make their way in.Get the big sports news, highlights and analysis from Times journalists, with distinctive takes on games and some behind-the-scenes surprises, delivered to your inbox every week.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.No. 3 Michigan (10-1) can win the Big Ten by beating No. 2 Ohio State (10-1) on Saturday in Columbus and then winning the Big Ten championship game the following weekend in Indianapolis, either against No. 6 Wisconsin (9-2) — which it has already beaten — or No. 16 Nebraska (9-2). But the game against the Buckeyes is expected to be difficult, particularly with the injured quarterback Wilton Speight’s availability in question.AdvertisementWhy is No. 4 Clemson (10-1) third on this list? The Tigers have relatively easy games remaining against South Carolina and, in the Atlantic Coast Conference title game, either Virginia Tech or North Carolina. None of those teams are ranked. In other words, the Tigers have an extremely good chance of being a one-loss conference champion, which would make them a shoo-in for the playoff, even after their 43-42 loss to Pitt this month. And being a one-loss champion of the A.C.C. is superior to any of the possibilities below this one.There are three such teams that one can easily see attaining this distinction: No. 6 Wisconsin (9-2), which can beat Minnesota to secure a Big Ten title game spot; No. 16 Nebraska (9-2), which needs Wisconsin to lose and must beat Iowa on Saturday; or No. 7 Penn State (9-2), which needs to beat Michigan State on Saturday while Michigan loses to Ohio State. (Because the Nittany Lions beat Ohio State last month, they hold the tiebreaker.) Given the Big Ten’s strength this season, the committee is likely to be impressed no matter who this ends up being.The committee clearly has lower esteem for the Pacific-12, slotting its only one-loss team, No. 5 Washington (10-1), below the SEC, the Big Ten and the A.C.C. leaders. Yet do the math: Two of the above possibilities are mutually exclusive. There is room for a fourth team, and if Washington beats No. 23 Washington State (8-3) on the road and then wins the Pac-12 championship game, in all likelihood, count the Huskies in.Only now do we consider the second-ranked team:  Ohio State (10-1) is, as of now, one of the four best teams in the country, a case that would only be strengthened if it beats Michigan at home on Saturday. The complicating factor is that doing so might still keep it out of conference contention thanks to that loss to Penn State last month. Still, given where it is ranked compared with the present Pac-12 and Big 12 leaders, there is a solid chance that it gets in above those conferences’ eventual champions — particularly if Washington loses another game. (The ideal for Ohio State, of course, would be beating Michigan while Michigan State upsets Penn State, paving the road to a Buckeyes conference title.)Last year, the Sooners began the season highly ranked, had a bad loss early, showed up at 15th in the initial playoff rankings and proceeded to run the table and eke out the fourth playoff slot. This season, No. 8 Oklahoma (9-2) had two not-so-bad early losses — to Ohio State and No. 20 Houston (9-2) — and opened at 14th and has been steadily climbing since. Its main competitors for the final slot are the Pac-12 champion and Ohio State. Given that the Sooners will not play a conference championship game, that might be too high a hurdle.There are alternative Pac-12 champions: No. 9 Colorado (9-2) and No. 13 Southern California (8-3) could find themselves in the title game. The Buffaloes must beat No. 22 Utah (8-3); the Trojans need Colorado to lose and must beat Notre Dame, which should not be too big a problem. Even No. 23 Washington State (8-3) could be a contender if it beats Washington at home. If No. 15 Florida (9-2) finished with a win over No. 14 Florida State (8-3) and a victory over Alabama, who would deny the Gators a spot? Everyone understands that No. 10 Oklahoma State (9-2) should really be 10-1, as it was denied a September victory over Central Michigan because of an errant call, so a win over Oklahoma on Dec. 3 could catapult the Cowboys in. And who knows? Maybe your team has that crazy outside chance as well.A version of this article appears in print on November 24, 2016, on Page B9 of the New York edition with the headline: Alabama? Likely. Others? Depends.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.