AdvertisementSupported byRoundupBy The Associated PressThe St. Louis Cardinals, in response to a gay minor league pitcher’s remarks that he had abandoned baseball because of homophobia, said Thursday that they were taking the allegations “very seriously.”The pitcher, Tyler Dunnington, whom the Cardinals selected in the 2014 draft, told Outsports.com in a report published Wednesday that he had heard derogatory comments from college coaches and from unidentified teammates in the minors. Dunnington, 24, said that “each comment felt like a knife to my heart.”General Manager John Mozeliak said in a statement Thursday that he was “very disappointed” to learn about Dunnington’s experiences, adding that “our hope is that every player, staff member and employee feels they are treated equally and fairly.”“Given the nature of these allegations,” Mozeliak said, “I will certainly look into this further as well as speak with Billy Bean of the commissioner’s office for further assistance on this matter.” He added, “We will take this very seriously.”The summer after Dunnington was drafted, he spent most of his time with the Cardinals’ rookie-level affiliate in the Gulf Coast League, a team based in Jupiter, Fla. He said he had felt uncomfortable revealing his sexual orientation to the Cardinals and retired a year ago before spring training for “my own sanity.”Dunnington, who was 3-2 with a 3.41 E.R.A. in 18 games as a reliever, told Outsports that he should have worked to “help change the game” and that quitting “isn’t the way to handle adversity.”In 2013, Major League Baseball established a policy prohibiting players from harassing or discriminating against other players based on sexual orientation. Bean, baseball’s ambassador for inclusion, told The St. Louis Post-Dispatch that he had sought out Dunnington to discuss and understand his experience, though Bean said there was “no precedent” for an investigation of this nature.ARROYO HAS SETBACK The Nationals right-hander Bronson Arroyo said that he had a “significantly torn” right rotator cuff but that he was not yet ready to call off his comeback attempt.Arroyo, 39, has not pitched since June 14, 2014, because of Tommy John surgery. He was scratched from his start Wednesday because of a sore shoulder. A 15-year veteran, he said he was not going to have surgery and would either rehabilitate the injury or retire.”I feel like it’s probably done,” he said. “But we’re going to compare my old M.R.I. from ’14 to this one and just make sure because I’m still really strong in a lot of positions, which I wasn’t the last time I was hurting.” SIMON BACK WITH REDS The right-hander Alfredo Simon returned to Cincinnati on a one-year deal, giving the Reds another option for their depleted rotation.Simon spent three years with the Reds, the first two as a reliever. He moved into the rotation in 2014 and went 15-10. The Reds traded him to Detroit for infielder Eugenio Suarez, and he went 13-12 with a 5.05 E.R.A. for the Tigers in 31 starts.INDIANS AND BYRD AGREE The Indians agreed to a minor league contract with outfielder Marlon Byrd. A 14-year veteran, Byrd has a .275 career average with 154 homers and 691 R.B.I. for nine teams.Byrd signed with Cincinnati last season and batted .237 with 19 homers in 96 games before he was traded to San Francisco. He hit .275 with four homers and 32 R.B.I. in 39 games for the Giants.Advertisement