By ROB HUGHESMARCH 16, 2016
LONDON — Even today, when teams spend hundreds of millions of dollars trying to win the Champions League, the intrigue around the games themselves can seem priceless.Both of Tuesday’s games — Manchester City versus Dynamo Kiev and Atlético Madrid versus P.S.V. Eindhoven — finished scoreless. This had never happened before in the current format of the knockout phase, and beneath the apparent barrenness were pain and lasting consequences, both physical and financial.In Manchester, the home goalkeeper Joe Hart had to make his first save only seconds before the final whistle as City reached the quarterfinals for the first time. The onus had been on Dynamo to come out of its defense and at least to try to make a contest of it, after a 3-1 loss in Ukraine three weeks ago.Dynamo Coach Sergei Rebrov was a potent scorer in his time, but his team did not dare try to score on Tuesday. It was a case of one team, Kiev, that couldn’t score and the other, City, that wouldn’t.Advertisement“It was a tactical game,” City’s coach, Manuel Pellegrini, told reporters afterward. “We were waiting, but they played a quiet game. I expected them to try to score, but they didn’t do it.”AdvertisementIt had pain, nevertheless, for City. After barely four minutes, its captain and the rock of its defense, Vincent Kompany, turned sharply to retrieve a ball that had slipped away from him. He stretched and fell, slowly, painfully to the ground, knowing what it meant.Kompany has sustained calf injuries more than a dozen times since joining Manchester in 2008. With him as captain, City’s defense has been twice as difficult to breach as it is when he is out. Statistics show that on average, City concedes a goal every 156 minutes when he is playing and every 70 minutes when he is out.Kompany almost certainly is out of Sunday’s derby match against Manchester United.Manchester City has hit a barren patch in its season and faces a struggle to finish in the top four of the Premier League, let alone to be a force in the Champions League. It is facing the very real prospect that it might fall short on both tests, which means that its future coach, Pep Guardiola, could take over a team that will not be in Europe’s top tournament next season, despite all the money thrown at it from its Abu Dhabi owners.That prospect appears uncomfortably close, especially given that not only was Kompany injured on Tuesday, but so too was the team’s next best central defender, Nicolás Otamendi. Yet, even with two defenders out after barely a quarter of the game, Kiev still did not summon the courage, or the will, to attack.It was a strange and hurtful game, and a weird way for Manchester City to celebrate reaching the quarterfinals.There are different ways to feel the pain of exiting the Champions League. Tuesday’s other match, in Vicente Calderón Stadium in Madrid, went beyond the regulation 90 minutes, beyond the 30 minutes of extra time and into the penalty shootout.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.It was, in every sense, a better game than the one in Manchester. P.S.V. Coach Phillip Cocu had been terribly predictive in his pregame assessment when he said, “We want to advance in the competition, and we don’t mind if it comes down to the penalty shootout. Playing for 0-0 isn’t easy, though, especially in a big stadium with such intensity as here.”Not easy, and not without lung-bursting effort. Cocu changed his tactical plan Tuesday by adopting a 3-5-2 formation. It stifled, to a degree, Atlético’s power in midfield, but still the Spanish club amassed 24 attempts on goal. Both goalkeepers made fingertip saves and both teams ran to their limits, and in extra time, some of them went clearly past what they are capable of.AdvertisementIt came down to the penalty lottery, soccer’s equivalent of pistols at dawn.P.S.V.’s players were first in line. Through varying degrees of power or guile or sheer luck, seven were able to strike beyond the grasp of Atlético goalkeeper Jan Oblak. On the opposite side, Eindhoven’s keeper, Jeroen Zoet, also was beaten seven times.There has to be a fall guy in this contrived way to end a stalemate. The 15th penalty kick fell to P.S.V.’s Luciano Narsingh, who had come into the match as a substitute with two minutes of extra time remaining.Narsingh stepped in because, according to Cocu, P.S.V.’s top scorer, Luuk de Jong, could barely stand by that point. He had cramps in both legs.Narsingh, a tall and lean winger, appeared confident enough, but he leaned back as he struck his penalty. The ball rose, beating the goalkeeper, but it clattered against the crossbar.The tumult inside the stadium quickly quieted. Atlético’s bearded fullback, Juanfran, strode up, struck the 16th penalty kick as clean as a whistle and ended the contest.“We believe,” said Juanfran. “Our coach makes us believe. And we have a lot of hunger and heart.”Narsingh was inconsolable. He believed too, until the ball hit that four-inch bar and his team went out of the tournament.A version of this article appears in print on March 17, 2016, in The International New York Times.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.