By ZACH SCHONBRUNMARCH 17, 2016
After a convulsive regular season — in which programs ranked in the top five were upset a record 37 times — and a conference tournament week that proved disastrous for top seeds, the N.C.A.A. tournament opened Thursday with many expecting chaos for the brackets.Instead, several of the initial games unfolded anticlimactically, with the higher seeds winning, looking strong and advancing without much of the drama that typically flavors the first full day of the tournament.That is, until Yale came into the picture. The Bulldogs, a No. 12 seed who had waited 54 years to return to the tournament, were not given much of a chance to beat Baylor, from the Big 12 Conference. But that was what Yale did, knocking off the fifth-seeded Bears in a tense battle, 79-75, in Providence, R.I.Yale’s victory seemed to pop the cap off a subdued afternoon schedule. Another No. 12 seed, Arkansas-Little Rock, came back from a 14-point deficit in the final four minutes to beat Purdue in Denver, 85-83. Little Rock guard Josh Hagins provided the first buzzer-beating shot of the day: a step-back 3-pointer with four seconds left in regulation to send the game into overtime.AdvertisementIt would take a second overtime, but Little Rock held on to complete the day’s second upset. “We didn’t come here to kind of show up and be happy to be here,” Hagins said. “We’re here to win.”AdvertisementIn the evening, the biggest upset was accomplished by No. 11-seeded Wichita State, which shocked sixth-seeded Arizona, 65-55, in Providence. (Top-seeded North Carolina led No. 16-seeded Florida Gulf Coast by only 41-40 at halftime but pulled away in the second half to win, 83-67.)
      The first day of the N.C.A.A. men's tournament is one of the craziest 10 hours in sports. Stay here for all the upsets, buzzer-beaters and Cinderella stories.
    Wichita State’s victory was not truly much of an upset. The Shockers were actually favored over the Wildcats heading into their matchup, and for good reason. Wichita State, which boasted the top defense in the nation this season according to KenPom.com, has looked commanding in two games already this tournament, having defeated Vanderbilt by 20 in a play-in game in Dayton on Tuesday.The Shockers took a 31-19 lead at halftime Thursday, the first time Arizona had been held under 20 points in a half since 2009. Arizona Coach Sean Miller seemed to feel the brunt of Wichita State’s pressure. His white dress shirt became drenched with sweat in the first half, and although he changed shirts at halftime, he appeared soaked again by the end of the game.So not only did his Wildcats lose the game, but Miller might have lost five pounds in perspiration.Last year, the No. 12-seeded teams all lost — an oddity given that the 12-5 upset is traditionally among the most common in the tournament. This year, they provided two of the most memorable games on an otherwise predictable afternoon.Little Rock moved on to meet No. 4-seeded Iowa State, which beat Iona, 94-81. Yale advanced to face fourth-seeded Duke, which outlasted a pesky team from North Carolina Wilmington that had the defending champion Blue Devils on edge for much of the game.After trailing at halftime, Duke regrouped to mount a 14-0 run early in the second half and win, 93-85.“When you see them in person, you can actually see their belief in one another and their strength,” Duke Coach Mike Krzyzewski said of Wilmington. “It’s really beautiful to watch. It’s more beautiful if you don’t have to play against them.”AdvertisementThat Duke was struggling against a team with a much lower seeding was not unusual; the Blue Devils have endured some memorable upsets in recent years, including as a No. 2 seed to Lehigh in 2012 and as a No. 3 seed against Mercer two years ago.
                Kansas, North Carolina, Virginia and Oregon are the top seeds in the N.C.A.A. men’s basketball tournament.            But while an upset seemed almost unthinkable in those years, there seemed to be little separation between the favorites and the underdogs this season. The regular season was among the most unpredictable in recent memory. Teams ranked in the top 10 of the Associated Press poll lost a total of 74 times, the most losses in poll history, which dates to 1948.Being ranked No. 1 did not guarantee much. Six teams carried that mantle at some point this season, and they lost seven times.The upheaval at the top of the rankings had some speculating that, for the first time in N.C.A.A. tournament history, this might be the year that a No. 1 seed lost to a No. 16. But on Thursday, that was not the case. Kansas, the top overall seed, demolished Austin Peay, 105-79, after taking a 20-point halftime lead, and Virginia, another No. 1 seed, coolly dispatched Hampton, 81-45.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.There was some momentary drama in that game. Virginia Coach Tony Bennett collapsed on the sideline with 34.1 seconds left in the first half after a sudden episode of dizziness. The 46-year-old Bennett, who needed to be helped to the locker room before the halftime buzzer, later blamed dehydration for his fall.“I think I’ve just been a little under the weather the last couple of days and I think I was a bit dehydrated,” Bennett said. “When you’re squatting down and get up quick, I just grayed out or blacked out a little bit.”While assistant coaches and trainers attended to Bennett by the bench, the senior forward Anthony Gill touched him on his shoulder and said a quick prayer.“I was praying just to make sure he was O.K.,” Gill said. “It worked. I healed him.”Virginia’s prayers were answered, too. No upset at the hands of a No. 16 seed, and no concern about standing out on a day with few surprises.A version of this article appears in print on March 18, 2016, on Page B9 of the New York edition with the headline: No. 12 Seeds Provide Surprises on a Mostly Predictable Day .  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.