By JAY SCHREIBERMARCH 15, 2016
Ruben Tejada’s role on the 2016 Mets always seemed a little tenuous. Now it appears there will be no role for him at all.The Mets placed the 26-year-old Tejada on waivers Tuesday, beginning the process of officially saying goodbye to a player who never fulfilled the promise he initially showed in the major leagues. He nevertheless became a folk hero to Mets fans in the 2015 postseason after his right leg was broken on a takeout slide by the Los Angeles Dodgers’ Chase Utley.The waiver move, first reported by ESPNNewYork, was confirmed by a person in baseball who spoke on the condition of anonymity. Under Major League Baseball’s rules, all waiver procedures are supposed to remain confidential until an official announcement is made that a player has cleared waivers and been released or been claimed by another team.The Utley slide ended Tejada’s first playoff experience and eventually led to a change in the rules governing plays around second base. The Mets re-signed Tejada this winter to a one-year deal worth $3 million — but that was before they acquired a new second baseman, Neil Walker, and a new shortstop, Asdrubal Cabrera.AdvertisementThose moves and the continued presence of Wilmer Flores as the No. 1 infield backup left Tejada, a decent fielder but unimposing hitter, with a questionable role. The Mets concluded they were better served by cutting ties with him and saving a good deal of the money they would otherwise have to pay him.AdvertisementIf another team claims Tejada by Thursday’s waiver deadline, that club will pick up his contract. If not, the Mets can release him and will owe him just $500,000. Tejada would then be free to sign a new deal with another team.Tejada was originally signed by the Mets in 2006 out of Panama. He made his major league debut in 2010. A year later, he turned into a pleasant surprise when he hit .284 in 328 at-bats while playing second base and shortstop. In 2012, as the replacement for Jose Reyes, Tejada did even better, hitting .289.But in 2013 he reported to spring training overweight, played poorly when the season began, injured his leg and found himself exiled to Class AAA Las Vegas. His real address, though, was the doghouse.Speaking about Tejada in a radio interview that September, General Manager Sandy Alderson said: “You know, one of the problems with Ruben is, it’s like pulling teeth. Extra batting practice, extra this, extra that, doesn’t happen unless someone else is insisting on it.”Get the big sports news, highlights and analysis from Times journalists, with distinctive takes on games and some behind-the-scenes surprises, delivered to your inbox every week.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.Still, Tejada, by default, was back as the primary shortstop in 2014, when he batted .237 across 119 games. In 2015, he shared the position with Flores.In Game 2 of the Mets’ National League division series against the Dodgers last October, Tejada was at shortstop when Utley upended him with a rolling block as he tried to break up a potential double play.Tejada broke his fibula, the Dodgers ended up winning the game and Utley was subsequently handed a two-game suspension by M.L.B.The impact of the play lingered, with rules instituted in February that, in effect, prohibit rolling blocks at second base. This month, Utley’s suspension was rescinded. He is back with the Dodgers, and Tejada will be with someone other than the Mets.David Waldstein contributed reporting.A version of this article appears in print on March 16, 2016, on Page B12 of the New York edition with the headline: With No Room in Infield, Mets Cut Ties With Tejada.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.