By MIKE VORKUNOVNOV. 22, 2016
Courtney Lee saw the signs of Derrick Rose’s rejuvenation flickering in the summer. In workouts, Lee would be awe-struck as Rose dominated him in workouts. Lee thought he was athletic, but he could not keep up.Justin Holiday sees it in the way Rose reacts the day after games. No longer hobbled by nagging injuries or the minutes he played the night before, Rose looks fresh and unencumbered, Holiday says.These are the moments that have convinced the Knicks that Rose is closer to the All-Star he once was than the injury-riddled, broken-down version of his final years in Chicago. The Knicks have convinced themselves that his explosiveness and athleticism have returned, even if the statistics do not back up that appraisal.Tuesday night, at Madison Square Garden, Rose provided his own triumphant moments as a testament to his resurgence. Over the last four minutes of the Knicks’ 107-103 win over the Portland Trail Blazers, he catalyzed his team, scoring on back-to-back possessions to give them the lead for good and setting up Mindaugus Kuzminskas for a 3-pointer to add to it. In all, Rose scored 18 points, punctuated by a step-back jump shot with 6.8 seconds remaining that clinched the game and sent the crowd into a frenzy.AdvertisementIt was Rose’s first chance to bask as a Knick, after he showed the kind of flash he provided so often with the Bulls. But instead of using his performance as a marker to re-establish himself, Rose viewed the game and its outcome in different terms.Get the big sports news, highlights and analysis from Times journalists, with distinctive takes on games and some behind-the-scenes surprises, delivered to your inbox every week.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.“Vintage?” Rose said. “The vintage is gone, man. I told you, the question should be, ‘Can I hoop?’ I can hoop. It shouldn’t be, ‘He’s playing like his old self.’ If I can hoop, I can hoop, no matter if I did that when I was younger or now. I can play the game of basketball.”However he fancies himself now, the Knicks needed Rose’s efforts Tuesday night. They found themselves in a tight game against the Blazers and survived a white-knuckle fourth quarter. Kristaps Porzingis scored a game-high 31 points to shoulder the burden for most of the night before Rose took over. Kuzminskas provided a boost off the bench with 10 points, and Brandon Jennings dished out 11 assists as the Knicks pulled to .500 on the season with a 7-7 record.AdvertisementThe Knicks needed help from unlikely sources because Carmelo Anthony missed 15 of 22 shots en route to his 17 points, and Joakim Noah sat out his second straight game with an illness.Still, the victory also displayed the problems the Knicks have faced all season. They have searched for consistency, barreled through practices lasting hours and talked through throat-clearing meetings. They have identified their issues but have been unable to fix them, pointing out their deficiencies in public but allowing them to linger.What has resulted has been a team battling its own habits, and on Tuesday the Knicks were passengers on the roller coaster they have constructed. In the first half, the Knicks were a sieve defensively, scoring 60 points but taking just a 2-point lead into intermission.By the second half, they found a way to stiffen. They allowed only 45 points after intermission and bothered Portland’s star guards, Damian Lillard and C. J. McCollum, into off nights. Before the game, Knicks Coach Jeff Hornacek had warned that the two could explode for 40 points apiece. Instead, they combined for 38, and missed 21 of their 35 shots.And in the game’s waning moments, Rose was the most prominent guard. Hornacek said he believes that Rose has shown more athleticism this season than he did during his last injury-marred season with the Bulls. Last season, Hornacek said, he believed his guards in Phoenix were quicker and more explosive than Rose — once one of the N.B.A.’s most astounding athletes.After missing most of the preseason because he was a defendant in a civil trial, Rose is still adjusting to the Knicks’ offense. While his statistics are much the same as last season’s, he is finding his way with a team that has more offensive firepower than the one he played with in Chicago. With Anthony and Porzingis on the roster, Rose is no longer the top scoring option. Hornacek said that the Knicks do not call plays for him as frequently as the Bulls did.Down the stretch on Tuesday, however, Rose looked at ease.“It’s a different stage,” he said, comparing his play now with his style when he first came into the N.B.A. “I was young and I was reckless. I was learning the league. I think my I.Q. got a lot higher than when I first got into the league. Now I got a chance to re-establish myself here and just take off again.”A version of this article appears in print on November 23, 2016, on Page B10 of the New York edition with the headline: Rose, in Youthful Flash, Helps Lift Knicks to .500.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.