By BRAD SPURGEONMARCH 17, 2016
The 1986 Australian Grand Prix never fails to evoke superlatives. It was the second edition of the race, held on the Adelaide street circuit, and it was the final race of the season. It was also a showdown for the drivers’ title between Nigel Mansell, Nelson Piquet and Alain Prost.There was certainly tension surrounding the rare three-way showdown — the next time such a battle would happen in the season finale was at the Brazilian Grand Prix in 2007. But it was circumstances during the race itself that made it what many consider to be the most exciting race of the 1980s, and some even call it the most exciting race of all time.The three drivers (as well as Ayrton Senna in a Lotus earlier in the season), had been fighting for the lead of the championship all year. Mansell and Piquet, driving for Williams, actually had the faster car, but Prost, who was aiming to become only the third driver after Juan Manuel Fangio and Jack Brabham to successfully defend the world title, had been consistently scoring points all season.It was something of a defining moment for the philosophy of the Williams team, as well: The team never favored one driver over the other. And many argue that it cost them the drivers’ title that season, so dominant was the team, which won the constructors’ title with 141 points over McLaren with only 96.AdvertisementBut it was something far more exciting that led to Mansell’s failure to win the drivers’ title that day, Oct. 26, 1986. All the British driver needed to do to secure his victory was to finish in at least third place. Prost and Piquet, meanwhile, both had to win the race to clinch the title.AdvertisementMansell scored an easy pole position and was a second faster than the other contenders. Piquet started second on the grid, Senna was third and Prost fourth. It therefore looked like the race might be a formality for Mansell to become the first British world champion since James Hunt in 1976.But a little unforeseen problem with the Goodyear tires would change everything. And Mansell was not the only one to have the problem.At the outset, Senna passed Mansell on the second corner, followed by Piquet and Keke Rosberg. Piquet then took the lead on that first lap, and Senna fell behind Rosberg. On the next lap, Senna dropped behind Mansell. Rosberg then passed Piquet on Lap 7, while Prost began climbing up the pack in his McLaren, passing Mansell and then going after Piquet, who spun out of the lead on Lap 23.Prost was the first to have a tire puncture shortly after that. He had to make an unscheduled pit stop for a tire change, but one stop would actually help him to win the race. When he made the stop, the Goodyear technicians decided by the condition of his tires that the tire change that had been planned for the other drivers would not have to take place.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.“They had all intended to stop for a change until we saw Prost’s tires,” said Lee Gaug, the Goodyear racing manager. “And then our projection was that they could do 82 laps without stopping. There was no reason to call Mansell in.”Then suddenly Rosberg, Prost’s teammate, had a flat tire after Lap 62 and retired. That put Piquet into the lead, followed by Prost. Mansell was third, with the title his for the taking.But after 63 laps, with just 19 remaining, Mansell, racing at 180 miles per hour and passing a lagging car on the long back straight, had his left rear tire explode spectacularly. He was lucky to have kept control of the car, but it was so badly damaged that he had to abandon the race.After so many drivers had had tire failures, Piquet’s team called him into the pits for a tire change, even though he was in the lead and capable of winning the title.AdvertisementThat put Prost into the lead. But it was not yet won for the Frenchman. His fuel consumption was vastly over what it should have been, and for the last 15 laps of the race, his fuel indictor was at minus. He finished the race with it reading that he was -5 liters. He had to slow to ensure that he did not run out of fuel. That allowed Piquet to return to within four seconds of him by the end of the race. But Prost won the race and the title, his second of four drivers’ titles.Mansell would have to wait until 1992 before he won his first and only Formula One championship.The British driver was so upset after dropping out of the race and failing to win what would have been his first title that as he was encircled by the media, he turned his back to them. He spoke with his press officer, and they decided that he would make one quick statement.“O.K., I’m doing one press conference, all together, and that’s it,” he said. “It was a desperate race today. When Nelson overtook me he nearly forced me off the road, and when Alain passed it was pretty close. I figured I didn’t have to fight, and let them go.”We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.See More »