AdvertisementSupported byNorth Carolina 14, Maryland 13 | Division I championshipBy Zach SchonbrunPHILADELPHIA — His North Carolina shirt was soaked a deeper shade of blue, his hat was turned backward, and eye black was smeared on his shoulder. Then Coach Joe Breschi lifted his arms and began to sprint toward Section 122 here at Lincoln Financial Field.His wife and four daughters scrambled down a stairway onto the field to embrace him. All were sobbing.“Happy tears,” Breschi said. “Happy tears.”Helmets, sticks and jerseys were scattered around them, as if some nonviolent explosion had stripped the players of their belongings. They were in the opposite corner of the stadium celebrating North Carolina’s first men’s lacrosse national championship since 1991, crying and hollering until their throats were hoarse and dehydration nearly set in. They asked for water.But then they were off to cut the nets, and slap hands, and take more pictures. Never before had a team been unseeded entering the N.C.A.A. tournament and completed a run like the Tar Heels’. Their final hill was the steepest to crest — Maryland (17-3), the top seed, playing for a national title for a second year in a row.But North Carolina, as it has done, found another way. The Tar Heels (12-6) fought back from a two-goal deficit in the final five minutes to win in overtime, 14-13, on a man-up goal by Chris Cloutier.Cloutier, the left-handed linebacker of the offense, who had scored nine goals in the semifinal win on Saturday over Loyola (Maryland), ripped a sidearm shot past Maryland goalkeeper Kyle Bernlohr off a feed from Michael Tagliaferri with 1 minute 39 seconds left in the extra period. It was Cloutier’s 19th goal of the tournament, a record, and his fifth of the game.“I didn’t really know how to react,” he said later. “I just sort of stood there.”He stood there as teammates flooded the field, racing around Maryland’s stunned players, who seemed frozen in defeat. The Terrapins’ championship drought extends to 1975, despite four appearances in the title game since 2011.The Terrapins had been ahead, 13-11, with less than eight minutes left, having largely solved North Carolina’s deep offensive attack. Breschi called a timeout to regroup the Tar Heels, and instead of panicked looks, he reviewed a surprisingly calm huddle.“These guys had zero pressure,” he said.Indeed, Breschi had said before that he felt as if his team were crashing the party. North Carolina was a bubble team upon its selection for the tournament. The Tar Heels had been picked to finish last in the Atlantic Coast Conference at the beginning of the season. They started 3-3.Late Sunday, Breschi was trying to figure out how to address his team before the game. He drifted to sleep and woke up at 3 a.m. to the image of Ray Lewis, the former Baltimore Ravens linebacker, speaking on NFL Network about his team’s run to the Super Bowl as a wild card after the 2000 season.Breschi, a lifelong Ravens fan, took it as a sign. He told his players, “That’s going to be you today.”The Tar Heels burst out of the gate to a 4-0 lead. But a failed clear by goalie Brian Balkam was stolen by Dylan Maltz in front of the net, and Maltz scored to get Maryland on the board. The Terrapins scored the next three goals, tying the game.It was back and forth from there. After North Carolina retied the game at 13-13 with 3:22 remaining in regulation, both teams turned the ball over in the closing minutes, and a shot by Maryland’s Colin Heacock hit the pipe. With 3.9 seconds remaining, North Carolina’s Luke Goldstock (four goals) was called for an unsportsmanlike-conduct penalty near the goal, giving Maryland an extra-man possession to start overtime.But early in the extra period, Maryland’s Connor Kelly (four goals) had a good look at a shot that Balkam managed to block with his stomach, saving Carolina’s season.“What better time to make a stop on man-down than overtime to win the national championship?” said Balkam, who made 13 saves.North Carolina also got an extra-man opportunity after a crosschecking penalty was called on Maryland’s Mike McCarney. That was when Cloutier delivered.“It was just inches away from putting that ball in the back of the net,” Maryland Coach John Tillman said of Kelly’s shot. “I’d give that guy the ball in overtime anytime.”It had been an emotional tournament for Breschi, 48, and his family. To reach the Final Four, the Tar Heels had to defeat Notre Dame at Ohio Stadium in Columbus, only a short drive from the cemetery where Breschi’s son, Michael, is buried. In 2004, Michael Breschi was killed in an automobile accident at age 3.There were tears of grief in Columbus a week ago as that memory was revisited. But as Breschi reminded his family on Monday, these now are happy tears.“We’ve been through a lot,” Breschi’s wife, Julie, said. “He’s been working for this moment for so long. This is absolutely living the dream.”Advertisement