By BRUCE WEBERMAY 31, 2016
Rick MacLeish, a slick-skating forward for the Philadelphia Flyers teams, known as the Broad Street Bullies, that won back-to-back Stanley Cups in the 1970s, died on Monday in Philadelphia. He was 66.The death was confirmed by his daughter Brianna, who said her father had had multiple medical problems.MacLeish, who was known for his nimble, stylish skating and a deadly left-handed wrist shot, had a 14-year career in the National Hockey League, almost all of it with Philadelphia, which was still something of a fledgling franchise when he joined the squad in 1971. In 1972-73, his first full season, he became the first Flyer to score 50 goals in a season (including a league-best 21 on the power play).The N.H.L., which now comprises 30 teams, had expanded from six teams to 12, including the Flyers, in 1967; there were 16 in the 1973-74 season, when the Flyers became the first team other than any of the original six to win the Stanley Cup championship, defeating the Boston Bruins in the finals.AdvertisementIn the first period of Game 6, which clinched the title, MacLeish controlled a face-off in the Bruins’ end, sliding the puck to a teammate, Andre Dupont, who let fly with a slap shot that MacLeish, skating across the goal mouth, deflected into the net with the heel of his stick. It was the only goal of the game and, as The Philadelphia Inquirer wrote after MacLeish’s death, “perhaps the most important one in franchise history.”AdvertisementMacLeish, a three-time All-Star, began as a left wing but played most of his career at center; for several seasons he was on the Flyers’ second line with Gary Dornhoefer on his right and Ross Lonsberry on his left. And though he was among the team’s most talented all-around players, he was far from the biggest name.The Flyers’ stars of the mid-1970s included center Bobby Clarke, left wing Bill Barber and goaltender Bernie Parent, all Hall of Famers, as well as Dave Schultz, one of the sport’s notorious enforcers.The team as a whole was an aggressive, hard-hitting bunch. Its nickname was a reference to its home arena, on South Broad Street, and to the team’s penchant for extracurricular tussling; Schultz’s 472 penalty minutes in 1974-75 remain a league record.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.The Flyers won the Cup again in 1975, defeating the Buffalo Sabres. MacLeish led the team in playoff scoring — goals plus assists — in both Stanley Cup seasons. The team made it to the finals again in 1975-76, but this time without MacLeish, who was injured, and they were swept in four games by the Montreal Canadiens.Richard George MacLeish was born on Jan. 3, 1950, in Lindsay, Ontario, northeast of Toronto, and grew up not far from there, in Cannington. His father, Garnet MacLeish, worked on an auto assembly line; his mother, the former Margaret Nicholson, held different jobs, including one selling beauty products.As a teenager, MacLeish played a handful of seasons for the Peterborough Petes of the Ontario Hockey League. He entered the N.H.L. when he was drafted by the Bruins, who traded him to the Flyers.In 1981, after 11 seasons with the Flyers, he was traded to the Hartford Whalers. He also played for the Pittsburgh Penguins and made a brief return to Philadelphia before finishing his career in 1984 with the Detroit Red Wings.MacLeish scored 328 of his 349 goals with the Flyers, the sixth most in team history, and had 697 total points as a Flyer (out of 759 total), fifth in team history. With 53 of his 54 career playoff goals having come with Philadelphia, he remains tied with Barber, his former teammate, as the franchise’s most prolific postseason goal scorer.MacLeish’s first marriage ended in divorce. In addition to his daughter Brianna, he is survived by his wife, the former Charlene Meyer; two brothers, Dale and Tom; a sister, Janice MacLeish; another daughter, Danielle Stewart; and two grandchildren.An obituary on Wednesday about Rick MacLeish, who played on the Philadelphia Flyers teams that won back-to-back Stanley Cups in the 1970s, reversed the positions played by two of his teammates. Gary Dornhoefer was a right wing and Ross Lonsberry was a left wing.A version of this article appears in print on June 1, 2016, on Page A19 of the New York edition with the headline: Rick MacLeish, a Flyers Broad Street Bully, Dies at 66.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.