By BILLY WITZMAY 30, 2016
TORONTO — Starlin Castro spared the Yankees the ignominy of being no-hit on Sunday, and his two-run homer off Tampa Bay’s Jake Odorizzi was enough to also spare the team from a defeat it could ill afford as it tried to climb its way back toward the top of the American League East.But counting on winning a game with one hit — something the Yankees had not done since 1914 — seemed like an inevitable outgrowth of how they are swinging the bat this season.An offense that was among the most formidable in baseball last season, even with a late-season slide, has sputtered from the start. After finishing last season second in the major leagues in runs scored, the bottom line for judging production, the Yankees this season are second to last in the American League and 25th over all, averaging 3.88 runs per game through Sunday.The Yankees, who have been built around a power-hitting lineup and a dominating bullpen back end, have lost the pop in their bats. They were fourth in the majors in slugging percentage last year, at .421. They have sunk to 27th this season, at .377. They have fallen to a tie with the Minnesota Twins for 19th, from fourth, in home runs and to last, from 18th, in doubles.AdvertisementAnd if the Yankees, with so many older, lumbering hitters in the lineup, are not driving the ball to gaps or over walls, they have a hard time stringing hits together or manufacturing runs.AdvertisementIt was more of the same Monday as the Yankees were beaten by Toronto, 4-2, their only offense coming on a ninth-inning home run by Brian McCann.“This is a team that was second in runs scored, behind Toronto, and Castro was a significant add,” General Manager Brian Cashman said. “That we’re radically different is a head scratcher.”Asked why the power had largely disappeared, Manager Joe Girardi said: “I wish I knew. You see them work every day; you like what they’re doing. It just hasn’t showed.”The poster boys for the Yankees’ troubles are the two anchors in the lineup: Alex Rodriguez and Mark Teixeira.Get the big sports news, highlights and analysis from Times journalists, with distinctive takes on games and some behind-the-scenes surprises, delivered to your inbox every week.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.Rodriguez returned Thursday after spending three weeks on the disabled list with a strained hamstring, but he is just 1 for 16 with nine strikeouts since then. (The one hit was a booming 441-foot home run.) He is hitting .170 and was given Monday off.Teixeira, who had spent the past five days out of the lineup with a stiff neck, started at first base Monday, but his season has been even more troubling. He has not hit a home run in 37 games and 128 at-bats, the longest droughts of his 14-year career.“Obviously, the two guys in the middle of the lineup, they were responsible for 65, 70 home runs last year,” Cashman said of Rodriguez and Teixeira, who have combined to hit nine — 16 fewer than on the same date last season. “That tells most of the story.”AdvertisementBut not all of it.Other than Carlos Beltran, who led the Yankees with 12 home runs and an .827 on-base-plus-slugging percentage entering Monday, and Castro, who has been a considerable upgrade at second base over Stephen Drew, few Yankees are matching their production from last season. McCann’s O.P.S. has dropped by .033, Chase Headley’s has declined by .056, Brett Gardner’s has dipped by .040 and Aaron Hicks’s is .219 lower than the fourth outfielder he replaced, Chris Young.Teixeira, though, said it was the heart of the order that needed to do a greater share.“That’s a big part of it,” he said. “Me, personally, I’ve got to drive in runs. It’s something I’ve done my whole career, and that’s what I want to keep doing. We have a lot of guys on this team that can hit for power. We just have to do it.”The Yankees say their collective approach at the plate has not changed this year under the hitting coach Alan Cockrell, who was an understudy to Jeff Pentland, who was not retained after last season. Cockrell is the Yankees’ third hitting coach in three seasons.“We want to continue to stay aggressive on pitches we can handle in the zone and continue to be disciplined and take our walks,” Cockrell said. “That’s what we preach.”But there has been a subtle influence from the analytics department, which has encouraged some players, including Headley, to be more aggressive early in the count. The Yankees have cut down on their strikeouts — they had the third fewest in baseball entering Monday’s games — but have little to show for that extra contact.Headley said that as teams had begun to move outfielders around this year with greater precision, as they have done in recent seasons with infield shifts, more hits had been taken away. He pointed to a dispute over the weekend, involving the Dodgers and the Mets, to show the lengths that teams will go to. The Dodgers wanted to use markers in the Citi Field outfield to guide their outfielders on where to position themselves; the Mets refused to allow it and lodged a complaint with Major League Baseball.“It’s making it really hard to hit if you don’t hit it out of the ballpark,” Headley said.INSIDE PITCHThe Yankees lost the backup first baseman and outfielder Dustin Ackley, most likely for an extended period, after a magnetic resonance imaging test revealed that he had torn cartilage when he dislocated his right shoulder while diving back to first base on Sunday. The backup catcher Austin Romine, who has a surprisingly robust .810 on-base-plus-slugging percentage, will serve as the backup to Mark Teixeira for now. The utility player Rob Refsnyder has been called up to take Ackley’s spot. … The Yankees activated pitcher Luis Severino from the 15-day disabled list and sent him to Class AAA Scranton/Wilkes-Barre.A version of this article appears in print on May 31, 2016, on Page B9 of the New York edition with the headline: Needing Runs, Yankees Also Seek Answers.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.