By SETH BERKMANMAY 29, 2016
During the two weeks he spent rehabbing in Port St. Lucie, Fla., and Binghamton, N.Y., Wilmer Flores was isolated from his Mets teammates. Flores, whose hair has grown noticeably bushier since he was placed on the disabled list May 12 with a strain of his left hamstring, could not even find a place to get his hair cut.When he returned to the Mets on Sunday, he stepped into a circus atmosphere engulfing Citi Field.First, there was one more game to play against the Los Angeles Dodgers, who in two days had drawn more ire from Mets fans than a stalled No. 7 train, thanks mainly to Chase Utley.Utley sat quietly at his locker before Sunday night’s game, seemingly unfazed by the animosity lingering since his hard slide in last year’s playoffs resulted in a broken leg for Ruben Tejada, the Mets shortstop at the time. The furor only grew when Utley hit a tying three-run double with two outs in the ninth inning Friday.Mets fans might have felt redeemed when Noah Syndergaard threw behind Utley in the third inning Saturday, even though Syndergaard and Manager Terry Collins were ejected as a result. But Utley responded Saturday with two home runs, including a grand slam off Hansel Robles, prompting Mets fans to all but run to the hardware store in search of pitchforks and torches.AdvertisementMore concerning to the Mets faithful should be the health of third baseman David Wright, who in the midst of Utley’s spree of vengeance sat out Saturday’s game with a neck injury. Collins said that Wright received medication, which Collins said he believed was an anti-inflammatory. He also said that doctors would re-evaluate Wright in 48 hours.AdvertisementCollins did not believe that the neck injury was related to Wright’s spinal stenosis, or that the extra preparation and stretching that Wright went through before every game had contributed to his new ailment. However, Collins did speculate that Wright’s neck pain could be connected to the shoulder soreness he had this month.After being ejected Saturday for arguing in defense of Syndergaard, Collins appeared more relaxed Sunday. As the former Mets ace Dwight Gooden was exiting the team’s news conference room, Collins, who was beginning his pregame session with the news media, asked, “You got an inning in you tonight?”While Gooden will not be brushing off his No. 16 jersey, Syndergaard could be in line to make a rare relief appearance Tuesday, since he threw only 34 pitches before his ejection. Syndergaard is expected to start on Friday.Get the big sports news, highlights and analysis from Times journalists, with distinctive takes on games and some behind-the-scenes surprises, delivered to your inbox every week.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.Syndergaard, an authority on finely manicured hair, joked with Flores about his new look before Sunday’s game. Flores, who remains close to Tejada, greeted Syndergaard with a big hug when he first saw him in the clubhouse.As unfamiliar as Flores’s mane may have been to his teammates, he entered a locker room with a seemingly different figure sitting at Matt Harvey’s locker. Harvey, whose E.R.A. is an unsightly 6.08, will look to return to his All-Star form when he starts Monday against the White Sox at Citi Field.The Mets could also formally welcome James Loney before Harvey’s start. On Saturday, before the Utley incident and a celebration of the Mets’ 1986 World Series championship team, Loney, a first baseman, was acquired from the San Diego Padres for cash.During Flores’s absence, the need for another option at first base arose when Lucas Duda went on the disabled list with a stress fracture in his lower back. Loney will platoon at first with Flores, although on Sunday, Flores started at third base in place of Wright (in activating Flores, the Mets optioned Matt Reynolds to Class AAA Las Vegas).AdvertisementLoney, a slick fielder, is a career .285 hitter over 10 seasons, including parts of seven with the Dodgers. He is the latest solid infield veteran, along with shortstop Asdrubal Cabrera and second baseman Neil Walker, to join the Mets since last seasonCollins also saw the benefit of having Loney help Flores learn the position.“There’s no question that that can go on,” said Collins, who has known Loney since Loney was 17, calling him “a tremendous kid.”During spring training, the former Mets first baseman Keith Hernandez, who won 11 Gold Glove awards, worked with Flores, advising him on what to expect on certain plays and imparting positioning tips. Collins said Flores was a model student.Flores was encouraged by the games he played at first at Class AA Binghamton. The extra innings of practice gained during his rehab assignment, combined with his preseason preparation, had Flores feeling comfortable with his upcoming duty at that corner of the infield“When I came into the season for spring training, I knew what I was going to do,” Flores said. “So it’s nothing new.”A version of this article appears in print on May 30, 2016, on Page D3 of the New York edition with the headline: Mets Get Back a Player Who Can Help Fill Gaps.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.