AdvertisementSupported byBy David WaldsteinPARIS — A miserable, rain-soaked day provided the perfect platform for Guy Forget, the director of the French Open, to renew his campaign for a roof over Philippe Chatrier Court.The weather, however, was not so good for the present tournament.All of Monday’s scheduled matches at Roland Garros were washed away by the worst weather of what has been a consistently wet event this year. The French Open is the only one of the four Grand Slam events without a roof over at least one court, and Monday’s heavy rain and the ensuing shift of the schedule could affect the tournament’s outcome.The complete washout, the first at Roland Garros in 16 years, left the tournament in an awkward stance, with six of the 16 fourth-round matches having been completed Sunday and the remaining scheduled for completion Tuesday. The forecast on Tuesday also calls for rain.Tournament officials particularly want to avoid a jam of backlogged matches that could force some players to play on consecutive days. That would be particularly challenging for the men, who play best-of-five sets.“If players need to play two matches in two days,” Forget said, “I guess the guy who is more fit will win.”With the women’s final still scheduled for Saturday, whoever reaches the final from the top half of the draw, which includes the top seed Serena Williams and her sister Venus as well as last year’s semifinalist Timea Bacsinszky and the Rome finalist Madison Keys, will have to play four matches in five days.Two of the fourth-round matches on the bottom half of the draw — Agnieszka Radwanska versus Tsvetana Pironkova and Simona Halep versus Samantha Stosur — were unfinished Sunday, so whoever reaches the semifinal out of those four players will have had had less rest than her semifinal opponent, either Garbiñe Muguruza or Shelby Rogers.Forget said he was optimistic that the matches would be played Tuesday and that with two days of matches on secondary courts, the tournament would get back on track. But he would not rule out the possibility of extending it into next Monday if rainy conditions persisted.“Today is evidence; it shows us that this is absolutely necessary — we must have a roof,” Forget said.He said it was a day of “frustration and annoyance.”Forget noted that the United States Open recently had a streak of four consecutive tournaments going an extra day. But Arthur Ashe Stadium now boasts a new roof. Forget has set his sights on 2020 for a roof at Roland Garros.When and if play resumes Tuesday, a dense schedule of matches could put all the remaining top players on court, including Serena Williams and Novak Djokovic, the men’s No. 1 seed. Both of their matches were scratched Monday, delaying their searches for elusive titles.Djokovic, playing in his 12th French Open, has yet to win this event, and a victory would complete a career Grand Slam. Williams needs one more major tournament victory to match Steffi Graf’s Open-era record of 22 Grand Slam titles. If the rain persists and heavy, muddy courts become the norm, those players’ championship hopes could be affected.Serena Williams could benefit from the day of rest since she and her sister played four sets of doubles Sunday, but her next singles opponent could have a better chance to defeat Williams than she has in the past.Williams is scheduled to play No. 18-seeded Elina Svitolina for a place in the quarterfinals. Svitolina, 21, has not beaten Williams, 34, in three attempts and may have no clue how to. But her coach definitely knows how.Justine Henin, who began working with Svitolina earlier this year, won six of 14 matches against Williams, including a 2-0 record at Roland Garros, where she won four singles titles.Part of what made Henin so difficult for Williams was her energy, her feisty and picturesque one-handed backhand and, perhaps more than anything, her desire to win.That relentless spirit would be hard for anyone to match, Svitolina included. But other differences include Svitolina’s two-handed backhand and her height. At 5 feet 9 inches, she stands about five inches taller than Henin.“She has different game, and I have different game,” Svitolina said. “So it’s not like I have her in my team so I’m going to play exactly like her, because it’s impossible. We are completely different persons. So we try to find something in between what suits me, what suits my game, and it’s just what’s the best for me.”Henin and Williams had some memorable confrontations, including their 2003 semifinal at Roland Garros. Svitolina recalled watching their last meeting, a three-set final at the Australian Open in 2010 that Williams won.But Williams sent a clear message that she was not playing Henin, and that any notion that Svitolina has some form of anti-Serena kryptonite with Henin watching from the box is folly.“It really doesn’t matter,” Williams said. “It’s just really about going out there and playing your best.”If wet conditions continue, though, they could nullify any advantage Williams might expect from her power game. Heavy, wet tennis balls could slightly dampen her serve and her potent ground strokes.For example, in his straight-sets win over the hard-serving John Isner on Sunday, Andy Murray, the No. 2 seed, conceded that the wet conditions after a downpour probably helped him.“When we came back out, the balls were extremely slow,” Murray said. “I was able to return a lot more serves, get a lot more in the service games, extend the rallies, and that’s where I was able to dictate most of the points.”On the men’s side, the defending champion Stan Wawrinka, the No. 3 seed, and Albert Ramos-Vinolas were able to complete their fourth-round matches and will face each other in a quarterfinal.Murray will face No. 9-seeded Richard Gasquet — and the French crowd — in another quarterfinal.“I played a number of times against French players here in difficult atmospheres and I managed O.K.,” Murray said. “I’m sure I’ll be fine on whatever day we play.”Djokovic will play No. 14-seeded Roberto Bautista Agut on Tuesday, weather permitting, and if he wins, he will have to come back Wednesday for a quarterfinal match. Djokovic is not unfamiliar with rain disruptions here. In his 2012 final against Rafael Nadal, Djokovic lost the first two sets, won the third and was leading in the fourth when rain suspended play.When they came back the next day, Nadal needed less than an hour to finish off Djokovic.Ben Rothenberg contributed reporting.Advertisement