AdvertisementSupported byOn BaseballBy Tyler KepnerCLEVELAND — The last time the Chicago Cubs played in the World Series, in 1945, they gave up five runs in the first inning of a Game 7 loss – then sat out the event for next seven decades. All things considered, the opener of this World Series, on Tuesday at Progressive Field, was not quite as bad.Yet in strangling the Cubs, 6-0, the Cleveland Indians proved a few things to the team with the majors’ best record. Their long layoff since winning the pennant, which can sometimes work against a hot team, did nothing to slow their momentum. And the Indians are not the same bunch as the Los Angeles Dodgers, whom the Cubs beat to get here.“We haven’t had the chance to play Cleveland,” said Cubs shortstop Addison Russell, who struck out against Corey Kluber, Andrew Miller and Cody Allen in Game 1. “They score runs a lot of ways. Analyzing that and putting all that together, this is definitely a different ball club than we’ve been facing. We have to come with our ‘A’ game every single game.”The Cubs did not bring it on Tuesday. They fanned 15 times, the most by any team in a World Series game in 31 years. And their ace left-hander, Jon Lester, allowed more free bases in the first inning of Game 1 than he had in his three National League playoff starts combined.Two were walks, and the third was a hit batter. The Indians packaged those gifts, two singles and a stolen base to take a 2-0 lead.“I’ve got to make those guys earn the two runs,” said Lester, who lost for the first time in four career World Series starts. “I can’t let free passes — hit-by-pitches and walks and stuff like that — win a game. I would much rather deal with making bad pitches and guys hitting home runs than giving free passes and more outs. That’s how I look at those, as more outs for them to work with.”Lester allowed one more run, the first of two homers by Roberto Perez, before leaving with two outs in the sixth. The Indians needed just one run, anyway, because the Cubs never scored.Kluber struck out eight in the first three innings – no other pitcher had ever done that in the World Series – and overpowered the Cubs with a darting sinker. He walked none in the game and ended up with nine strikeouts in six efficient innings.Miller was not as sharp, needing 46 pitches to wade through two innings, surviving two hits and two walks while fanning three. Allen allowed a double but struck out the side.“Over all, I was not disappointed,” Manager Joe Maddon said. “I know we had 15 punchouts, I get it. But the quality of at-bats were not that bad.”That was the theme in the Cubs’ clubhouse, especially as it pertained to Miller, the most valuable player of the American League Championship Series. and the pitcher they most want to avoid. If they did not quite puncture his aura – he did escape a bases-loaded, no-out jam — at least they may have sapped his strength for Game 2.“I know Andrew, and I know his competitiveness,” said Lester, a teammate of Miller’s in Boston. “I know how he’s going to approach tomorrow and what he’s going to say to Tito to try to get into that game. But hopefully we were able to work him enough to where he’s down tomorrow and we can not worry about him, and maybe try to get to somebody else.”Terry (Tito) Francona, the Indians’ manager, said he was not sure what he could ask of Miller for Game 2 – besides, he added, it might rain. The game time has already been moved up an hour, to 7 p.m., because of a threatening forecast.Whenever the game is played, the Cubs will be glad to have Kyle Schwarber as the designated hitter. That was another point they emphasized: Schwarber, with only a brief tuneup in the Arizona Fall League after missing more than six months with torn knee ligaments, managed a double and a walk in Game 1.“It’s almost not human, to swing at strikes,” third baseman Kris Bryant said. “When you take time off, you feel a little more anxious up there. But it certainly didn’t show with him.”Maybe not, but Schwarber did strand runners in scoring position in his other at-bats, striking out against Kluber in the second after Ben Zobrist’s leadoff double, and again off Miller to end the eighth with runners at the corners. The Cubs were 1 for 11 with runners in scoring position.The task should be easier in Game 2 against Trevor Bauer, who barely pitched in the A.L.C.S. after slicing his right pinkie while fixing the propeller of a drone. He recorded just two outs in Game 3 of that series, but the Indians won anyway with a bullpen relay that stifled a powerful Toronto lineup.Cleveland has not gone from leading to trailing in any game this postseason. To send this series back to Chicago even, the Cubs understand the importance of scoring first.“You’ve got to get a lead,” catcher David Ross said. “They’ve got a pretty good bullpen. Their record in the playoffs is pretty dominant, and we understand how good they are. Everybody may take them a little lightly, but we don’t.”The Cubs have recovered from shutouts before in this postseason. But for another day, at least, the last Cub to score a run in the World Series remains Peanuts Lowrey, on a double by Bill Nicholson against Detroit in that fateful Game 7 in 1945. The Cubs lost by six runs that day, too.Advertisement