By BILLY WITZOCT. 24, 2016
In an effort to stem plummeting attendance, the Yankees on Monday announced several changes to Yankee Stadium, including a play area for children and open-air patio bars. The enhancements aim to draw younger fans who have increasingly abandoned the team in recent years.The new areas will be mostly in the outfield sections of the stadium, and the team will remove nearly 2,100 seats, more than half of them bleacher seats with restricted views.Get the big sports news, highlights and analysis from Times journalists, with distinctive takes on games and some behind-the-scenes surprises, delivered to your inbox every week.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.New patio bars will be built above the bullpens in left and right field, and the current one in center field will expanded to nearly three times its current size. A 2,850-square-foot children’s zone will be constructed on the 300 level in right field. Three other lounge and patio areas will also be built. All the additions will be open to all ticket-holders.The team also said it would make available about 2,500 seats per game at $15 or less.While patio bars and children’s play areas are common in many ballparks, the Yankees have struggled to connect with younger fans who have been loath to pay high ticket prices.Annual attendance at Yankee Stadium has dropped by more than 700,000 since 2010, when the Yankees, as the defending World Series champions, drew about 3.8 million. The Yankees, who averaged 37,820 fans last year (about three-fourths of capacity), have become less appealing because they have missed the playoffs in three of the last four seasons, and many of their longtime drawing cards, including Derek Jeter and Mariano Rivera, have retired.A version of this article appears in print on October 25, 2016, on Page B12 of the New York edition with the headline: Baseball; Yankee Stadium to Get Spruce-Up.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.