By BILLY WITZAPRIL 4, 2017
ST. PETERSBURG, Fla. — It is sometimes hard to remember that Ronald Torreyes is a ballplayer and not just a totem of bonhomie in the Yankees’ dugout.A regular gag is for Torreyes, at 5 feet 7 inches and 158 pounds, to pose for a photo with the behemoth outfielder Aaron Judge, who is a foot taller and more than 100 pounds heavier.Another is for Didi Gregorius to hoist Torreyes up so he can high-five his teammates.It was no joke, though, when Torreyes stepped into the batter’s box Tuesday night and delivered an outsize blow: a two-run homer that sent the Yankees on their way to a 5-0 victory over the Tampa Bay Rays at Tropicana Field.The Yankees also got a solid start from C. C. Sabathia, along with a home run and run-scoring single by Chase Headley, to bounce back from their abysmal performance in Sunday’s season opener.AdvertisementBut it was the performance by Torreyes, a 24-year-old Venezuelan, that stood out. His home run was the second of his career, and it carried at least 10 rows deep into the bleachers in left field.AdvertisementHe drove another ball deep to center, turning the Gold Glove outfielder Kevin Kiermaier around to catch it, and Torreyes fielded cleanly at shortstop.Afterward, as he conducted a postgame interview on the field, he was drenched with a bucket of water — another form of endearment that followed his being mobbed in the dugout after the home run.“You don’t see guys that size playing in the big leagues,” Headley said. “I hate to say it, but that has something to do with it.”He added: “Toe is one of those guys that everybody loves to pull for because he works his butt off. He can play 17 different positions, and he never complains. He’s a great teammate, so when he has big hits like that, it really fires the team up.”With Gregorius, the starting shortstop, expected to be out until mid-May with an injured shoulder, the Yankees will need more than nights like Tuesday from their utility infielder.But power is not necessarily what the Yankees expected of him. In the season opener, Manager Joe Girardi sent Aaron Hicks up to hit for Torreyes when the Yankees were in a deep hole.His reasoning: The Yankees needed a home run — something that might have been expected from Gregorius, who hit a career-high 20 last season, but not Torreyes.Torreyes said he was not bothered by Hicks hitting for him on Sunday.“It’s part of baseball,” he said. “At that time, the manager wanted to make a move. Maybe Hicks could have hit a home run at that time, maybe something we were looking for at that time.”AdvertisementWith Torreyes and his backup, the light-hitting Pete Kozma, Girardi only wants them to be themselves. In Torreyes’s case, a reliable glove and solid contact hitter. He hit .258 in 72 games last season, many as a late defensive replacement.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.“You’re missing a very good shortstop with an extremely strong arm that hit 20-plus homers that you feel is growing as an offensive player,” Girardi said Monday of Gregorius. “So you’re going to miss that. Didi’s a guy that can hit somewhere in the middle of the order, too.”Girardi said he appreciates Torreyes’s steadiness.“He’s a baseball player,” Girardi said. “He’s going to do things the right way, and he’s going to be in the right spot and he’s going to run the bases well. He’s going to do everything right. Didi is a hard guy to replace, but we feel that Toe is going to do a good job.”Torreyes crushed an 86-mile-per-hour cutter that Rays starter Jake Odorizzi left over the plate. Brett Gardner followed with a double into the right-field corner and scored when Peter Bourjos lost Matt Holliday’s high fly ball against the white roof. It landed for a double and was Holliday’s first hit as a Yankee. Headley added a solo homer off Odorizzi in the sixth, then drove home Jacoby Ellsbury with a single in the eighth.It was enough support for Sabathia, who allowed three hits and two walks over five innings. Bryan Mitchell, Tyler Clippard, Jonathan Holder, Dellin Betances and Aroldis Chapman finished off the shutout.The only dicey inning came in the eighth, when the Rays got two infield hits against Holder and Betances was summoned. He walked Evan Longoria to load the bases but struck out Rickie Weeks Jr. and retired pinch-hitter Logan Morrison, who homered Sunday, on a grounder.If Sabathia was a victim of bad luck last season — his 9-12 record belied his 3.91 earned run average, the second-best of any Yankees starter — then Tuesday provided an auspicious start to 2017.“We’ll talk about that after the season,” Sabathia said of his luck.Ellsbury, the Yankees’ center fielder, clattered into the wall to catch a drive by Weeks, depriving the Rays of a run in the first. Bourjos ripped two liners in the third, one landing just foul, and the other in third baseman Headley’s outstretched glove.AdvertisementAnother out came thanks to a replay, the review concluding that Torreyes’s throw had not pulled first baseman Greg Bird off the bag.And when Steven Souza Jr.’s chopper over the mound ticked off Sabathia’s glove, Torreyes was there, scooping the ball up and firing on the run to get Souza.On this night, though, the best part of the Yankees’ fortune came from the one who delivered his first home of the season. His name was not Holliday or the young sluggers Gary Sanchez, Bird or Judge.“I don’t think a whole lot of us would have bet on that,” Girardi said of Torreyes. “But he played an incredible game tonight.”An article in some editions on April 5 about the Yankees’ 5-0 victory over the Tampa Bay Rays misstated, in some copies, the number of home runs Yankees shortstop Didi Gregorius hit last season. It was 20, not 21.A version of this article appears in print on April 5, 2017, on Page B9 of the New York edition with the headline: Modest in His Stature, a Yankee Makes a Towering Statement.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.