

 Jeré Longman
 

ON SOCCER
NOV. 22, 2016
First, a question of clarification for Bruce Arena on the first day of his second stint as coach of the United States men’s national team: Would American soccer grow as nativist in outlook as American presidential politics? Did Arena still subscribe to his earlier remarks that most players should be homemade, like jeans and jazz?“Players on the national team should be — and this is my own feeling — they should be Americans,” Arena told ESPN in a 2013 interview. “If they’re all born in other countries, I don’t think we can say we are making progress.”Those comments were viewed by many as a rebuke of the stewardship of Jurgen Klinsmann, a native of Germany who had aggressively pursued a number of German-born players with dual citizenship to supplement the United States player pool. They also raised questions, with Arena replacing Klinsmann as coach of the national team on Tuesday, about the future of players — John Brooks, Timothy Chandler, Fabian Johnson and Jermaine Jones, to name a few — under Arena as the struggling American team seeks to qualify for the 2018 World Cup in Russia.In April, after the retired women’s star Abby Wambach was widely criticized for making similar remarks, Arena expanded his earlier comments. He told the commentator and former national team player Alexi Lalas in a podcast that given the melting-pot nature of the United States, it was “a ridiculous point of view” to say that a player must be born there to play for the national team. His record of fielding foreign-born players in his previous stint as national team coach backed up his defense.AdvertisementBut Arena added: “I think that if you play for the national team, regardless of your background and how you got that passport, it’s got to be important to you. You have to play with pride, and to me, that’s an important characteristic to have as a national team player. You care about your country. You care about how your team is represented on the field, and it means everything to you. And if you’re short of that, whether you were born in Kansas City or you were born in Berlin, to me, that’s critical.”AdvertisementArena continued, in remarks that some found troubling: “And I hate saying this, but today I don’t feel that we fully have a national team where all players understand that — the importance of playing for your national team and the pride you’re supposed to have in playing for it. And you know, that troubles me, if anything.”Players who come into the team “from the outside” must be instilled with such pride and understanding, Arena told Lalas, and “if it’s not there, then I think they should not be part of the national team.”So even in clarifying his remarks, Arena seemed to be signaling an otherness about foreign-born American players and questioning their desire and patriotism. During his reintroductory teleconference on Tuesday, Arena adopted a more inclusive tone.Get the big sports news, highlights and analysis from Times journalists, with distinctive takes on games and some behind-the-scenes surprises, delivered to your inbox every week.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.Anyone holding an American passport is eligible for consideration for the national team, Arena said, adding, “I embrace all players that are eligible to play.” He added, “I just want to make sure their heart is in the right place,” and when they wear the United States jersey, “they’re playing for that crest on the shirt.”Arena went on: “It’s important to me. I have a great passion for this national team, and I expect the same out of our players. So I’m all for any players that are eligible to play for us. And I really look forward to working with, using your term, our foreign nationals as well as our domestic players.”The issue was fraught enough that Sunil Gulati, the president of U.S. Soccer, made a point of telling reporters that he had discussed it with Arena before hiring him.“We’re open to anyone, whether they are born abroad or born here,” Gulati said, adding, “There’s no thought pattern that one has an advantage over the other as long as they’re committed to the U.S. national team.”AdvertisementIn truth, there seems little time for a severe makeover before the United States resumes World Cup qualifying in March, anyway. Klinsmann had a loftier mandate to remake American soccer. Arena’s charge is more pragmatic: Get results in qualifying and, it is hoped, at the World Cup. “It’s highly unlikely we’re going to bring many new players into the program,” Arena said.Still, at 65, Arena said he felt better prepared to manage the national team now than he did when he coached the Americans to the quarterfinals of the 2002 World Cup and to a first-round exit in 2006. Asked to name the biggest problem facing the current team, Arena indirectly referred to the criticism that Klinsmann faced about endless tinkering and tactical awkwardness.“We need to build a chemistry in this team and have a common goal and really work on a team concept,” Arena said.He described himself as a players’ coach whose biggest strength was knowing how build a team. That was especially evident in 2002 in his ability to adapt to the strengths and weaknesses of his players and their opponent in a given match. The same 3-5-2 formation used bewilderingly by Klinsmann in qualifying against Mexico this month brought success and acclaim to Arena in a victory against Mexico in the second round of the 2002 World Cup.His intended style this time around, he said, would be a familiar American style: strong goalkeeping, young attacking talent and an experienced midfield, brought together by athleticism, togetherness and spirit.“We are who we are,” Arena said.Presumably, he meant everyone, whether born in the United States or not.A version of this article appears in print on November 23, 2016, on Page B11 of the New York edition with the headline: Arena’s Comments Show Shift in View of Foreign-Born Players.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.See More »