

 Marc Tracy
 

ON COLLEGE BASKETBALL
APRIL 4, 2017
GLENDALE, Ariz. — In Monday night’s sluggish slog of a national title game — it was trench warfare, with whistles instead of land mines — North Carolina faced the frustrating situation of clearly outplaying its opponent, Gonzaga, without the scoreboard reflecting that fact.The Tar Heels (33-7) relinquished a lead less than five minutes into the start of the game and did not get it back until the second half had begun. They promptly lost the lead again, going more than four minutes without scoring. A team that entered the game making more than 36 percent of its 3-pointers sank them at less than half that rate. The team’s heart and soul, Kennedy Meeks, amassed four fouls. A four-point lead with more than six minutes left was their biggest to that point, and not a minute later, Gonzaga (37-2) was back up by one.Many teams might have crumbled.But, like Russian novels, the N.C.A.A. tournament rewards suffering. And suffering — suffering, this team knew. Ten U.N.C. players, including the starting five and the leaders in minutes played, were on last year’s team, which lost the title game to Villanova on a body-blow buzzer-beater by Kris Jenkins, the adoptive brother of U.N.C.’s own Nate Britt. Jenkins sat directly behind the U.N.C. bench like some metaphysical reminder of how painful it can be to get so close to glory and falter.Leading by 62-60 with a little more than three minutes left, U.N.C. huddled during a media timeout. Steve Robinson, who has been an assistant to Tar Heels Coach Roy Williams both at Kansas and at U.N.C., brought up last year’s finale with the players.Advertisement“Remember that moment, and how we felt last year,” Robinson said, according to point guard Joel Berry II. “And we don’t want that again. So we’ve just got to give it our all.”Advertisement“And that’s the moment where we locked in,” Berry added, supplying his own narration. “And we went out there and just gave it our all, literally.”After Gonzaga went ahead 65-63 with less than two minutes left, the Bulldogs — the little program that truly could, a small school in eastern Washington State that built itself into a national power and was validated with its first appearance in the Final Four — never scored again. U.N.C. finished the game on an 8-0 run to make the final score 71-65 and bring the program’s sixth national title back to Chapel Hill.Previous defeat leading to present triumph was a common theme throughout this tournament. Here was Zak Showalter, the Wisconsin redshirt senior, for instance. Last month in Buffalo, in the tournament’s second round, the eighth-seeded Badgers — led by a core of seniors who remembered barely losing the 2014 national semifinal to Kentucky and then barely losing the 2015 national title game to Duke — put the kibosh on top overall seed Villanova’s season with a 65-62 upset.
                North Carolina defeats Gonzaga to win its sixth N.C.A.A. championship.            “In March, there aren’t really going to be blowouts to win games,” Showalter said. “It’s going to be who makes the plays in the last five, 10 minutes of games.”He added, “I don’t know how to explain it. We’re just calm in those situations.”A week later, there was Tyler Dorsey, the Oregon sophomore. In the regional finals last year, the Ducks, elated after beating Duke, the defending champion at the time, were knocked off by the underdog Oklahoma. Dorsey and his team did not forget, and in this year’s regional final, in the hostile territory of Kansas City, Mo., they upset top-seeded Kansas.“That experience definitely helps — that we got back to this point,” Dorsey said. “We knew what we needed to do.”And here was Theo Pinson, the U.N.C. junior who has made himself M.V.P. — Most Valuable to the Press — and foreshadowed Monday the day before, describing how the Tar Heels respond to on-court adversity.Advertisement“We’ve been here before,” Pinson said. “We say that a lot during games: ‘We’ve been through these situations before.’ ”In college basketball, as a Nobel Prize-winning poet once almost put it: There is no path to success like failure, even if failure itself is no success at all.If that holds any sway, it may constitute commentary on the team-building strategy of loading up on one-and-dones — players bound for the N.B.A. after their freshman seasons. Such teams have the advantage of the most purely talented players but the drawback of a lack of experience — in a sport where winning in March might require losing in past Marches.There have now been 11 seasons of what might be termed the one-and-done era — since the N.B.A. began to require its draftees to be at least one year removed from high school — and it is generally agreed that just two teams, 2012 Kentucky and 2015 Duke, won national titles primarily because of such players.Get the big sports news, highlights and analysis from Times journalists, with distinctive takes on games and some behind-the-scenes surprises, delivered to your inbox every week.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.Monday’s contenders combined for, at most, one one-and-done player (Gonzaga big man Zach Collins, whose five fouls limited him to just 14 minutes). Williams has been ineffective at recruiting such players, partly because a protracted N.C.A.A. investigation into fake classes disproportionately taken by major-sport athletes has left a cloud over the program.“I had one dad say, ‘We’re just going to wait until the spring, and it will be over with by then, and then we’ll know exactly what it was,’ ” Williams said Sunday. “That was two years ago.”But a perhaps unforeseen advantage of this recruiting obstacle is that U.N.C. has “been able to stay old,” in the words of Seth Greenberg, the former Virginia Tech coach who is now an ESPN commentator.“I’ve always been a believer,” Greenberg continued, going on to refer to two veterans on otherwise young teams, “that one-and-done can win with that guy who can basically coach your freshmen and locker room — Darius Miller in 2012, Quinn Cook in 2015.”Advertisement“It’s hard for those young players to understand how it works,” he added.There were several huge plays that confirmed the victory for the Tar Heels, but perhaps the most impressive came with 16 seconds left and a 3-point lead. Meeks, a senior, carrying four fouls and 260 pounds, rose up and blocked an attempted floater by Nigel Williams-Goss, Gonzaga’s leading scorer this season. The ball fell to Berry, a junior, who chucked it up the court to Justin Jackson, a junior, who stuffed it home to create a 5-point lead with 12 seconds left.After the game, Nakhia Meeks, the mother of Kennedy Meeks, said she never doubted her son or his team.“My question is, Did we know we were going to win it this year?” she said. “Yes. I prayed on it, and I called it last year. I knew our boys wanted it more than anything.”Kennedy Meeks confirmed that account in a joyous postgame locker room.“I think it definitely gave us a little edge,” he said of last year’s loss. “Definitely helped us out.”He added: “This team, we worked so hard trying not to be remembered as the team last year. And I don’t think we will now.”A version of this article appears in print on April 5, 2017, on Page B10 of the New York edition with the headline: Tar Heels, After Letting One Slip, Hold On Tight This Time.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.See More »