By WALLACE MATTHEWSMAY 3, 2017
Aaron Judge, a 25-year-old Yankees rookie, finally offered some evidence that he is, in fact, fallible. In the first inning of Wednesday night’s game against the Toronto Blue Jays, he was thrown out trying to steal a base.But aside from that, he continued to pile up numbers at so rapid a pace that it may be difficult for the average fan to keep track of them.The Yankees beat the Toronto Blue Jays, 8-6, yet another come-from-behind victory that was fueled by the team’s primary weapon this season: home runs. The long balls helped them stay close in a game in which they trailed by 4-0 after one inning and by 6-3 after three. Judge, unsurprisingly, produced one of the homers, a two-run shot to center field in the third inning.Judge’s home run was not the only one hit by the Yankees, or even the most important — that designation would go to Matt Holliday’s three-run shot in the first inning, which gave the Yankees a quick start on climbing out of the four-run hole that C. C. Sabathia had put them in in the top of the inning. Holliday’s home run was also the 300th of his 14-year major league career.AdvertisementBut Judge’s added to the case that he might just be for real, that the 10 home runs he hit in April to help earn him the American League Rookie of the Month Award, announced earlier on Wednesday, might just be the start of something much bigger.AdvertisementAs Sabathia succinctly put it, “he’s scary.”The home run — Judge’s 13th in just 88 at-bats this season, a pace that would put him in the neighborhood of 88 home runs over the course of a 600-at-bat season — was one of three hits he collected, a first for him in a major league game.Judge also scored the run that tied the game at 6-6 in an atypical small-ball rally by the Yankees in the seventh inning. Judge produced a one-out single off a 1-2 changeup, a pitch that might be expected to confound a young player who, in his first big league stint, showed an alarming tendency to strike out. But little has fazed Judge this time around.“Honestly, I just take it one day at a time,” he said Wednesday. “I try to forget what I did the day before. Every day is like opening day for me.”Get the big sports news, highlights and analysis from Times journalists, with distinctive takes on games and some behind-the-scenes surprises, delivered to your inbox every week.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.Judge singled to the opposite field in the first inning (and was thrown out trying to steal), homered in the third, popped out in the fifth and singled again in the seventh before striking out in the eighth.Although he has played down most of his achievements so far, he seems at least grudgingly aware of the significance of what he is doing as a player with not even 175 major league at-bats.Asked if he had ever been as hot as he is right now, at any level, Judge grinned and said, “Maybe in tee ball.”His teammates are not nearly so coy. “The only word I can use to describe him is ‘dominant,’” Chase Headley said. “He’s been pretty impressive to be around, and to be a part of it.”AdvertisementManager Joe Girardi said: “I’ve said all along, if he gets the barrel of the bat to the ball, he’s going to do a lot of damage. We knew he was a good outfielder. We knew he could run the bases. But we wanted that consistent contact because when a man that size makes consistent contact, there’s going to be some damage. It’s hard to measure what he’s done for us in these first 20-something games.”Girardi argued balls and strikes so vociferously with the home-plate umpire, Bill Welke, that he was ejected early in the seventh inning. His tirade may have had an effect, though. Before the ejection, Blue Jays reliever Joe Biagini had struck out five straight Yankees, four of them looking. After the ejection, the next four Yankees — Judge, Headley, Chris Carter and pinch-hitter Didi Gregorius — got hits to give the Yankees a 7-6 lead. The final run was driven in with a bases-loaded walk by Aaron Hicks.That rally helped the Yankees overcome a second straight troubling effort by Sabathia, who surrendered a three-run homer to Steve Pearce on his 15th pitch of the game and left two batters into the fifth inning, having allowed six earned runs.“I have confidence in C. C.,” Girardi said. “He didn’t have his cutter tonight. But he’ll be fine.”No such reassurances were needed about Judge, who through the first 26 games of the season continues to affirm just how fine he is.As Headley said, “Judge has been out of this world.”So much so, the Yankees might want to erect a scoreboard dedicated only to him.A version of this article appears in print on May 4, 2017, on Page B13 of the New York edition with the headline: Yankees, With Sabathia Struggling, Again Find a Way to Rally to a Victory.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.