AdvertisementSupported byBy Pat BorziDES MOINES — Kentucky and Kansas, the bluest of the blue-blood programs, attract big crowds everywhere they go, even for practice. When the Wildcats and Coach John Calipari took the court at Wells Fargo Arena for their 40-minute session on Wednesday, about 3,000 people, mostly from the area, greeted them warmly.When Kentucky was finished — Kansas had practiced earlier — most of the fans took it as their cue to leave. By the time Stony Brook, the last team scheduled to practice, walked onto the court shortly after 6:30 p.m., only about 300 people remained. Three dozen of them — members of the Seawolves’ pep band and dance team — initiated a “Let’s go, Seawolves!” chant.That is what happens when a first-time N.C.A.A. tournament participant — in this case a modest-size state university from New York, founded in 1957 — matches up with one of college basketball’s leviathans.Few give Stony Brook, the champion of the America East Conference and the No. 13 seed in the East Region, much of a chance against fourth-seeded Kentucky, the Southeastern Conference champion, a winner of eight N.C.A.A. titles and the Seawolves’ opponent Thursday.But this is March. Crazy things happen. Maybe Stony Brook can be this year’s Florida Gulf Coast, Hampton or Norfolk State and score a major upset. Stony Brook’s players sounded less than convinced.“We know Kentucky is an elite program, but we’ve got faith in our team and our coaching staff,” forward Rayshaun McGrew said. “So we’re going to be doing what we’ve been doing all year and try to keep the game close.”Upsets and underdogs have made the tournament a national phenomenon. Invariably, fans with no obvious allegiances find themselves cheering on an unheralded team that challenges a top seed or an elite program.But the most coveted upset — a No. 16 seed over a No. 1 — has yet to occur. No. 1s are 124-0 against No. 16s since 1985, when the field expanded to 64 teams.They have come close though, especially in 1989, when Princeton faced Georgetown and East Tennessee State played Oklahoma. Both Princeton and East Tennessee State led at halftime before losing by a point. Murray State took Michigan State to overtime the following year. And in 2006, Albany led Connecticut by 12 points in the second half before the Huskies prevailed, 72-59.“I think it will happen,” said Bill Self, the coach of the overall No. 1 seed, Kansas. “Just hopefully not in 2016.”The Jayhawks will face 16th-seeded Austin Peay on Thursday in the South Region.Seven No. 15 seeds have beaten No. 2s. It happened twice in 2012, when Norfolk State, with the future Knick Kyle O’Quinn, upended Missouri and Lehigh surprised Duke.Hampton’s 58-57 upset of Iowa State in 2001 remains that program’s signature victory. Mindful of their history, the Pirates will be seeking an even bigger upset as a No. 16 seed against Virginia, the Midwest Region’s top seed, on Thursday in Raleigh, N.C.“We put our pants on just like they do,” Lawrence Cooks, a redshirt junior guard, said. “They might have a little different training than us, but we got big boys in here, too. We’re all grown.”Florida Gulf Coast, which beat Georgetown in a No. 15-versus-No. 2 stunner in 2013 in its second full-fledged season in Division 1, returns this year as a No. 16 seed. It earned a game against the East’s No. 1 seed, North Carolina, by beating Fairleigh Dickinson in a play-in game. This time?“I would say we have to play a pretty close to perfect game,” Florida Gulf Coast guard Christian Terrell said. “It’s not going to be impossible. I think it’s going to be tough for us.”Even if Stony Brook wins its opener, it could have to face Indiana, and Austin Peay could advance to play Connecticut — programs that, combined with Kentucky and Kansas, own 20 national championships among them. So Stony Brook and Austin Peay are the outsiders.In New York, Austin Peay is best known for James Williams, the Brooklyn-born playground legend nicknamed Fly, who set program records in 1972-73 for points in a game (51) and a season (854) and took the Governors to consecutive N.C.A.A. appearances before leaving in 1974 for the American Basketball Association. Austin Peay has been back five times, the last four since Coach Dave Loos arrived in 1990.That the Governors qualified this year is remarkable. Austin Peay was 12-17 on Feb. 20 and staring at a fifth consecutive losing season before winning six straight, the last four to capture the Ohio Valley Conference tournament.Austin Peay (18-17) slipped into that tournament as the No. 8 seed on the final day of the regular season when Eastern Kentucky lost; ousted top-seed Belmont in the semifinals on a disallowed basket at the overtime buzzer; and then hit a team-record 16 3-pointers to beat Tennessee-Martin, 83-73, for the championship on Loos’s 69th birthday.“We were the underdogs coming into the O.V.C. tournament,” the senior Khalil Davis said. “We made history at the O.V.C. tournament. Who says we can’t make history as the 16 seed?”Through all this, Loos’s 6-year-old granddaughter, Rhyan, continued treatment for neuroblastoma, a rare pediatric cancer, at Memorial Sloan Kettering Cancer Center in New York. Brad Loos, Rhyan’s father, is an assistant coach at Missouri. Earlier this week, Self said he hoped facing Austin Peay might increase national attention on the cancer afflicting Rhyan.The Seawolves (26-6) are led by the 6-foot-8 senior forward Jameel Warney, the program’s career leader in scoring and rebounding, who poured in 43 points against Vermont in the America East final.Kentucky (26-8), still formidable after losing seven players to the N.B.A. last year, counters with guards Tyler Ulis and Jamal Murray, who have combined for more than 37 points per game. Murray and two other starters, guard Isaiah Briscoe and forward Skal Labissiere, are freshmen, which worries Calipari.“You know, they can beat us — they can,” Calipari said of Stony Brook. “They do some great stuff.”This time of year, an underdog often does.Ray Glier contributed reporting from Raleigh, N.C.Advertisement