AdvertisementSupported byBy Robert WeintraubIt began, literally, with a pain in the neck.Billy Kennedy was coaching Murray State in 2011 when he first noticed the discomfort. His doctor said it was bone spurs, or perhaps just the woes of middle age. It did not prevent Kennedy from leaving the Racers after the season for what he called his dream job, coaching Texas A&M.Then his life unraveled.Soon after Kennedy arrived in College Station that year, the pain spread to his shoulder, and he had trouble controlling his left arm. Subsequent examinations revealed a troubling diagnosis: Kennedy had early-onset Parkinson’s disease, a degenerative nerve condition that affects movement and has no cure.“I hadn’t even signed my contract yet,” Kennedy said.Thus began a nightmarish period of tension and secrecy. Convinced that telling anyone about his condition would unleash chaos on his new program and stifle his recruiting before he could even begin it, Kennedy clammed up.“For 30 days I held it in,” Kennedy said last week as he prepared for his first N.C.A.A. tournament with the Aggies. “First off, I’m not wired to talk about my problems. I also had a new job and a new staff that had just moved their families. There was a great deal of stress.”After a month of sleepless nights and endless worry for Kennedy, his body shut down — “hit the wall” in his words. He was ordered to take a leave of absence of nearly a month to rest.Pills helped Kennedy sleep, and an outpouring of sympathetic notes from fans and coaches buoyed his spirits. Texas A&M announced that an “undisclosed medical condition” had forced him to step away from the team.About two weeks later, Kennedy revealed the true nature of his illness, and others with Parkinson’s offered their support.“Michael J. Fox, for example, has been great,” Kennedy said of the actor, who learned he had the condition in 1991. “He’s been a big supporter and has helped me in many ways.”Parkinson’s affects those who have it differently, and Kennedy said his case was caught early enough that he did not require medication to help control his tremors for nearly a year. Today his regimen combines drugs with diet and exercise that has left Kennedy “a good 20 pounds lighter” than he was when the senior guard Alex Caruso first arrived on campus, Caruso said.Before his diagnosis, Kennedy was a “McDonald’s-three-times-a-week guy,” his wife, Mary, said. But he has changed his intake considerably in the past several years. He avoids processed and fried foods and drinks green smoothies through which he consumes “a pound of spinach every day,” Mary said.Yet despite Kennedy’s success managing the disease, his job was threatened by Texas A&M’s on-court mediocrity. The Aggies missed the tournament in Kennedy’s first four seasons, after six straight appearances under previous coaches.“They could have bailed out on me given the struggles we had early on,” Kennedy said of his bosses, “but they stayed the course, and I feel blessed because of that.”When rival programs did not hesitate to use Kennedy’s Parkinson’s diagnosis against him in recruiting, he employed an unconventional strategy to win over players: He challenged them to games.“I would play them in games of one-on-one so they would know for sure I had the energy to coach,” he said.One top recruit, the 6-foot-10 center Tyler Davis, was convinced by Kennedy’s vigor, although he scoffed at Kennedy’s game.“It wasn’t a tough matchup,” Davis said without noting that the 52-year-old Kennedy had given up about three decades and twice as many inches to him.Kennedy’s strategy produced a top-five recruiting class, and this season the Aggies at last broke through. Texas A&M shared the Southeastern Conference’s regular-season championship with Kentucky, the first conference title for the team since it won the Southwest Conference in 1986.While Texas A&M was advancing to the SEC tournament final — where the Aggies lost in overtime to Kentucky — the university announced that Kennedy had agreed to a   five-year contract extension.A native of New Orleans, Kennedy began his head coaching odyssey at tiny Centenary in Shreveport, La., before landing at his alma mater, Southeastern Louisiana, which he led to its first N.C.A.A. tournament berth. After six seasons he moved on to the perennial midmajor power Murray State, where he spent five years before taking the A&M job.While he has found a home in East Texas, the bayou still flavors his drawl like cayenne pepper. As if to make himself even more indecipherable, the coach, like a character out of a “Seinfeld” episode, is also a low-talker.“Coach is very soft-spoken and talks very slowly and methodically,” Caruso said. “It catches you off guard. The freshmen are really surprised he’s like that. You’ve got to slow yourself down to really hear him, and that’s a good thing. You mentally want to slow down on the court, too, so his cadence works well.”The Aggies have been hearing Kennedy just fine.The cherubic Davis was part of an impressive recruiting class with a large contingent of Texas-bred players. Davis’s interior bulk — he is listed at 265 pounds — anchors a team that mostly features perimeter threats, like the seniors Jalen Jones and Danuel House, high-scoring transfers who can hurt opposing defenses with outside shooting or slashes to the basket. Jones, in particular, epitomizes the toughness of the team.“Jalen is very aggressive,” Kennedy said of Jones, a former Southern Methodist swingman. “He brings a motor to our program that we didn’t have.”The Aggies also have another attribute highly prized come tournament time: a smart and tough senior point guard in Caruso, who led the team in assists and topped the SEC in steals.The Aggies’ part of the West Region bracket has a distinct Southwestern flavor. Third-seeded A&M opens against No. 14-seeded Green Bay on Friday night in Oklahoma City, but the next round could bring a matchup with Texas, while Oklahoma looms as a potential round-of-16 opponent.Davis might be the critical component for a deep tournament run. A mobile big man, he is not nearly as large as he was in high school in Plano, Tex., having lost about 75 pounds and transformed himself into one of the nation’s best pivot players.“He’s surpassed expectations,” Kennedy said. “His attitude and maturity are off the charts. He’s not caught up in minutes or shots or how many times he gets the ball, which is rare for a freshman.”Kennedy’s deep rotation allows his team to crank up its defensive intensity; the Aggies led the SEC in points allowed per game, another promising trait for postseason play.But even if the Aggies fall earlier than expected, Kennedy has already taken measure of the bigger picture.“I’m a much better coach today for going through this,” he said of his illness. “I know how to delegate. I’m more organized. I’m healthier physically, mentally and spiritually.“When you go through something like I have and are able to get back on your feet, then you feel a little bit sharper and a little bit more sensitive to the players when they make mistakes.“I can relate if they miss two free throws to lose a game because, hey, there are a lot worse things you can live through.”Advertisement