By BILLY WITZMAY 30, 2016
TORONTO — A sign of how the Yankees’ offense is in dire straits arrived in the ninth inning Monday when Manager Joe Girardi took the bats out of the hands of two struggling stalwarts.Brett Gardner, hitless in his last 20 at-bats, was pinch-hit for by the rookie Rob Refsnyder, and Alex Rodriguez, given the day off while in a 1-for-16 skid, stayed anchored to the bench while a rally fell short in a 4-2 loss to the Blue Jays.The loss dropped the Yankees to six and a half games behind first-place Boston in the American League East.Get the big sports news, highlights and analysis from Times journalists, with distinctive takes on games and some behind-the-scenes surprises, delivered to your inbox every week.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.The Toronto right-hander Marco Estrada shut the Yankees out on three hits over eight innings before Brian McCann hit a two-run homer off Aaron Loup and Mark Teixeira doubled against Drew Storen to bring the tying run to the plate with one out. But Girardi stuck with Starlin Castro, whose homer lifted the Yankees to a win Sunday at Tampa Bay, and Chase Headley. Castro flied out and Headley struck out. Refsnyder had struck out on an eight-pitch at-bat leading off.AdvertisementGirardi said he did not use Rodriguez for Headley because Storen had been hit hard by left-handed hitters this season, though it is hard to imagine that if Rodriguez were not in such a funk since returning from the disabled list, he would have been given a shot to tie the game.Gardner had no complaints.“I’ve always said, if you don’t like not playing or you don’t like getting pinch-hit for,” Gardner said. “I haven’t been swinging the bat well recently, and completely understand it.”AdvertisementIvan Nova struggled with command of his sinker, and Ryan Goins’s solo homer put the Blue Jays ahead, 4-0. The Yankees’ best threat against Estrada came in the eighth, when Aaron Hicks doubled Castro to third with two outs. But Estrada, after falling behind Jacoby Ellsbury by 2-0, got him to pop up. It was the second time in two weeks Estrada had beaten the Yankees.A version of this article appears in print on May 31, 2016, on Page B9 of the New York edition with the headline: Late Rally Comes Up Short, Along With Yanks’ Options.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.