By THE ASSOCIATED PRESSMAY 3, 2017
Isaiah Thomas scored 53 points, including 9 in overtime, to help the Boston Celtics beat the visiting Washington Wizards, 129-119, on Tuesday night to take a two-games-to-none lead in the best-of-seven Eastern Conference semifinals.Fiddling with the mouth guard he began using after he lost one of his front teeth in Game 1, Thomas became the fifth player in the history of the Celtics to score at least 50 points in a postseason game.John Wall had 40 points and 13 rebounds for the Wizards.The series moves to Washington for Games 3 and 4, set for Thursday and Sunday.It has been a rough postseason for Thomas, whose sister died the day before the Celtics’ first-round opener. He attended her funeral on Saturday and returned to Boston early Sunday morning — just hours before the Celtics beat the Wizards, 123-111, in a game in which he had a tooth knocked out.AdvertisementTeam doctors jammed the tooth back in, but Thomas spent part of Monday and Tuesday in the dentist’s chair to have it repositioned.AdvertisementIn Game 2, Thomas banged his face on the court in the third quarter and spent the next few minutes adjusting his teeth.Two others needed medical attention: Washington’s Otto Porter Jr. left the court with blood gushing from his nose, and Celtics guard Avery Bradley needed treatment for a hip pointer in the second half.Al Horford scored 15 points with 12 rebounds for Boston, and Bradley and Jae Crowder each scored 14 points.Marcin Gortat had 14 points and 10 rebounds for the Wizards, and Markieff Morris scored 16 points, but both fouled out in overtime.The Wizards, who in their previous game took a 16-0 lead only to fall behind by 15 in the third quarter, erupted for 42 points in the first quarter and opened a 13-point lead. Wall had 19 points in the first, to Thomas’s 15, but Boston erased the deficit in the second quarter and took a brief lead with just over a minute left before halftime.Get the big sports news, highlights and analysis from Times journalists, with distinctive takes on games and some behind-the-scenes surprises, delivered to your inbox every week.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.Washington went ahead by 14 in the third quarter, but Boston led by 112-111 with 33 seconds left in the fourth. Porter hit a 3-pointer to give the Wizards the lead, but Thomas was fouled going to the basket and made two free throws to tie the score before both Wall and Bradley Beal missed short jumpers that could have lifted the Wizards in regulation.The game had a testy moment: Thomas and Morris got into it midway through the third quarter, drawing double technicals. Thomas appeared to be having words with someone on the Wizards’ bench, and Morris tried to push him away.AdvertisementAt the same time, Porter and Thomas appeared to bang heads, and Porter headed to the locker room, bleeding from the nose.RAPTORS LOOK TO FIGHT BACK LeBron James dazzled with soaring dunks, outside shots and even a beer chaser in a Game 1 victory by the Cleveland Cavaliers on Monday.And he did it all — 35 points, 10 rebounds, 4 assists and an amusing sideline exchange with a beer vendor — at the expense of the Raptors.
            LeBron James grabs a beer... pic.twitter.com/gKVBk5saXt Toronto Coach Dwane Casey has seen this happen before — with Michael Jordan.A day after the Raptors fell into a familiar postseason hole with a 116-105 loss in the opener of the teams’ Eastern Conference semifinal series, Casey was asked if his players might be awed by James, who is on a mission to make his seventh straight N.B.A. finals.As an assistant coach with Seattle, Casey urged his players not to bow to Jordan, he recalled.“I think that’s natural,” Casey said. “It’s human nature to watch a Michael Jordan or a Karl Malone, spectate until they hit you in the mouth.“When a guy hits you in the mouth a few times — now what are you going to do? That’s the mentality we have to have: They punched us.”In Game 1, the Cavaliers landed a vicious uppercut on the Raptors, who lost their 10th straight series opener.But Toronto has shown it can take a big shot and deliver one. A year ago, the Raptors were blown out in the first two games of the Eastern Conference finals by Cleveland before winning two straight at home. And while they were eliminated in six games, the Raptors do not feel nearly as groggy as they did in 2016.“The way we lost last year, it hit a lot harder,” guard DeMar DeRozan said. “This time around, we have kind of that confidence and understanding of how to get back on our feet.”A version of this article appears in print on May 3, 2017, on Page B9 of the New York edition with the headline: Thomas Passes 50 Points in Celtics Win.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.