By VICTOR MATHERJULY 26, 2016
When the International Olympic Committee declined to bar the entire Russian team from the Summer Games, it largely passed off the decision on Russian athletes and teams to the individual international sports federations. The opening ceremony in Rio de Janeiro is on Aug. 5, so the federations must swiftly determine which Russian athletes will be allowed to compete.The I.O.C. said Russian athletes who had doping violations in the past, even those who have already served a penalty, must be barred from the Games.Here is a sport-by-sport tally, as of early Friday.The three qualified Russians in archery will be admitted, as will all 16 fencers. The Russian news agency TASS reported that the women’s team handball will compete.The equestrian federation’s president said there was “no indication of any organized doping malpractices within the Russian equestrian delegation,” paving the way for the Russian team to compete.The judo federation, which has President Vladimir V. Putin of Russia as its honorary president, said all Russian judo athletes could compete.AdvertisementThe tennis federation is set to allow the eight Russian players to compete, noting that they had all been “subject to a rigorous antidoping testing program.”AdvertisementThe gymnastics federation said it would judge athletes on a case-by-case basis, but Reuters reported that its vice president said all Russians would compete.The Russian badminton, triathlon, table tennis, shooting and taekwondo teams have been cleared to compete. Both the volleyball and beach volleyball teams will compete.In one of the most sweeping bans, the rowing federation announced that only six members of the 28-strong Russian rowing team would be permitted to participate. It noted that the athletes had not failed doping tests but that they were being barred because of irregularities in the Moscow drug-testing lab. As a result, four Russian boats, including the men’s and women’s eights, are out of the Games.The swimming federation announced that seven members of Russia’s team were ineligible for the Games. One of them is Yuliya Efimova, a 2012 bronze medalist in the breaststroke, who failed a doping test in 2014. The federation said that Russian divers, synchronized swimmers and water polo players were not implicated.Five members of the Russian canoeing team were barred from the Games, although not suspended from all competitions. Among them is Alexander Dyachenko, a gold medalist in London. Two modern pentathletes and one sailor were also barred as were one wrestler and six cyclists.The track team was barred in June, and the decision was upheld by the Court of Arbitration for Sport last week. Only the long jumper Darya Klishina, who trains in the United States, has been permitted to compete so far. The whistle-blower Yuliya Stepanova, an 800-meter runner, was initially approved but was eventually barred because of her own history of doping.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.Russia’s entire weight lifting team was banned from the Games. Several members had previous doping violations or were named in WADA’s report on doping in Russia.The boxing federation say they will judge the Russian athletes on a case-by-case basis. There have been no formal, official announcement on the fate of the lone Russian golfer, Maria Verchenova.Russia did not qualify teams in basketball, field hockey, rugby or soccer.A version of this article appears in print on July 27, 2016, on Page B10 of the New York edition with the headline: In or Out? Word Is Still Trickling In to Russians.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.See More »