By JERÉ LONGMANJULY 22, 2016
A judge has denied an attempt by the United States Anti-Doping Agency to depose a Houston endocrinologist under investigation for possibly providing banned substances to track and field athletes.Judge Michael Gomez of the 129th Civil District Court of Harris County, Tex., ruled this week that Usada had not met requirements under Texas law to compel a deposition by Dr. Jeffrey S. Brown, an endocrinologist who has treated elite athletes affiliated with the track coach Alberto Salazar and the Nike Oregon Project.Judge Gomez also questioned whether the antidoping agency was trying to subvert a requirement that disputes involving Olympic-related sports be resolved by arbitration.Dr. Brown and Mr. Salazar have denied any wrongdoing.Joan Bain, Dr. Brown’s lawyer, said Friday that Usada lacked evidence against her client and was engaged in a “fishing expedition to see if they can find some kind of a problem.”AdvertisementShe also said the antidoping agency appeared to have a vendetta against Dr. Brown and the Nike Oregon Project, whose runners include Galen Rupp, an American who won a silver medal in the 10,000 meters at the 2012 London Olympics, and Mo Farah, a Briton who won gold in the 5,000 and 10,000 meters.AdvertisementMr. Rupp and Mr. Farah, who are scheduled to participate in the Rio de Janeiro Olympics, which begin Aug. 5, have vehemently denied taking banned substances.Get the big sports news, highlights and analysis from Times journalists, with distinctive takes on games and some behind-the-scenes surprises, delivered to your inbox every week.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.The New York Times reported last month that Usada was seeking to depose Dr. Brown. The denial of Usada’s petition was first reported Friday by LetsRun.com.In recent court filings, Usada said it became concerned that Dr. Brown might be violating antidoping rules because a number of athletes from outside Texas began visiting him in Houston. Some unnamed athletes said they were not told of the nature of his treatments, which seemed more related to enhancing sports performance than addressing a medical condition, Usada said.For instance, the antidoping agency said, some athletes reported that their treatments were preceded and followed by treadmill tests. Variations in blood markers of some athletes raised concerns about possible manipulation, Usada said. The antidoping agency also said that at least one athlete had been asked to transport testosterone from Dr. Brown to a coach in Oregon, an allegation that Dr. Brown has denied.Ms. Bain, the doctor’s lawyer, said her client had cooperated with Usada by releasing medical records of seven athletes who had given their permission. Dr. Brown, however, was restricted from giving a deposition by medical privacy laws, Ms. Bain said.“You have a private physician who has ethical, legal and professional obligations, and they want him to say, ‘No problem, I’m just going to throw them away,’” Ms. Bain said of Dr. Brown and Usada officials. “He can’t do that.”Usada said Friday night that Dr. Brown was not bound by privacy laws because numerous athletes had given him permission to discuss his treatment of them. Only after Dr. Brown declined to follow the athletes’ wishes did the agency seek in court to depose him under oath, Usada said.“Any statements to the contrary by either Dr. Brown, or his counsel, are merely attempts to distract attention from the truth — that Dr. Brown is failing in his duty to adhere to his own patients’ request for transparency,” Ryan Madden, a Usada spokesman, said in a statement.A version of this article appears in print on July 23, 2016, on Page D3 of the New York edition with the headline: A Move to Depose a Doctor  Is Set Back.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.See More »