JULY 16, 2016
To The Sports Editor:Re “These Crossings Aren’t Pedestrian,” July 11: The article failed to mention Bo Roberson. Tabbed by Dick Schaap as the best natural athlete he’d ever seen, Roberson played seven seasons in the N.F.L. after finishing second (by a centimeter) in the 1960 Olympic long jump. In addition to being a football and track star at Cornell, the 6-foot-1 Roberson, in his only season as a basketball player, was third in the country in rebounds.Maybe he never won a gold or got a Super Bowl ring, but he is the only person ever to have graduated from an Ivy League university, played in the N.F.L., won an Olympic medal and later received a doctorate. He also introduced Schaap to a promising Olympic teammate then known as Cassius Clay.Harry PetcheskyNew YorkTo the Sports Editor:Re “Hall of Famer Paul Hornung Sues Helmet Maker,” July 8: Physics in physics. No equipment can cheat accelerations of the brain in today’s tackle football. But tomorrow’s game could be just as exciting if we make concussion-inducing hits against the self-interest of players and coaches.Accelerometers inside helmets could measure the extent of moment-to-moment trauma, tracked as “injury points.” A very severe hit would trigger expulsion from the game. Moderate hits would accrue injury points that, once reaching a specific game total, trigger expulsion.AdvertisementThis system would reduce “exciting” high-powered direct hits but would add an element of self-policing and creativity similar to how players and coaches manage personal fouls. Players would learn how to tackle differently, artfully, possibly using principles of martial arts. “Injury points” would add an interesting and suspenseful element for fans to watch.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.Stuart MontaldoChesterfield, Mo.To the Sports Editor:Re “Battling a Bull,” July 14: This is the second time in two months that The New York Times has shown a photo of bullfighting in the Sports section. Is The Times supporting a “sport” that is outlawed in many countries?I am also shocked that “Battling a Bull,” as it is quoted, is seen as appropriate. We have more and more violence in our lives every day. We as a culture are finally coming to terms with the barbarism of football and the detrimental consequences of boxing. Why are you taking a step backward and depicting the slaughter of a participant who has zero choice but to play in this antiquated “sport”?AdvertisementAdam WeprinNew YorkA version of this letter appears in print on July 17, 2016, on Page SP6 of the New York edition with the headline: Another Football And Track Standout.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.