AdvertisementSupported byBy David WaldsteinCLEVELAND — With a string of virtually impeccable performances this postseason, Andrew Miller has established himself as a human signpost of imminent victory for the Cleveland Indians. Every time he has entered a playoff game this October, it has led to a win.So it was on Tuesday, when Miller held the Chicago Cubs scoreless over two innings as the Indians won Game 1 of the World Series, 6-0. It was his seventh postseason game this year, but this one was different.Miller was not as sharp as usual, perhaps the result of a long layoff from game action. He threw a season-high 46 pitches — the rough equivalent of a half a start — to get in and out of two jams.He called it a grind and offered no excuses, despite not having pitched since last Wednesday, when Cleveland clinched the American League pennant in Toronto.“I’d like to be sharper than I was,” he said. “I think I can be sharper; I think I will be sharper.”Even without his best command, Miller still managed to protect a 3-0 Indians lead over both innings. He has now thrown 13⅔ postseason innings without allowing a run while accumulating 24 strikeouts, including three on Tuesday. Opponents have hit just .152 against him in that stretch.Andrew Miller, the versatile and dominant reliever for the Indians, throws a slider that gives hitters fits. Here’s what makes it so tough to hit.But unlike most of his other outings this October, Game 1 included nerve-racking moments as Miller lacked his usual command and allowed an uncharacteristically high number of base runners.He came into the game in the seventh inning, relieving Corey Kluber with a man on first base and nobody out — and subsequently walked the left-handed designated hitter Kyle Schwarber. Then Javier Baez singled to load the bases with nobody out.Avoiding runs in that predicament would require a nervy escape. First, Miller got pinch-hitter Willson Contreras to hit a fly ball to shallow center field. Rajai Davis caught it for the first out and then fired to catcher Roberto Perez, preventing Ben Zobrist from tagging and scoring.However, Davis failed to see that Schwarber, playing in his first major-league game since April 7, had inexplicably run two-thirds of the way to third base and easily could have been caught at second base had Davis thrown there instead.“I just wanted to put my head down and crawl under some rug,” Davis said. “I was like, man, that could have been a triple play, or at least a double play. All I had to do is run it to second and it could have been an easy out.“Good thing we had Miller on the mound. He could take care of the rest.”Miller did so by striking out Addison Russell and David Ross, Miller’s former teammate. Ross went ahead in the count, 3-1, but Miller threw two nasty sliders, the first one falling in for a called strike when a ball would have given the Cubs a run.“He’s a tricky hitter, because if he connects it will go a long way,” Miller said of Ross. “You try to play into the aggression. I know it will have to be a different sequence next time, but glad he chased after that pitch. That was a big moment.”Cubs Manager Joe Maddon said he decided not to pinch hit for Ross because he felt his catcher would be able to work a good at-bat and perhaps draw a walk, which nearly happened.“I swung at a bad pitch on 3-2,” Ross said. “I’d like to have that one back.”In the eighth Kris Bryant drew a walk and went to third on a two-out single by Zobrist. But Miller struck out Schwarber to end that threat. Cody Allen pitched the ninth, and Cleveland could begin thinking about Game 2.Even after the longer-than-usual outing, Miller vowed he would be ready for Game 2. Indians Manager Terry Francona might not know until Wednesday afternoon, or perhaps even the middle of Game 2, how long he can use Miller, or if he will even need him.Miller threw 40 pitches in Game 1 of the division series against Boston, and he would have been ready for Game 2. But he was not needed until Game 3, four days later.“There’s a lot that can happen tomorrow,” said Francona, whose manipulation of the bullpen in the postseason has been masterful. “One, we might not have a lead. Two, it might rain. Three, we could have a lead and he won’t be available for as much. But we won tonight. I think when you have a lead, you try to win.”Miller has played a significant role in helping the Indians win this year, ever since the Indians acquired him from the Yankees in July for the prospects Clint Frazier, Ben Heller, Justus Sheffield and J. P. Feyereisen. The Yankees also sent Aroldis Chapman to the Cubs, but, as was often the case when he was with the Yankees, there was no need for him to pitch for Chicago in Game 1.In Miller’s first game for Cleveland, on Aug. 1, he entered in the eighth inning. In his second game he came on in the sixth. That surprised Jason Kipnis, the Indians’ second baseman, who said he was expecting Miller to be the closer.“I was like, ‘We traded the farm for a fifth-inning guy?’ ” Kipnis recalled.Kipnis was informed that Miller’s flexibility was his best asset, and he soon realized how valuable Miller, who would later be named the Most Valuable Player of the A.L.C.S., was for his team — much as Chapman has been to the Cubs.“He is one of the biggest reasons we are here today,” Kipnis said Tuesday.Advertisement