By SCOTT CACCIOLAOCT. 25, 2016
CLEVELAND — Once the lights dimmed and delirium began to sweep through Quicken Loans Arena on Tuesday night, the Knicks retreated to the visiting locker room. They wanted no part of the ring ceremony, and they had no interest in bearing witness to the raising of a new championship banner.Those rewards belonged to the Cleveland Cavaliers, and the Knicks were trying to prepare for a game — and a new season. They were about to wade into the crucible of an 82-game schedule by facing a fearsome opponent, and that seemed to be the way they wanted it.“Why not accept that challenge?” Carmelo Anthony said before the game.The Knicks have reason to feel cautiously optimistic about the season ahead, but the Cavaliers, with their 117-88 victory, dealt them a dose of reality. Hard work remains for the Knicks, who committed too many turnovers, got caught on too many back screens and struggled to make enough shots.“There’s a lot of room for improvement,” Derrick Rose said.It hardly helped that the Cavaliers’ LeBron James notched the 43rd triple-double of his career, collecting 19 points, 14 assists and 11 rebounds, or that Kyrie Irving finished with 29 points.AdvertisementAnthony scored 19 points in the loss, and Kristaps Porzingis had 16. Rose, in his first regular-season game with the Knicks, had 17 points.Advertisement“For us, we’ve just got to figure out who we want to be as a team defensively, how we want to play,” Anthony said. “There are so many moving points right now, and we’re still trying to figure it out.”The Cavaliers ran away with the game in the third quarter. Irving buried a 3-pointer over the outstretched arm of Porzingis, the Knicks’ 7-foot-3 power forward, and then made a jump shot. The lead was 21. By then, many fans in the building were busy monitoring their cellphones for updates on the baseball game outside.It was a wild night at the Q, as local residents know the arena. Across the street at Progressive Field, the Cleveland Indians were facing the Chicago Cubs in Game 1 of the World Series. After so many decades of futility, the city was awash in championship glory. The Knicks played a bit part.“Tonight left a bad taste in everybody’s mouth,” Rose said. “We should be able to take it out on each other tomorrow.”Before the game, the Cavaliers celebrated last season’s run to their first N.B.A. championship. As the Larry O’Brien Trophy sparkled under a spotlight, clips from their comeback against the Golden State Warriors in the finals played overhead on Humongotron, the arena’s flame-spewing video board.Commissioner Adam Silver presented the team owner Dan Gilbert with his championship ring, which appeared to be the size of a small automobile. Gilbert made a pledge.“Once this banner goes up, there’s only one thing left to do,” he said. “Repeat.”The crowd liked that a lot. One by one, the team’s returning players came forward to accept their rings, each encrusted with 400 diamonds, the heaviest championship rings in league history. James took the microphone to thank the fans.Advertisement“At this point,” he said, “if you are not from here, live here, play here, dedicate yourself to Cleveland, it makes no sense for you to live at this point. Cleveland against the world!”Get the big sports news, highlights and analysis from Times journalists, with distinctive takes on games and some behind-the-scenes surprises, delivered to your inbox every week.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.The crowd liked that a lot, too. Only then did the Knicks re-emerge from the locker room so they could run through their final warm-ups.The Knicks had labored through an uneven preseason. Joakim Noah, who was held scoreless in 19 minutes Tuesday, was slowed by hamstring and ankle injuries, and Rose missed about two weeks to attend to well-publicized legal matters in California. Rose was ultimately found not liable in a civil case brought by a woman who had accused him of rape. But his preparation for the season was affected.Before the game, Rose described himself as feeling anxious and nervous.“But usually when I’m feeling those emotions, something good comes out of it,” he said.He made the game’s delicate calculus sound simple, but the Knicks have not been very good at math, assembling an 86-160 record over the last three seasons. Still, Phil Jackson, the team president, made significant moves in the off-season, trading for Rose and signing Noah, who had been a teammate of Rose’s with the Chicago Bulls since 2008.On Tuesday, with the new-look Knicks finally whole, Anthony was a source of early stability, scoring 11 points in the first quarter. But the Cavaliers quickly ran out to a double-digit lead. Early in the second quarter, Rose lost the handle on his dribble (a theme), and the Cavaliers pounced, sending the ball ahead to James for a ferocious dunk (another theme).Cleveland led by just 3 at halftime, but soon enough, James was back in the open court, soaring for dunks against an overmatched opponent.“This is a no-excuse league,” Noah said. “I think everybody is disappointed.”The Knicks are trying to build something. Against the Cavaliers, they saw a finished product.A version of this article appears in print on October 26, 2016, on Page B10 of the New York edition with the headline: Banner Flies in Cleveland. Attention Turns to Next One. And, Oh, Knicks Lose.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.