
On Soccer By                     
RORY SMITH

OCT. 25, 2016
Filippo Galli does not draw the parallel lightly. When he does so, it comes buttressed by caution and littered with caveats. His wariness is understandable. More than most, he knows the power of the past at A.C. Milan.As a player, Galli was part of the club’s greatest team, alongside Paolo Maldini, Franco Baresi, Alessandro Costacurta and the rest. Thirty years later, as director of Milan’s youth system, he has helped nurture the generation that some feel — and many hope — might follow in their footsteps.He knows comparing the teams is dangerous, invoking expectations and bringing pressure. That he is prepared to do it anyway is telling.“There are similarities,” he said, “between now and where Milan was in the mid-1980s.”The reason for his optimism is obvious. On Saturday, Milan beat all-conquering Juventus at San Siro. The game’s only goal was scored by Manuel Locatelli, an 18-year-old midfielder who has made only eight appearances in Serie A. In the 96th minute, Gianluigi Donnarumma, a 17-year-old goalkeeper heralded as Italy’s heir to Gianluigi Buffon, produced a flying save to deny Juventus an equalizer.AdvertisementThe victory carried Milan to within 2 points of Juventus at the top of the standings. Had a win against Genoa on Tuesday followed, Milan would have occupied first place, albeit temporarily. But a 3-0 defeat perhaps served as a reminder why Manager Vincenzo Montella has been keen to play down his team’s early-season achievements.AdvertisementMilan is, by some distance, the youngest squad in the league; Montella has made plain that comparing these players to the greats of the past is premature in the extreme. The team Galli played on won five Serie A championships and three European Cups. For a time, it was the world’s best. Donnarumma and Locatelli have never even played in Europe.It is hard to avoid the sense, though, that something is stirring at San Siro.Milan, for the last several years, has seemed a club unable or unwilling to move on. It was here, after all, that Milan Lab, the famed medical department, seemed to be able to prolong players’ careers almost indefinitely. The presence of veterans well into their late 30s served as a painful reminder of what Milan once was, infusing the club with an air of faded grandeur.Silvio Berlusconi, the owner, would not countenance selling the team that transformed him from media magnate into political potentate; plans to move from the crumbling San Siro were published and then shelved. Milan seemed to have settled into a period of elegant, irreversible decline.The immediate, compelling impact of Donnarumma and Locatelli has changed all that. Now, at last, Milan seems to be driving forward. Despite appearances, this is no overnight sensation. Galli stresses that everything depends on “the talent of the players,” that “there are no gurus here,” but such modesty, while commendable, is misleading. Milan’s nascent revival is more than mere good fortune.In January 2013, Adriano Galliani, Milan’s longstanding vice president, tasked Galli with answering one question. Milan, he knew, could no longer compete in the transfer market with the financial powerhouses of the Premier League. But why was it, he wanted to know, that the rest of Europe’s soccer elite managed to produce their own players, but Milan did not?Galli embarked on a journey that crisscrossed the continent to try to find an explanation. He went to Barcelona’s famed academy at La Masia, the hothouse of talent that produced Lionel Messi, Andrés Iniesta and others. Galli spent a few weeks at Ajax in Amsterdam, and visited Manchester United and Real Madrid, too.Get the big sports news, highlights and analysis from Times journalists, with distinctive takes on games and some behind-the-scenes surprises, delivered to your inbox every week.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.“I wanted to understand what they were doing,” Galli said in an interview Monday. “At the end of those studies, we had a clear idea of what to do.”AdvertisementHe produced — and Galliani endorsed — a document that was designed to revolutionize the way Milan approached youth development. Galli wanted to remain true to Milan’s “history and identity”; he bridles at the suggestion the plan is in some way derivative of one club or other.“We looked at all of them, and at coaches like Marcelo Bielsa, Pep Guardiola, Juan Manuel Lillo and César Luis Menotti, too,” Galli said.“Our method looks at integrating all of the areas: the technical, the athletic, the tactical, the psychological,” he added. “Producing players is not only about technique. It is more holistic than that. Our job is to create the right environment to allow talent to flourish, to give players the tools not only to become professional, but to play for A.C. Milan, to play at San Siro.”As at Barcelona, he has encouraged youth team coaches to play in a consistent style across age groups. Coaches, together with psychologists and medical staff, meet at the start of every week to map out the next five days’ activities. The focus is on creating players rather than just winning games in youth competitions. Galli takes his role as an educator literally.“Educate is from a Latin word,” he said. “Educere. It means to draw out. That is what we are here to do. To draw out talent.”That is easier in some cases than others. Cristian Brocchi, now the coach of Brescia, coached Donnarumma and Locatelli in Milan’s youth squad, and during a brief spell in charge of the senior side, he gave Locatelli his debut.“You only had to see them to see they were special,” Brocchi said.The test of Galli’s model will be how many follow. There are contenders. Davide Calabria, a fullback, has already appeared for the first team; hopes are high for midfielder Mattia El-Hilali and forward Zakaria Hamadi. Not all will make it. Brocchi suggested “one or two a year” making the grade would represent the start of “a new cycle” for the club.That is ambitious enough, but it may well prove more complicated in the future. Should Montella achieve any measure of success — or should a long-expected takeover by a Chinese consortium come to pass — Milan may be talent-rich but opportunity-poor.AdvertisementThat is a parallel Galli is not afraid to make.“The club was struggling in the 1980s, too,” he said. “That is when young players have the chance to play.”As Brocchi pointed out, “Franco Baresi, Paolo Maldini, Alessandro Costacurta and Demetrio Albertini made the first team in the 1980s because the club had no choice.”When trophies and financial firepower followed, the production line ground to a halt.“If you can buy ready-made players, it is always easier to do that,” Brocchi said.Such problems, of course, remain far off at best, hypothetical at worst. That they are deemed worthy of consideration, though, suggests something has changed. For years, Milan has looked only to the past. All of a sudden, it is preoccupied with the future once more.A version of this article appears in print on October 26, 2016, on Page B9 of the New York edition with the headline: Push to Develop Young Players Revives a Faded Power.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.See More »