AdvertisementSupported byBy Karen CrouseAs Lexi Thompson walked up the 18th fairway on Sunday at the L.P.G.A.’s first major of the year, she was serenaded by loud chants of “Lex-i,” leading her eyes to well with tears. It was an incongruous moment that reflected an intensely emotional day in which the popular Thompson won new fans because of the way she lost the tournament.Thompson, 22, appeared to be cruising to her second major championship when she was informed at the end of the 12th hole that she was being assessed a four-stroke penalty. It was a result of an infraction that a viewer had noticed while watching Saturday’s third-round telecast.Just like that, Thompson’s two-stroke lead at the ANA Inspiration became a two-stroke deficit.Despite the startling setback, Thompson regrouped well enough to force a playoff with So Yeon Ryu, who won with a birdie on the first extra hole, the par-5 18th. That came after Thompson narrowly missed an eagle putt on the last hole of regulation that would have delivered her the victory.It was the second major title for Ryu, who also won the 2011 United States Women’s Open in extra holes. Thompson closed with a five-under-par 67 and Ryu a 68 as both finished at 14 under at Mission Hills Country Club in Rancho Mirage, Calif. And yet all those numbers ended up as footnotes to the consternation fostered by the four-stroke penalty.“I wasn’t expecting what happened today,” Thompson said afterward as tears rolled down her face.“But I’ll learn from it,’’ she added.The long-hitting Thompson was told about the penalty as she made her way to the 13th tee after a bogey at 12 had whittled her lead. An L.P.G.A. rules official walked alongside her and explained the four-stroke penalty: two strokes for improperly replacing her ball on the second-to-last green of her third round, which meant she had then played the ball from the wrong spot, and two more for signing an incorrect scorecard.A television viewer had contacted tournament officials as the final round was underway to bring attention to Thompson’s actions Saturday on the 17th green, when she marked her ball and placed it back down roughly a half-inch from the original spot. Thompson’s initial reaction to being told about the penalty, as captured during the final-round television broadcast, was, “Is this a joke or something?” Shaking her head, she added, “That’s just ridiculous.”Battling her emotions the rest of the way, Thompson somehow bounced back to play the final six holes in two under par. “I am proud just the way I played coming in,” said Thompson, who told the rules official, Sue Witters, that she had not intentionally placed her ball in the wrong spot on the hole in question.It did not matter. In the rules of golf, action trumps intent. If not for a rules change last year, Thompson would have been disqualified for signing an incorrect scorecard. “For her to come back, I got goose bumps talking about it,” said Suzann Pettersen, who tied for third. “It shows what character she has.”It was the second time in as many years that a player holding the lead on the final day of a major was assessed a penalty after a television viewer noticed a rules infraction involving the leader.Dustin Johnson won the 2016 United States Open despite being alerted on the 12th tee that he probably would be given a one-stroke penalty when he finished his round because his ball had moved on the fifth green before he putted. Johnson was indeed assessed the penalty but still won by two strokes.In a similar case, Anna Nordqvist lost to Brittany Lang in a playoff at last year’s United States Women’s Open after being assessed a penalty for grounding her club in a bunker after officials reviewed high-definition video from the telecast. She was not informed of the penalty until a hole later.The players in all three incidents had one thing in common: They were garnering a majority of the television coverage, with every one of their shots shown, because they were battling to win the tournament.How many similar infractions might accidentally occur among golfers who are out of contention in a tournament and are not being scrutinized by high-definition cameras is hard to say.The R&A and the United States Golf Association, the governing bodies of golf, unveiled proposed changes last month to pare the cumbersome rulebook, but many in golf feel they should add one rule posthaste: The sport should not allow a television viewer who contacts officials about a rules infraction to affect the outcome of a tournament.But that was indeed what happened Sunday, and the reaction on Twitter came fast and furious. Among those who weighed in was the 14-time major winner Tiger Woods, who himself was the recipient of viewer scrutiny at the 2013 Masters when a second-round ball drop he made was called into question after he had already signed his scorecard.In that instance, the armchair observer turned out to be a longtime tournament official. Woods was assessed a two-stroke penalty for an improper drop the next morning. As Thompson was trying to regroup on the course, Woods posted this message on Twitter: “Viewers at home should not be officials wearing stripes.”Advertisement