By MIKE VORKUNOVAPRIL 3, 2017
GREENBURGH, N.Y. — With just five regular-season games remaining for the Knicks until they are put out of their current misery, there seems to be an increasing possibility that Carmelo Anthony’s tenure with the organization may end soon, too.Anthony, the franchise’s biggest star, has had a particularly troubled season with the team, enduring countless losses on the court and a number of barbs aimed at him by his own team president, Phil Jackson.Anthony has two years left on his deal with the Knicks and a no-trade clause that allows him to prevent any move elsewhere, but he did not say anything Monday to dispute the notion that a breakup might finally be coming this summer for him and the Knicks.“I see the writing on the wall,” said Anthony, who turns 33 in May. “The writing — yeah, I see it on the wall. You don’t know what writing is on the wall, though, but I see what writing is on the wall.”Get the big sports news, highlights and analysis from Times journalists, with distinctive takes on games and some behind-the-scenes surprises, delivered to your inbox every week.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.His comment was part of his continuing effort to offer clues but no definitive statements about how he sees his future as an N.B.A. player and where that future might be.AdvertisementStill, he dropped a hint when asked about Scottie Pippen, the former N.B.A. star who won six titles playing for Jackson with the Chicago Bulls. In recent comments, Pippen put the Knicks’ current woes at the feet of his old coach and said that Jackson should be removed from his current job with the Knicks.Advertisement“Everybody has their opinion,” Anthony said of Pippen. “I’m just glad people speaking up, whether it’s good or bad, people are speaking up, having their own opinion, rather than me trying to convince, or not convince, people of the situation or what’s going on, and I could just play basketball. Everybody else sees what’s going on, so they’re going to have an opinion.”The first of the final five games of the season will come Tuesday night, when the Knicks play the Chicago Bulls at Madison Square Garden. The season ends for the Knicks on April 12, with a home game against Philadelphia. After that, Anthony will have his end-of-season meeting with Jackson. They have had other meetings in this uneasy season for Anthony, but this one might be more conclusive.“Pretty sure the chips will be on the table,” Anthony said. “The chips will be on the table in that meeting. Honestly, I don’t know what to expect, but I got a good feeling.”A version of this article appears in print on April 4, 2017, on Page B12 of the New York edition with the headline: On Future, Anthony Sees ‘Writing on the Wall’.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.