By KEN BELSONMAY 2, 2017
The Miami Marlins, one of the most forlorn franchises in baseball, are inching closer to being sold.Jeb Bush, the former Florida governor, said he was confident that he and his fellow investors, including the retired Yankees shortstop Derek Jeter, would complete a deal to buy the team. Bush said he expected a resolution to their bid soon.“Given the interest that we have inside of Miami, and among people who are potential limited partners, I’m really excited about it,” Bush said  at a conference on Tuesday in Los Angeles.Jeter and Bush have lined up Citibank to help them pay for the team, which is owned by Jeffrey Loria, a New York art dealer who has often conducted fire sales of expensive talent. The club is expected to sell for about $1.3 billion, but about $400 million of that amount is debt on the team. Bush, Jeter and their fellow investors would need to raise $800 million to $900 million to cover the rest.Get the big sports news, highlights and analysis from Times journalists, with distinctive takes on games and some behind-the-scenes surprises, delivered to your inbox every week.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.Baseball Commissioner Rob Manfred said recently that the Bush-Jeter group was not the only bidder for the Marlins, who have consistently ranked near the bottom of the major leagues in attendance and payroll. The other major bidder remaining is a group that includes Tagg Romney, the eldest son of Mitt Romney, the Republican nominee for president in 2012. Tagg Romney has worked in marketing at Reebok and with the Los Angeles Dodgers.AdvertisementIf it can complete the details of its financial plan to buy the team, the Bush-Jeter group is the favorite to win the bidding because of Jeter’s prestige inside baseball and Bush’s standing in Florida.Advertisement“The team will be sold,” said a person with knowledge of the process who was not authorized to speak publicly about the matter. “It’s just a question of when.”If the Marlins are sold for $1.3 billion, it will represent the second-highest price paid for a major league team, after the $2 billion paid for the Dodgers in 2012.The Marlins’ buyers could recoup some of their investment by selling the naming rights to the team’s stadium, which could bring in several hundred million dollars. They could also restructure the team’s media-rights deal.A version of this article appears in print on May 3, 2017, on Page B9 of the New York edition with the headline: Bush Group, With Jeter, Is Confident On Marlins.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.