By VICTOR MATHERMARCH 16, 2016
South Africa would again seem to be a strong contender for the World Twenty20 cricket tournament. The team is fourth in the world rankings and filled with star players.So why are most fans and pundits openly dismissive of its chances?It’s the dreaded word that makes athletes the world over cringe: chokers.In the previous five World Twenty20s and in seven visits to the longer format World Cup, South Africa has yet to make even a final despite being consistently among the favorites.Choking and the South African cricket team, nicknamed the Proteas, are almost synonymous. This week’s headlines include “Choker Tag Haunts South Africa” (The Sun), “Proteas Get New Chance to Remove ‘Choker’ Tag” (The Independent of South Africa) and “Chokers Proteas Confident” (The Herald of Zimbabwe).AdvertisementBook lovers can enjoy a 2012 tome titled, “The Art of Losing: Why the Proteas Choke at the Cricket World Cup.”AdvertisementSouth Africa’s batting lineup of Faf du Plessis, A. B. de Villiers, Hashim Amla and Quinton de Kock is fearsome. On the other side of the ball, Imran Tahir is a top-rated bowler.Yet at the opening news conference, the questions about choking inevitably came.“To be honest, it’s not worrying us at all,” du Plessis told reporters. “That said, the only way you get the mark off your back is by winning the trophy. One day when we win, people will stop asking this question.”Get the big sports news, highlights and analysis from Times journalists, with distinctive takes on games and some behind-the-scenes surprises, delivered to your inbox every week.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.Another player, J. P. Duminy, acknowledged to reporters: “We are never going to lose the chokers tag unless and until we win a big tournament. We have let ourselves down in pressure situation in big and crucial games.”Four years ago, South Africa lost in a semifinal to India with only five balls remaining. In 2009, the team came up a mere seven runs short at the same stage.Some of South Africa’s losses in the World Cup are even more painful. In 2003, playing at home, the team needed to win against Sri Lanka to advance out of the first round. As rain, which would eventually end the match, poured down, some team members celebrated, thinking they had scored enough runs to win. But they had miscalculated: The match ended in a tie and South Africa was out.In the 1999 semifinal against Australia, the scores were tied with three balls to play and South Africa was batting, needing just one run to win. Lance Klusener tried for a run, but his partner, Allan Donald, stayed where he was. The miscommunication led to an easy out; again the game ended in a tie, and Australia advanced on a tie-breaker.South Africa opens this year’s tournament on Friday against England, another team that has sometimes underachieved on the big stages. After four preliminary-round games, the Proteas will be hoping to make the semifinals and, for the first time, the final on April 3.AdvertisementIt’s hard to hold this generation of players responsible for errors made by their countrymen when they were children. But fans still seem to.South Africa’s reputation is reminiscent of one once held by Spain in soccer. Despite generally having a top team, Spain always seemed to be knocked out in the quarterfinals of big events.The Spaniards broke that jinx with a win in the 2008 European championships and went on to win the 2010 World Cup and the 2012 European championships, establishing themselves as the best team in the world, and one of the best ever. No one talks about Spain choking anymore.That’s the kind of ending that South Africa cricket fans will be hoping for.We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.