By BILLY WITZMAY 1, 2017
May is only just beginning, but the temperature in the American League East has been rising rapidly lately. When Baltimore’s Manny Machado took out Dustin Pedroia of Boston with a late slide a little more than a week ago, Pedroia’s teammate Matt Barnes threw a pitch that buzzed Machado’s ear, which the Orioles did not care for — and neither did Pedroia, as he made clear after the game.On Sunday in Toronto, when Tampa Bay’s Chris Archer threw a fastball behind the head of Jose Bautista, it was viewed by Blue Jays Manager John Gibbons as payback for Toronto reliever Joe Biagini’s hitting the hand of Rays outfielder Steven Souza Jr. the previous day.The Yankees, in contrast, have thus far steered clear of any testy conflict in the division — perhaps because, for the first month of the season, they have found few reasons to take offense.Then again, until Monday, they had not played the Blue Jays, the team that during the past two seasons has succeeded not only in repeatedly beating the Yankees but also in getting under their skin.AdvertisementIf the Blue Jays did little to upset the Yankees’ sensibilities on Monday, they nevertheless cruised to a 7-1 victory at Yankee Stadium, riding the adroit pitching of Marco Estrada and home runs by Bautista, Ryan Goins and Chris Coghlan.AdvertisementThe defeat dropped the Yankees to one game behind the Baltimore Orioles for the division lead and gave them back-to-back losses for the first time since the opening week of the season, when they lost three in a row.That it came to Toronto could hardly be a surprise. The Blue Jays have won 26 of 39 games against the Yankees dating to the beginning of the 2015 season — blowing past them down the stretch in 2015 and winning three of four in late September last season, as Toronto clinched a wild-card berth and all but eliminated the Yankees.Their last meeting of 2016 was a memorable one: Yankees pitcher Luis Severino hit the Blue Jays slugger Josh Donaldson, the Blue Jays’ J. A. Happ answered by plunking Chase Headley, and Severino responded by hitting Justin Smoak.That led to two bench-clearing dust-ups in the first two innings, a welt under the eye of Yankees outfielder Tyler Austin, and ejections for Severino, Manager Joe Girardi, the bench coach Rob Thomson and the pitching coach Larry Rothschild. The Yankees had the last word when Mark Teixeira hit a game-winning home run off reliever Jason Grilli in the ninth inning, which Teixeira punctuated with a bat flip and some extra words for Grilli from the dugout.The Yankees viewed it as giving the Blue Jays — “the kings of fun,” Headley called them at the time — a little taste of their own sauce.It was Bautista, of course, whose bat flip after a late home run in the 2015 playoffs so rankled the Texas Rangers that they hit him in their final meeting last year, which Bautista answered with a hard slide that engendered an overhand right to his chin by Rangers second baseman Rougned Odor.“Some people look at it, and they don’t like that aspect of the game,” Yankees reliever Tommy Layne said. “I love it. I think that’s still keeping some of the traditional aspects of protecting your players and your teammates. But I think it breeds a better baseball. How long did people talk about the bat flip and the situation between Texas and Bautista? It brings attention to the game, which is not a bad thing.”AdvertisementThis season, the Blue Jays have not had much to celebrate. They lost 17 of their first 23 games, and their disabled list includes third baseman Donaldson, shortstop Troy Tulowitzki and pitchers Aaron Sanchez and Happ. Even with their modest three-game winning streak, the Blue Jays are eight games behind the Orioles.Get the big sports news, highlights and analysis from Times journalists, with distinctive takes on games and some behind-the-scenes surprises, delivered to your inbox every week.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.On Monday, Estrada repeatedly stymied the Yankees’ pursuit of a big inning, scattering seven singles over seven innings. He struck out Didi Gregorius with two on to end the third, got Greg Bird to hit into an inning-ending double play with two aboard in the fourth, and retired Aaron Judge and Bird on fly balls with two on in the sixth.Asked how Estrada can get hitters out by throwing an 89-m.p.h. fastball and changeup combination up in the strike zone, Judge shrugged. “If I knew, I’d have had four hits,” he said.The Blue Jays did not find Severino nearly as baffling. Goins, filling in for Tulowitzki, hit a two-run homer off Severino in the second, and Coghlan, filling in for Donaldson, hit a solo homer in the sixth that finished the night for Severino, who has not beaten the Blue Jays in five starts.Earlier in the inning, the Blue Jays scored two runs on a sacrifice fly as Jacoby Ellsbury crashed into the center-field wall to catch Goins’s long drive. But his flip from the seat of his pants to Judge went over the 6-foot-7 outfielder’s head as Smoak and Devon Travis raced home from second and third. Ellsbury injured his left elbow on the play, and though he stayed in the game, he was not sure if he would be ready for Tuesday’s game.Bautista applied the crowning blow, hitting a two-run homer off Luis Cessa, who was recalled from Scranton/Wilkes-Barre earlier in the day to replace Bryan Mitchell. It was his 34th home run against the Yankees, the most of any active player.“Any time you walk into this building, you know what the name represents, and you want to beat the best, always,” Bautista said.He added: “I would compare this to an underdog playing Barcelona or Real Madrid in soccer. You always want to beat the opponent, but there seems to be a higher sense of awareness of how important it is to win when you come into Yankee Stadium. It’s always important to come in here and play good because it sets a statement, not only with them, but for the rest of the division.”A version of this article appears in print on May 2, 2017, on Page B11 of the New York edition with the headline: In Anyone’s A.L. East, Everyone’s A Contender.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.