By THE ASSOCIATED PRESSMARCH 14, 2016
The blossoming N.F.L. career of Pittsburgh Steelers wide receiver Martavis Bryant took a significant hit Monday when the league suspended him for at least one year after another violation of the N.F.L.’s substance-abuse policy.It was the second league-mandated discipline for Bryant, 24. He sat out the first four games last season after a violation during the off-season.Bryant caught 50 passes for 765 yards and six touchdowns after he returned in Week 6 and was dynamic in the playoffs. He made an acrobatic touchdown catch in a wild-card win over Cincinnati, and he accounted for more than 200 yards of total offense in a loss to Denver in the divisional round.The Steelers pointed to Bryant’s development heading into 2016 as a key for the team’s possible return to the Super Bowl. Now they will play without Bryant, a 6-foot-4 speedster.AdvertisementSteelers General Manager Kevin Colbert said in a statement that the team was disappointed in Bryant for putting himself at risk, adding that Bryant was at a crossroad in his professional life.Advertisement“He needs to understand significant changes need to occur in his personal life if he wants to regain his career as a Pittsburgh Steeler,” Colbert said. “We are hopeful Martavis will take the necessary stops to develop the discipline in his personal life to become a successful player and good teammate.”SANCHEZ READY TO COMPETE Quarterback Mark Sanchez is thankful for a fresh start with the Denver Broncos.Get the big sports news, highlights and analysis from Times journalists, with distinctive takes on games and some behind-the-scenes surprises, delivered to your inbox every week.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.Sanchez, who led the Jets to the A.F.C. championship game in his first two N.F.L. seasons, said that General Manager John Elway told him to come in and compete for the No. 1 job, “and what a reinvigorating feeling this is.”“This isn’t an opportunity I’m going to squander,” Sanchez, a 29-year-old veteran, said on Monday during his introductory news conference at the team’s headquarters.The Broncos acquired Sanchez from the Philadelphia Eagles last week for a conditional 2017 draft pick after the Super Bowl champions lost Peyton Manning to retirement and Brock Osweiler to free agency.PACKER ON HIATUS Green Bay Packers defensive lineman B. J. Raji quoted the Hall of Fame coach Vince Lombardi in announcing his decision to leave football for a year.“Coach Lombardi once said that ‘unless a man believes in himself and makes a total commitment to his career and puts everything he has into it — his mind, his body, his heart — what’s life worth to him?’ ” Raji said. “That is the approach I have taken with football since I was a two-star high school recruit.”AdvertisementRaji said he was taking a hiatus from the N.F.L. and would not play in 2016 after seven seasons with the Packers.Raji became a free agent after having a good season in 2015, with 22 tackles in 15 regular-season games. He bounced back after missing 2014 with a biceps injury.SIGNINGS The Baltimore Ravens and safety Eric Weddle agreed to terms on a four-year contract. ... The Minnesota Vikings signed the free-agent safety Michael Griffin. ... The Detroit Lions re-signed tight end Tim Wright. ... The Chicago Bears re-signed tight end Rob Housler to a one-year contract. ... The free-agent linebacker Daren Bates signed with the Oakland Raiders. ... The Arizona Cardinals came to terms on another one-year deal with tight end Jermaine Gresham and re-signed defensive tackle Red Bryant to a one-year contract. ... The Tampa Bay Buccaneers re-signed safety Chris Conte and agreed to a deal with the free-agent cornerback Josh Robinson. ... The veteran kicker Phil Dawson signed a one-year deal to remain with the San Francisco 49ers.A version of this article appears in print on March 15, 2016, on Page B13 of the New York edition with the headline: League Suspends Steelers’ Bryant for a Year.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.