By BILLY WITZMAY 29, 2016
ST. PETERSBURG, Fla. — One of the first questions that greet players who are new to the Yankees is how they will handle the New York fishbowl, where the fans can be unforgiving, the news media seems ever present and the scrutiny is ceaseless.Since Starlin Castro arrived in a winter trade with the Chicago Cubs, he has confronted the transition the same way at each turn — with a smile.While Castro has made the adjustment to second base, his new position, as seamlessly as he has the move to his new team, he took another opportunity to endear himself to the Yankees on Sunday when he blasted a two-run homer in the seventh inning, breaking up a no-hitter by Tampa Bay’s Jake Odorizzi and sending the Yankees on their way to a 2-1 victory over the Rays.“Really fortunate” is how Manager Joe Girardi described the win, in which Castro’s homer was the Yankees’ only hit, although the lead it gave them was in safe hands with relievers Dellin Betances, Andrew Miller and Aroldis Chapman, who struck out seven of the nine batters they faced.AdvertisementThe Yankees, who were last no-hit by six Houston Astros pitchers on June 11, 2003, had done little to impede Odorizzi’s bid. They hit no threatening balls and had only one base runner until Brett Gardner coaxed an eight-pitch walk from Odorizzi with one out in the seventh.AdvertisementCastro then drove a 91-mile-per-hour fastball to the deepest part of the park — the notch in the left-center-field fence — and suddenly the Yankees were ahead. As the ball cleared the wall, landing 421 feet from home, Castro stepped on first base with an ear-to-ear grin.He was not the only one smiling.Dustin Ackley said the atmosphere in the dugout was similar to that of a game last September in which the rookie Slade Heathcott hit a late game-winning home run against the Rays and was mobbed upon his return.“It was awesome,” Castro said of the reception. “Especially because it was the seventh inning already, and with the bullpen we’ve got, it’s almost game over. That’s a game that we felt good about.”Nathan Eovaldi, who pitched out of two big jams in the fifth and sixth innings, had something to feel good about after another strong start. He has allowed two runs in 18 innings over his last three starts.The only dent the Rays put in him came in the third inning, when Evan Longoria continued his career-long torment of the Yankees by poking a two-out, belt-high slider to right field, scoring Brandon Guyer with the game’s first run. Longoria, who drove in four runs on Saturday, now has 90 R.B.I. against the Yankees, the most in the majors since 2008.Longoria just missed putting the game out of reach in the fifth, with two on and two outs, as Aaron Hicks caught Longoria’s towering fly ball with his back against the right-field wall.Get the big sports news, highlights and analysis from Times journalists, with distinctive takes on games and some behind-the-scenes surprises, delivered to your inbox every week.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.“I thought he hit that one out,” Eovaldi said. “Fortunately, it stayed in.”Eovaldi left the bases loaded in the sixth when Curt Casali popped up a 3-2 pitch.Advertisement“I’m watching the game; I know what’s going on,” Eovaldi said. “When they scored the one run, I knew I had to keep it right there.”When the Yankees acquired Castro, they gave up what would have been a valuable commodity for this team: pitcher Adam Warren, who had been a capable reliever and spot starter. What the Yankees were getting was a three-time All-Star who they hoped would find some consistency in New York, where he would be shifting to second base and would have less pressure to anchor the lineup as he had for mostly bad Cubs teams.Instead, Castro has proved to be one of the Yankees’ most reliable bats. He got off to a hot start and remains second on the team in doubles (nine), home runs (seven) and total bases (79).With the Yankees getting little out of Alex Rodriguez and Mark Teixeira — who have combined to hit nine home runs and are batting below .200 — and with Carlos Beltran getting a day off, Castro batted third on Sunday. Girardi said he appreciated being able to use Castro in different spots in the lineup, and many of his teammates are learning more about him, like his lightning-quick hands and the ever-present smile he carries around the field and the clubhouse.“He’s got a lot of talent on both sides of the ball,” said Gardner, who had not seen Castro play much in the National League. “He’s a lot bigger and stronger than I thought. He’s really got a knack for putting the bat on the ball.”Other than Gardner’s walk and Castro’s home run, the Yankees managed one other base runner in the sixth, when Brad Miller double-clutched and threw just late on Dustin Ackley’s grounder. The play was ruled an error on Miller. But any thought that the good fortune might inspire the Yankees vanished quickly. The next better, Ronald Torreyes, bounced into a 4-6-3 double play.Teixeira made his return as a late-inning replacement for Ackley, who jammed his right shoulder diving into first base on a pickoff attempt. Ackley stayed behind Sunday night to have a magnetic resonance imaging test on his shoulder, and Girardi feared that Ackley might have to go on the disabled list.“It was an emergency,” said Teixeira, who had not played since Tuesday because of a neck spasm that required a cortisone shot — his second of the season. He took fielding and batting practice on Sunday, but his luck did not change in his one at-bat, a shattered-bat fly ball to center.AdvertisementTeixeira is hitting .193, and he has not hit a home run in 36 games and 125 at-bats, the longest streaks of his 14-year career. The other slugger, Rodriguez, struck out twice more and is 1 for 16 with nine strikeouts since his return.But those worries, along with any others the Yankees had to confront on Sunday, were wiped away — along with Odorizzi’s no-hitter — by a solitary swing of Castro’s bat.INSIDE PITCHLUIS SEVERINO, who is on the disabled list with a strained triceps, gave up two hits in three scoreless innings Sunday in a rehabilitation assignment for Tampa in high Class A.A version of this article appears in print on May 30, 2016, on Page D3 of the New York edition with the headline: Castro’s Home Run Transforms the Yankees Into One-Hit Wonders.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.