By THE ASSOCIATED PRESSMAY 28, 2016
PARIS — The defending champion Serena Williams needed five match points Saturday after waiting out a rain delay of more than two and a half hours, but she eventually moved into the fourth round of the French Open with a 6-4, 7-6 (10) victory over 26th-seeded Kristina Mladenovic of France.Her sister Venus Williams also won a match interrupted by rain.On the men’s side, the sixth-seeded Jo-Wilfried Tsonga of France had to quit his third-round match because of a groin strain. Tsonga, a two-time semifinalist, was leading Ernests Gulbis of Latvia, 5-2, in the opening set when he was forced to stop.The tight, well-played match at Court Philippe Chatrier between Mladenovic and Serena Williams was suspended when a thunderstorm arrived before second-set tiebreaker.Once they resumed, Williams erased one set point for Mladenovic at 9-8 with a swinging forehand volley winner. Four times, Williams was a point from victory in the tiebreaker — at 6-5, 7-6, 8-7 and 10-9 — and could not close it out. But on her fifth opportunity, Mladenovic pushed a forehand wide to end the match.Advertisement“She played really, really well and forced me to bring out my best tennis,” Williams said. “I’m happy I got through that.”Advertisement“Serena was really aggressive, went for her shots and took risks,” her coach, Patrick Mouratoglou, said. “That’s her game.”Her older sister now needs one more victory to reach the quarterfinals here for the first time in 10 years.Playing a terrific final set, the ninth-seeded Venus Williams beat France’s Alizé Cornet 7-6 (5), 1-6, 6-0, to reach the fourth round. Williams lost at that stage in Paris in 2010, missed the tournament the next year, then lost in the first or second round in every appearance from 2012 through last year.Get the big sports news, highlights and analysis from Times journalists, with distinctive takes on games and some behind-the-scenes surprises, delivered to your inbox every week.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.She lost to her sister in the 2002 French Open final and since then has made it as far as the quarterfinals only twice, most recently in 2006.Next for Venus Williams, who turns 36 next month, is a matchup with No. 8 Timea Bacsinszky.Serena Williams, the No. 1 seed, is trying to become the first woman to win consecutive titles at Roland Garros since Justine Henin took three in a row from 2005 through 2007.Next up for her will be Elina Svitolina, who defeated Ana Ivanovic, 6-4, 6-4.In her seven previous matches with Ivanovic, the 18th-seeded Svitolina of Ukraine had only managed to win a set. Svitolina had also lost twice at Roland Garros to Ivanovic, the 2008 champion.“First win against Ana, it’s huge for me,” said Svitolina, whose best result at the French Open was a spot in the quarterfinals last year, when she lost to Ivanovic.AdvertisementSvitolina, 21, who had won just one match on clay this season before coming to Paris, said she played with a “better mentality” than during her previous matches against the Serb Ivanovic.“I was really confident today,” Svitolina said. “I don’t know. Just everything was right.”Svitolina, who made her debut on the tour four years ago, added Henin to her coaching team this year.Although an injury hampered her quick progression this season, Svitolina said Henin’s experience has helped her mentally.Henin’s knowledge of Williams’s game may be a strong asset, too. The now retired Henin beat Williams twice at the French Open, in 2003 and 2007.Tsonga’s withdrawal came a day after the nine-time French Open champion Rafael Nadal, the fourth seed, pulled out with a wrist injury.Roger Federer, the world’s third-ranked player, chose not to play in the tournament because of a back injury.A version of this article appears in print on May 29, 2016, on Page SP7 of the New York edition with the headline: Williams Sisters Move to Fourth Round.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.