By DAVID WALDSTEINMAY 28, 2016
PARIS — It is not often that a tennis player leads a cheer for a chair umpire, or insists that he come down from his perch and join a post-match interview. But after beating Aljaz Bedene — and the encroaching darkness — in the last match of the day at Roland Garros, Novak Djokovic was in a cheerful and appreciative mood.With the sky darkening over Philippe Chatrier Court in the third set, Djokovic jogged from one corner of the court to the other between points, rather than take the usual plodding steps, and sprinted to his chair during changeovers.At one point he even waved away a ball girl bringing a towel, so intent was he to expedite the match and prevent the chair umpire, Pascal Maria, from suspending play because of darkness.On the penultimate point, Djokovic put his hands together and begged Maria to stay in his chair rather than take time to check a ball mark. Maria dutifully stayed put.AdvertisementWhen it was finally over and the top-seeded Djokovic had defeated Bedene, 6-2, 6-3, 6-3, in 2 hours 2 minutes, Djokovic pointed to Maria and then led the fans in a cheer for the reluctant umpire.AdvertisementFinally, instead of signing his own name on the television camera, as is usually the custom, Djokovic wrote Maria’s name.This was the temperament of a man who knew that the most difficult opponent in his half of the draw was no longer there: Rafael Nadal, the most successful men’s player in the history of the French Open, had withdrawn with a wrist injury the day before.Nadal’s absence significantly changes the landscape for several players, perhaps most notably for Djokovic, who is seeking his first French Open title. Theoretically, he could have met Nadal in a semifinal.But Djokovic, who will next face No. 14-seeded Roberto Bautista, took no joy in hearing the news that Nadal, like Roger Federer before him, had withdrawn because of injury, or in watching Nadal’s announcement the day before.“It was sad seeing him in the press conference,” Djokovic said, his mood changing from gleeful to somber. “You could feel his pain, definitely.”No. 6-seeded Jo-Wilfried Tsonga of France was also felled by injury, retiring from his match with Ernests Gulbis despite leading, 5-2, in the first set. But Tsonga, as popular as he is in Paris, is not Nadal.When word filtered across the grounds on Friday that Nadal’s wrist injury would sink his hopes for a 10th title, Dominic Thiem knew what it meant. But he tried to block it out of his mind.Get the big sports news, highlights and analysis from Times journalists, with distinctive takes on games and some behind-the-scenes surprises, delivered to your inbox every week.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.Thiem, the No. 13 seed with high expectations for a glittering future, could have faced Nadal in the round of 16.AdvertisementIt would have been a daunting challenge, but beating Nadal, the ruler of clay, in his own kingdom would have been as memorable a victory as Thiem, 22, of Austria had ever known.Then again, he had tried before.“Well, I already made this experience,” said Thiem, who lost to Nadal in straight sets here in 2014. “It’s not such a nice one.”On Saturday, Thiem beat 19-year-old Alexander Zverev, 6-7 (4), 6-3, 6-3, 6-3, in their third-round match, and he now will face Marcel Granollers instead of Nadal.Granollers was the most immediate beneficiary of Nadal’s misfortune. He had been scheduled to play Nadal, a fellow Spaniard, on Saturday. Instead, Granollers advanced in a walkover and will play Thiem for a place in the quarterfinals, which neither has ever reached.After he beat Zverev, Thiem politely wished Nadal well, then pondered the fact that his odds of winning had significantly increased.“Of course, maybe I go different into the match against him than against Rafa,” he said, “because against Rafa I’m the underdog. Against Granollers, I’m probably the favorite.”Even if Granollers loses, he made roughly $78,920 in extra prize money the moment Nadal stepped down. And it is not the first time this spring that Granollers has been so fortunate.AdvertisementAt the Masters 1000 event in Monte Carlo in April, Granollers lost in the qualifying rounds. But when David Ferrer was forced to withdraw because of injury, Granollers gained entry into the main draw — with a first-round bye, no less — as a so-called lucky loser.The same thing happened at Madrid, and Granollers’s luck did not change once he arrived in Paris. His second-round opponent, Nicolas Mahut, had a knee injury and lost the first two sets before retiring from the match.Injuries are, of course, a part of the sport, especially with Nadal. But not so much for Federer, who withdrew before the tournament with an undisclosed ailment, ending his streak of 65 consecutive major tournaments.But Federer will turn 35 in August, and with two of the so-called Big Four (Djokovic, Federer, Nadal and Andy Murray) already out of the tournament, it led Djokovic to speculate that perhaps this is more than just a fluke. Perhaps there is a changeover of the elite guard taking place.“There might be,” Djokovic said. “There’s going to be. How soon? We don’t know.”But before the sun sets on the current stars of men’s tennis, Djokovic hopes to secure a French Open title.A version of this article appears in print on May 29, 2016, on Page SP7 of the New York edition with the headline: Djokovic Shines as Darkness Descends.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.