AdvertisementSupported byBy Filip BondyThe Mets trotted out their 1986 champions Saturday night for a belated curtain call and some premature comparisons. Inevitably, the Amazins of old were asked their opinions of the Amazins of new, and their responses were not always diplomatic.“Eighty-six. You kidding me?” Dwight Gooden said when asked before the ceremony which Mets starting rotation was best. “Sixty-nine was the most talented. We had the most heart. These guys today have got to win it first.”The ’86 team won a championship next door at Shea Stadium, while last year’s bunch could not quite handle the Kansas City Royals in the World Series. The old champs, therefore, retain their nostalgic aura and were greeted with standing ovations before the Mets’ current cast faced the Dodgers at Citi Field. The night celebrated the 30th anniversary of what was perhaps the most successful year in the franchise’s uneven history.The on-field introductions by Howie Rose were poignant, marked by the presence of so many great players, fond memories and the absence of Gary Carter, who died in 2012 of brain cancer. Carter’s wife, Sandy, and their son, D. J., took Gary’s spot on the infield during the introductions.The 1986 Mets finished 108-54 during the regular season, then knocked off the Houston Astros and the Boston Red Sox in two tough, meandering series to win the championship.Davey Johnson, that team’s manager, said Saturday that his squad had been constructed very differently from the current version. He pointed out that his edition had more table-setters at the top of the lineup, players like Lenny Dykstra and Wally Backman. He also noted that his starters had had more experience after a couple of near misses in previous seasons.“By 1986, they were veteran pitchers who knew how to handle the pressure,” Johnson said. “My young guys learned from losing.”Johnson, 73, lives in Florida now and is involved in real estate after a long baseball career. He last managed in 2013, with the Nationals, and kept true to some basic tenets.“They have bigger guys now,” Johnson said. “But I was always a numbers guy, even before sabermetrics, and we had players in 1986 who crouched low and battled to get on. We didn’t have anyone in the rotation struggling like Matt Harvey, though he’ll get out of it. I would say this team now compares favorably. You still need a balanced lineup, good defense.”In 1986, the Mets’ starting rotation boasted remarkable earned run averages: Gooden at 2.84; Ron Darling, 2.81; Sid Fernandez, 3.52; and Bob Ojeda, 2.57. Noah Syndergaard entered the game Saturday with a 1.94 E.R.A. Jacob deGrom was at 2.81 and Steven Matz at 2.36. But Harvey’s E.R.A. had ballooned to 6.08.Darling suggested that only Gooden and Fernandez had possessed the sort of overpowering stuff to match the present-day rotation, but that his group had been more wily and experienced.“It’s unfair to compare them until they have five or six years under their belts,” Darling said of the current Mets rotation. “Let’s wait to judge them and see if they can win 15 games a season for five years.”At this juncture, it is unlikely that Harvey will be able to post that sort of mark this season. Gooden said that he could relate to Harvey’s problems, that it was not always so easy for him in his first few years in New York.“It happens,” Gooden said. “You lose confidence, question yourself. But once he gets one or two good starts, he’ll be fine.”Of course, those Mets of old would face their own issues, particularly behavioral problems with Strawberry, Gooden and others.Ultimately, it was left to the current manager, Terry Collins, to state the obvious: that comparisons between the old-timers and the newcomers were a futile exercise and not particularly relevant. Collins has his own troubles. For one, David Wright was out of the lineup again with a neck injury.“They had power, speed, they could catch the ball,” Collins said of the 1986 team. “We don’t have the speed they had, which would be nice because it created some things.“We’re just different. We’re made up differently. We’re trying to create our own identity.”If the ’86 Mets paraded through the clubhouse, Collins said, the current players, “no disrespect,” would not recognize many of them.Darryl Strawberry offered some universal wisdom for all teams, all ballplayers, all eras.“Have fun as a group,” Strawberry advised. “We didn’t care about numbers; we cared about winning.”Advertisement