By BRAD SPURGEONJULY 29, 2016
Had Max Verstappen not transformed the definition of precociousness in auto racing by competing in Formula One last year at age 17 and winning his first Grand Prix this year at 18, the attention paid to Pascal Wehrlein, 21, would be considerably greater than it is.Wehrlein, who arrives at his home race in Germany this weekend in his first season in Formula One, has plenty of precocious statistics of his own — which is how he got to race in the series in the first place. And Wehrlein’s first point scored, when he finished 10th at the Austrian Grand Prix on July 3, might be considered a feat almost as great as Verstappen’s first victory, at the Spanish Grand Prix in April.Verstappen won that race thanks to the elimination of the series’ two leading drivers, and to the fact that he was driving one of the strongest cars on the grid, a Red Bull. Wehrlein, on the other hand, finished 10th in Austria driving for the back-of-the-grid team Manor, which has scored points only once before since it began Formula One racing in 2010. (At the 2014 Monaco Grand Prix, the late Jules Bianchi finished ninth for Manor.)A Formula One driver’s career depends on the strength of the team for which he drives, on who his backers are, and on whoever might be occupying potential seats at the team ahead his own.AdvertisementVerstappen is a protégé of Red Bull. After proving his value in one and a half seasons at Toro Rosso, the second, weaker Red Bull team, Verstappen was transferred in April to the Red Bull team, replacing Daniil Kvyat, who was sent back to Toro Rosso.AdvertisementWehrlein is a protégé of the Mercedes team, where Lewis Hamilton and Nico Rosberg, who are first and second in the series at the moment, have contracts for the next two seasons. Neither is likely to be ejected.No wonder Wehrlein, a polite, soft-spoken, unassuming driver who seems more teenager than adult, responded with a confused smile when asked if it was better for a driver to join a top team immediately, as Verstappen had done, rather than to learn the ropes step by step and work his way up the grid, like Wehrlein is doing.“Was it a serious question?” he said, since it was framed within the context of Verstappen and his precocious debut. “Of course it’s good to get some experience in everything, if you can do it step by step, but if the pace is there, and if you are confident, I see no reason why you shouldn’t go into a top team if there is an offer.”At the moment he is the second-youngest driver in Formula One — a few weeks younger than Toro Rosso’s Carlos Sainz Jr. — and his climb up to Formula One has been marked by quick and impressive success. It was also atypical.He started go-kart racing in 2003, and began racing cars at the age of 15 in 2010, at the Formel Masters series in Germany. He won the title in that series the following year. In 2012 he finished second in the Formula 3 Euro series.Then, in the Mercedes fold, rather than continuing in the more typical road to Formula One via the single-seat series such as GP2 or GP3, he was entered into the DTM sports-car racing series in 2013.Most of his career has been spent in his native Germany — his father is German, his mother from Mauritius — which was also not typical, as most young drivers today travel the world from series to series, or take part in international series.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.But DTM is a top series, usually involving former Formula One drivers or drivers who did not quite make it to the elite level. In 2014, Wehrlein became the youngest driver to score a DTM pole position and win a race. The next year, he became the youngest driver to win the DTM title.AdvertisementIn 2014, Mercedes had placed him in its Formula One program, as a reserve driver at the Mercedes team, ready to replace Hamilton or Rosberg should they be injured. He also worked with the team frequently on developing the car, driving the race simulator at the team factory. And he tested both the Force India car — which uses the Mercedes engine — and the Mercedes car in preseason testing in Spain.This year he was placed at Manor as a full-time driver. Manor started using the Mercedes engine this year, and it agreed to take Wehrlein on in exchange for access to the Mercedes wind tunnel for testing.So while Verstappen goes from glory to glory, becoming not just a great hope for the future of Formula One but one of its top drivers at a top team today, Wehrlein continues to learn the ropes of elite racing. And he has no illusions about his possibilities at Manor.“I’m happy with the team, we get along really well, we have a good relationship, and I think they like me as well,” he said, turning to the team’s press attaché and inquiring if that was the case. She responded that it was.“Of course I want to win races and I want to win championships and with Manor it is not possible,” he added. “But you know, in general, I’m really happy with the team. I like everyone, the car is making big progress. But then we will have to see what happens.”His result in Austria was phenomenal, given the circumstances.It was the first track of the season on which he had some driving experience — as he does at Hockenheim, where the German Grand Prix is running this weekend — and it showed that Formula One has not yet seen his full worth. With his career until now confined largely to Germany, he has raced on very few of the Formula One tracks. In Austria, it was not just his 10th-place finish that was impressive, but also his 12th position in qualifying, which equaled the best qualifying position ever for a Manor car.“Suddenly, for the first time this season, he really proved that he is a special boy,” said Toto Wolff, the Mercedes team director. “This is the first track that Pascal has raced on previously, and this effect should not be underestimated.”But Wehrlein remains clear-sighted about his chances for the rest of the season with the underfunded Manor team.“There’s no race this year where we can realistically fight for points and where the car is in the top 10,” he said. “But if we make the best out of it and if others are struggling somehow, then with certain circumstances, yes, we are able to score points like we did in Austria.”A version of this special report appears in print on July 30, 2016, in The International New York Times.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.See More »