AdvertisementSupported byOn BaseballBy Tyler KepnerMost major trades involve some level of pain. A good deal rarely comes without a downside, without something each team will sorely miss.The Yankees traded Aroldis Chapman to the Chicago Cubs on Monday, and to be sure, they will miss the surge of excitement that rippled through their ballpark when Chapman threw fastballs. Chapman challenged the human body’s limits, pushing the boundaries of the possible. As an athlete unlike any other, he was, in some ways, the essence of why we watch sports.“They’re going to get the most exciting ninth inning that you can imagine,” General Manager Brian Cashman said Monday before the Yankees’ 2-1 victory over the Houston Astros, when a Chicago reporter asked him what Cubs fans could expect. “It’s a very unique circumstance. He’s not afraid of anything.”Yet the Yankees are not afraid, either. Not anymore. They traded an elite performer from a roster that, while flawed, has managed to hang around the fringes of the pennant race. And to Cashman, there was no pain involved at all.“This was an easy call, and this was the right call,” he said. “Easy because we traded from an area of strength, and we are excited about the players that we’ve received for someone that was only under control for two more months.”The Yankees still have two late-inning relievers. They have told other teams that Andrew Miller is available, but with two years left on his contract, they would need to be overwhelmed. Dellin Betances, who cannot be a free agent until after the 2019 season, will most likely stay put.Chapman was overkill from the start, but he was available for such a reduced price last December that the Yankees would have been foolish not to get him. With the threat of a domestic violence charge looming over Chapman, the Cincinnati Reds took a package of fringe prospects in return.The Yankees weathered the backlash, and the 30-game suspension, and Chapman did his usual thing. It lasted all of 31 ⅓ innings. Blink, and you missed it, just like his fastball.Closers are replaceable. That sounds wrong around the Yankees, the team that won so much with Mariano Rivera. But Rivera’s greatness came from his longevity and his extraordinary success in October.From season to season, closers come and go, and the Yankees usually find a good one.They have had five exceptional closers in the past five seasons: Rafael Soriano, Rivera, David Robertson, Miller and Chapman — and that is not even counting Betances or Mark Melancon, a future All-Star closer they traded in 2010.The closer has a dramatic job — and, yes, tenacity surely is a requirement. But that quality is not as rare as we sometimes make it seem. Most major league pitchers are tough enough to handle big league pressure, or they never would have made it through the thicket of the minors. Find a pitcher with two-plus pitches, an elastic arm and the temperament to be in the majors in the first place, and chances are he can close.Cashman had all the components for a deal like this. Chapman was pitching well in an overvalued role. He was essentially redundant for the Yankees, but the Cubs were especially motivated. They have not won the World Series since 1908 — as you may have heard — and needed a more reliable closer.Privately, officials around baseball hailed Cashman’s haul, led by the Class A shortstop Gleyber Torres, a consensus top-30 prospect in the industry. Cashman also received pitcher Adam Warren — whom he sent to the Cubs last winter for second baseman Starlin Castro — and two other prospects, including Billy McKinney, a Class AA outfielder who ranked as the No. 75 prospect on MLB.com’s midseason list.Theo Epstein, the Cubs’ president of baseball operations, is no fool. But Epstein, the former Boston Red Sox general manager who was once all but forbidden from dealing with Cashman, prepared for this moment. He had plenty of competition for Chapman, and he blew away the field.“I said when we first got here that every chance to win is sacred, and we believe that,” Epstein told reporters in Chicago, adding later, “It was tough to give up what we gave up, but if not now, when?”When Epstein took over a struggling Cubs franchise after the 2011 season, he preached patience as he built. He spent big on the international market, beating the Yankees to Torres with a $1.7 million bid in 2013. He traded an All-Star pitcher, Jeff Samardzija, to Oakland the next summer for a package that included McKinney.Epstein built a deep enough reservoir of talent to have the majors’ best record, even without Kyle Schwarber, the injured outfielder who belted moon shots last October. As neatly as Schwarber would have fit as a future Yankees designated hitter — think 50 homers a year — the Cubs swore he was untouchable, and they meant it. They got their closer and kept their slugger.Chapman might throw the fastball that ends the Cubs’ 108-year drought. For all we know, he might even hit 108 miles per hour while doing it. It would rank among the most celebrated moments in baseball history.But for the Yankees, it was indeed an easy call to trade him. They badly need to get younger with impact position players, and having multiple promising middle infielders is never a bad thing. They upgraded their middling package from last December’s Chapman deal to an impressive package in this Chapman deal — and they got back the pitcher they dealt for Castro, too.Chapman’s 31 ⅓ innings sure were fun. They made little difference in the standings but could make a major imprint on the Yankees’ future.Advertisement