By BILL PENNINGTONOCT. 25, 2016
The Giants stood behind kicker Josh Brown for months after the details of his 2015 arrest for domestic violence became public this summer. He remained part of the team even when police documents released last week showed Brown admitting to being abusive to his then-wife. And after John Mara, the Giants’ co-owner, acknowledged that Brown had told the team of the abuse, he still remained on the team with full pay, even though the N.F.L. suspended him.On Tuesday, however, after both the team and the N.F.L. came under intense criticism for a perceived soft stance on domestic violence, the Giants cut ties with Brown, conceding that their handling of him was “misguided.”“We believed we did the right thing at every juncture in our relationship with Josh,” Mara said in a statement Tuesday. “Our beliefs, our judgments and our decisions were misguided. We accept that responsibility.”Brown released a statement through the team that said in part, “in the coming days and weeks, I plan on telling more of the pain I had caused and the measures taken to get help so I may be the voice of change and not a statistic.”AdvertisementIn an earlier statement posted by Adam Schefter of ESPN that was nearly verbatim to the one released by the Giants, Brown seemed to deny having been physically abusive, but that comment did not appear in the statement distributed by the team.Advertisement“It is important to share that I never struck my wife, and never would,” Brown said in the ESPN statement. “Abuse takes many forms, and is not a gray area. Through the past several years I have worked to identify and rectify my own behaviors.”A Giants spokesman said the additional comment was not in the version he gave the team Monday night.Brown’s release by the Giants had seemed all but inevitable since Oct. 19, when police officials in Washington State made public the details of a long investigation into Brown’s arrest. Twice, prosecutors declined to charge Brown, and the police investigation was recently closed.But in the police case file, Brown made comments in emails and journal entries as part of a marriage counseling exercise in which he wrote that he had “physically, emotionally and verbally” abused Molly Brown, his former wife. In another passage, Brown wrote, “I viewed myself as God basically and she was my slave.”Shortly after the arrest, Molly Brown, still then his wife, told the police that he had been physically violent with her numerous times. The couple have since divorced.After the revelations, the N.F.L., which had earlier suspended Josh Brown for one game because of the episode, announced it was reopening its investigation into his behavior. The Giants removed Brown, who signed a two-year, $4 million contract in April, from their active roster and did not let him play in their game Sunday in London. Brown was suspended with pay by the N.F.L.Two years ago, the league instituted a policy of six-game suspensions for players found to have committed abusive acts against a spouse or partner. The Brown case brought renewed criticism that the N.F.L.’s approach to discipline was inconsistent and indiscriminate.High-level meetings began at the Giants’ headquarters in northern New Jersey as soon as the team and its executives returned from England. By late Monday, the team had decided to release Brown.Advertisement“The road to rehabilitation is a journey and a constant modification of a way of life,” Brown said in the statement the team released. “My journey will continue forever as a person determined to leave a positive legacy and I embrace the opportunities to show and speak about what has helped me to be that man.“I am sorry that my past has called into question the character or integrity of the New York Giants, Mr. Mara or any of those who have supported me along the way. In the coming days and weeks, I plan on telling more of the pain I had caused and the measures taken to get help so I may be the voice of change and not a statistic. In the interim, I am cooperating with the Giants and the N.F.L. Thank you to everyone that has supported me, I will not let you down.”Brown, 37, played in five games for the Giants and will still collect more than $1 million this season, although his N.F.L. career is certainly in jeopardy. On Friday the Giants signed the former Chicago Bears kicker Robbie Gould.In his statement, Mara added: “We hope that Josh will continue to dedicate himself to rehabilitation, and to becoming a better person and father. We will continue to support him in his efforts to continue counseling, and we hope that Josh and his family can find peace and a positive resolution.”Get the big sports news, highlights and analysis from Times journalists, with distinctive takes on games and some behind-the-scenes surprises, delivered to your inbox every week.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.An earlier version of this article misstated Josh Brown’s status after the Giants removed him from their active roster. The N.F.L. suspended him with pay, not without it. Because of an editing error, an earlier version of this article also misstated the surname of the ESPN reporter who posted a statement by Brown. He is Adam Schefter, not Schecter.A version of this article appears in print on October 26, 2016, on Page B9 of the New York edition with the headline: Giants, Rueful, Cut Kicker Who Admitted Abuse.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.