
On Baseball By                     
 TYLER KEPNER
 
APRIL 3, 2017
Noah Syndergaard did not want to talk about his blister. He had just overwhelmed the Atlanta Braves on opening day with turbo sinkers and jackknife sliders and power changeups. The Mets won, 6-0, and the Citi Field stands were full of worshipers.“You’re walking up the dugout steps, you start getting chills,” Syndergaard said. “The roar of the crowd was unbelievable.”The cheers would have lasted longer, but the Mets pulled Syndergaard after six innings — and only 86 pitches — because of a blister on the tip of his right middle finger. The last time he had dealt with blisters, Syndergaard said, was when he pitched in the minors for Toronto, meaning at least four and a half years ago. He was relieved when someone changed the subject.“Some good questions,” Syndergaard huffed. “Not the blister anymore.”Maybe it’s nothing, but with the Mets and medical reports, you never really know. Manager Terry Collins said he had already decided to push back Syndergaard’s next start by a day, to Sunday night against Miami. Later, Collins somewhat casually cited a grim report on another young right-hander.Advertisement“We lost Seth Lugo today for a period of time,” Collins said, and then explained why he was taking no chances with Syndergaard’s blister. “I think it’s the right decision, because you have trepidation. We’ve got to stay healthy. We preach it and preach it and preach it, and now we’ve got to act on it.”Wait — there was news on Lugo? He was already on the disabled list. Now he is seeking a second opinion.Advertisement“He’s going to miss some time with his elbow,” Collins said. “We’ve got to make sure we keep these five guys healthy.”The Mets have almost no insurance for their dazzling rotation. Steven Matz, the lefty who has everything but durability, is out with elbow inflammation. That is the same injury afflicting Lugo, who filled in so capably last September and then helped Puerto Rico to the final of the World Baseball Classic.Bartolo Colon, the staff innings leader in each of the past three seasons, is in town now — but with the Braves, as Wednesday’s scheduled starter. They signed him in November for one year and $12.5 million, as the Mets turn to the right-handers Zack Wheeler and Robert Gsellman behind Syndergaard, Jacob deGrom and Matt Harvey.That is a better rotation than most teams, for sure, and Syndergaard is a dominant leading man. His sinker — or two-seam fastball — veers sharply away from left-handed hitters at speeds few pitchers can reach with their four-seamers.“He broke one of my bats — I’m sure he broke more along the way,” Braves catcher Tyler Flowers said.Flowers added: “The two-seamers are more challenging to hit than four-seamers, especially if it’s higher velocity. I’d rather see a guy throwing 100 straight than 97 with sink,” referring to the pitches’ speed.AdvertisementWhen it wasn’t that pitch, it was the slider, curve or changeup, which Syndergaard worked hard to refine in spring training. He is heavily scrutinized for his velocity and strength, but he also has exceptional touch with his change.“I’ve always trusted it,” Syndergaard said. “It’s just all about selling it with arm speed, throwing it just like my fastball. That’s exactly what I was doing.”Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.We could go on like this, but you get the idea: Syndergaard is really, really good, which is what makes the blister concerning until he shows otherwise. Rich Hill essentially missed a month and a half last summer with blisters, and the Dodgers handled him with extreme caution thereafter. Hill throws curveballs, but blisters are a pest for two-seam pitchers, too. Chien-Ming Wang, the former Yankee who threw it, dealt constantly with calluses on his middle finger.Syndergaard said he noticed a blood blister in the second inning, and it started causing pain around the fifth. Collins said the blister popped, but he did not sound alarmed.“That’s a very common thing these days,” Collins said. “They’ll dry it out in the next couple of days, and he’ll be ready.”Catcher Rene Rivera did not alter his pitch selection for Syndergaard, who said his blister affected all his pitches, not one in particular. He still became the first Met since Jerry Koosman in 1978 to strike out at least seven without a walk on opening day.“That happens to anybody,” Rivera said of the blister. “It’s part of the game. He knows how to handle it, and he’ll be fine.”Fair enough, but Syndergaard, 24, is handling this problem for the first time as a Met. Perhaps this will pass as swiftly as the bone spur/arm fatigue scare early last summer, when he missed the All-Star Game but stayed strong into October. The team is being appropriately cautious.The Mets, and their fans, want desperately to move past injury fears and just bask in the glory of Thor at his best. For six innings, it was quite a show.“That was what I’ve seen from Noah since I’ve been here, so it’s kind of what you come to expect, to be honest with you,” right fielder Jay Bruce said. “I believe something like this today sets the tone for the pitching.”AdvertisementThe dominance, he meant. Not the injury. Too often for the Mets, those go hand in blistered hand.A version of this article appears in print on April 4, 2017, on Page B7 of the New York edition with the headline: Goose Bumps Tower Over a Met’s Blister.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.See More »