By ANDREW DASAPRIL 2, 2017
More than a dozen members of the United States women’s national soccer team took part in hours of negotiating sessions with U.S. Soccer representatives over the weekend. It was a renewed — and potentially promising — push to complete a new collective bargaining agreement before many players scatter for the start of their league season in two weeks.The talks, which lasted nearly five hours on Saturday and at least six on Sunday, took place outside Dallas, where the national team is gathered for a training camp before two exhibition matches against Russia this week.At least 15 players sat in on large portions of the sessions, as indicated in a photograph posted on social media on Saturday by midfielder Allie Long. Others listened in by telephone, including defender Julie Johnston, who interrupted her honeymoon for several hours Saturday, according to a union spokeswoman familiar with the discussions.U.S. Soccer President Sunil Gulati was part of the federation’s negotiating team, another sign that the talks could be approaching a critical moment. Gulati, citing an understanding with the union to keep the substance of the talks private, declined to comment on the sessions in a text message Sunday afternoon.AdvertisementAccording to the union spokeswoman, however, the sides made progress Saturday on some issues: travel, accommodations, per diem payments and inclusion in decision-making. The core issue of compensation remains the main obstacle to a deal.AdvertisementThe sides have held more than 20 negotiating sessions this year. In late February, representatives of the players and the federation met daily before pausing so the players could take part in a tournament in March. All of this year’s talks have come since the players moved to reset the union’s relationship with the federation and the tenor of the negotiations after the firing of their union’s previous executive director in December.Get the big sports news, highlights and analysis from Times journalists, with distinctive takes on games and some behind-the-scenes surprises, delivered to your inbox every week.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.In the months since that change, the team has embraced a less combative approach, hired new representation and restructured its union leadership. In the last month, Gulati and national team players, like the co-captain Becky Sauerbrunn, have used the phrase “equitable and fair” to describe the goal of any agreement; last year, the union made repeated and vociferous demands for “equal pay” with the men’s national team.Both teams are paid by the federation when they represent the United States in international matches, but they do so under different collective bargaining agreements and pay structures. The women play under annual contracts with the federation, with modest bonuses for games and much larger ones for tournaments like the Olympics and the World Cup. The men are paid by U.S. Soccer only when they are called into camp, in the form of larger per-game and tournament bonuses.The women’s team and the federation have been negotiating a new deal for well over a year, but their dispute spilled into public view last February when U.S. Soccer sued the national team’s players’ union to enforce the expiring agreement — and block a potential labor action before last summer’s Rio Olympics. The union responded the next month by having five prominent players file a wage-discrimination complaint against U.S. Soccer with the Equal Employment Opportunity Commission.
            Happy first birthday to the USWNT's EEOC complaint. https://t.co/JqPJoJaBQz While that complaint remains unresolved, the team’s collective bargaining agreement, which expired Dec. 31, has remained in force as the working deal between the players and U.S. Soccer, to ensure that the players are paid and that the team can continue to hold camps and play matches.But the looming start of the National Women’s Soccer League season — not to mention the United States women’s hockey team’s victory in its salary stare-down with its federation last week — has added some momentum, and perhaps even some urgency, to the talks.While some prominent members of the national team have moved to teams abroad — notably two of the E.E.O.C. complainants, Alex Morgan and Carli Lloyd — most of the national team players compete for teams in the N.W.S.L. Their league salaries are structured as part of their national team contracts, and thus paid by U.S. Soccer as part of its ongoing subsidization of the domestic league.With the N.W.S.L. season set to open April 15, this weekend’s discussions took place in what most likely will be the last time the national team players will gather in the same city until a trip to Norway in June.A version of this article appears in print on April 3, 2017, on Page D7 of the New York edition with the headline: U.S. Women Renew Wage Negotiations.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.