By KEN BELSONMARCH 15, 2016
Eric T. Schneiderman, the New York State attorney general, said he had “serious concerns” about N.F.L. players being asked discriminatory questions during interviews at the N.F.L. combine and elsewhere after a prospect, Eli Apple, said an Atlanta Falcons coach asked him about his sexual orientation.The Falcons have since apologized, but on Tuesday, Schneiderman sent a letter to Robert Gulliver, the league’s head of human resources, and asked him to provide a detailed summary of the steps the N.F.L. has taken to eliminate sexual orientation discrimination.BRONCOS KEEP ANDERSON The Denver Broncos matched the Miami Dolphins’ front-loaded four-year, $18 million offer to running back C. J. Anderson.The move was somewhat surprising given that the Broncos had placed the lower tender on Anderson, a restricted free agent.AdvertisementAnderson ran for 720 yards and five touchdowns last season. He had 90 yards and a touchdown on 23 carries in the Super Bowl. (AP)AdvertisementRAVENS SIGN WALLACE The Baltimore Ravens added speed and a familiar foe to their passing game, signing wide receiver Mike Wallace to a two-year contract.Released by the Minnesota Vikings on March 8, the 29-year-old Wallace joins his third team in three years after beginning his career with Baltimore’s A.F.C. North rival, the Pittsburgh Steelers. (AP)CARDINALS ACQUIRE PATRIOT The Arizona Cardinals filled what they considered their biggest off-season need by acquiring Pro Bowl defensive end and outside linebacker Chandler Jones from the New England Patriots.Get the big sports news, highlights and analysis from Times journalists, with distinctive takes on games and some behind-the-scenes surprises, delivered to your inbox every week.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.The Cardinals sent guard Jonathan Cooper and a second-round pick in this year’s draft to the Patriots in a deal that was pending the two players’ passing physicals.The 26-year-old Jones ranked fifth in the N.F.L. last season with a career-best 12 ½ sacks. (AP)SEAHAWKS BEEF UP LINE The Seattle Seahawks continued to address their offensive line by agreeing to a $6.25 million, two-year contract with J’Marcus Webb. Webb started 16 games last season for Oakland as a guard, but he has played tackle in the past and could be an option for Seattle at that position. (AP)BENGALS RE-SIGN JONES The Bengals signed Adam Jones to a three-year deal. Jones, who is known as Pacman, was Cincinnati’s top cornerback in a 12-4 season that ended with a playoff loss to Pittsburgh. Jones’s personal foul for bumping an official helped set up the Steelers’ winning field goal in the closing seconds. (AP)A version of this article appears in print on March 16, 2016, on Page B11 of the New York edition with the headline: N.F.L. Is Asked How It’s Addressing Sexual Orientation Question.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.