By DAVE CALDWELLMAY 27, 2016
Courtney Rahal plans to stand in the pits at Indianapolis Motor Speedway on Sunday while her 27-year-old husband, Graham, climbs into a car and starts his ninth Indianapolis 500. She will join her parents in a suite for a while, returning to the pits for the end of the race.That is standard procedure for most of the spouses and sweethearts of the 33 drivers in the race, which will be run for the 100th time, before a sellout crowd of more than 300,000. But Courtney, 27, is different. She drives fast cars for a living, too — faster than Graham’s.Known professionally as Courtney Force, she drives a Funny Car owned by her father, John, a 16-time series champion, in the National Hot Rod Association series. While Graham Rahal qualified last weekend at Indy at 225.847 miles an hour, she topped 330 m.p.h. at an N.H.R.A. event in Topeka, Kan. She leads the Funny Car standings after seven events.Of course, Graham’s race will last 500 miles and will hopefully include 2,000 left turns, and Courtney’s races are deafening, 1,000-foot-long nitromethane-fueled bursts on a straightaway. But the couple, married for six months, can relate.Advertisement“I think it is a positive, because they both understand the demands that are placed on each other,” said the 1986 Indianapolis 500 champion Bobby Rahal, who is Graham’s father and owner of his racecar. “They don’t have to explain to each other what they have to do, and why. They both recognize the risks — although I’m sure they don’t dwell on that. You appreciate what each other is doing.”AdvertisementThe work is extremely hazardous, of course. Eric Medlen, a Funny Car driver for John Force, died in March 2007 after crashing in a test session. Six months later, Force was seriously injured in a crash at Ennis, Tex., and was out of racing for four months.Graham drove in the last two races in which IndyCar drivers sustained fatal injuries: Dan Wheldon, the two-time Indy 500 winner, at Las Vegas in October 2011, and Justin Wilson at Long Pond, Pa., last August.“We know what’s out there,” Force said. “The monster’s always out there. It is out there, but you can’t dwell on it. I’ve always believed when the Good Lord wants you, he’s going to take you. She’s seen it, lived it, with losing Eric.”Courtney said, “It’s always in the back of your head, the danger, but you expect that as a driver, anyway.”Graham’s occupation was what led Courtney to follow him on Twitter early in 2012, her first season as a driver. At 19, Graham won his first IndyCar Series race in 2008 — still the youngest American to win a major open-wheel event.She was coming to Indianapolis with friends; she reached out to him for dining suggestions. Rahal had other obligations and could not meet her, but they stayed in touch. He texted her to see if she could get him tickets to an N.H.R.A. event in Joliet, Ill.“I remember I was in the pit area, signing autographs, and he walked over to me when I was right in the middle of signing, and he gave me a big hug,” Courtney said. “I remember thinking: ‘Oh, my God, he’s hugging me in front of all these fans. They’re going to jump to conclusions.’”AdvertisementBut they liked each other. When the IndyCar Series had a race later that season in Fontana, Calif., not far from her house in Yorba Linda, she asked Graham to get her two tickets — one for her and one for her father.“I made my dad go to the race with me,” Courtney said, “because no one would think anything of it.”They became a racing couple, even though their backgrounds were different. She grew up in Southern California and is one of four sisters, all of whom drove or work for their loquacious, 66-year-old father. (Brittany Force, 29, is third in the Top Fuel standings.)Graham grew up in Columbus, Ohio. John Force did not know Bobby Rahal well before Graham met Courtney, but Force said, “He reminds me a lot of his dad,” meaning Graham was lower key and softer-spoken than Force, with a droll wit.“John is a great guy — very successful, very demanding,” Graham said. “I grew up in a very successful family, so we bump heads. We’d be a good TV show, let’s put it that way.”Get the big sports news, highlights and analysis from Times journalists, with distinctive takes on games and some behind-the-scenes surprises, delivered to your inbox every week.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.Graham laughed, then added, “John is racing. That is John. He’s a shoot-from-the-hip-kind of guy. It is difficult for me sometimes, because he is so different.”As Courtney recalls, Graham began talking about marriage before she was quite ready. She thought that perhaps he would propose to her when visiting the Forces over Christmas — almost a year after they had met. Graham had an accelerated plan.They went to Venice, Italy, at Thanksgiving 2014, and Graham came prepared. He hired a gondola and hoped to propose at just the right moment of the ride. He waited until the light was just right — and spotted a Dumpster and “nasty fencing.”Advertisement“I thought, `Wow, this isn’t romantic,’” Graham said.“He’d been sweet-talking me, then all of a sudden he said, ‘Isn’t the architecture really amazing here?’” Courtney said. “I was just kind of frozen. I remember him fiddling with something in his pocket. It was utterly unexpected.”They finally reached a spot where he could pop the question. Courtney said, “Before I said yes, the first thing I said was, ‘Does my dad know?’ He knew my dad can’t keep a secret.”Graham had already run it past John and Laurie Force. John Force said, “I know he loves her — that’s what’s important to my wife and me. You’ve got to be in love to make that work. They’re kind of a special couple.”They were married last November in Southern California next to a cliff that overlooked the Pacific Ocean, but they have kept residences near their teams’ headquarters, seeing each other as often as their schedules permit. Courtney has been in Indianapolis most of May.“I don’t get to see her enough,” Graham said. “The largest drawback is that we live our lives on the road. It’s not fun. It’s not easy. It’s demanding, and it’s frustrating. On the weekends, she disappears off to her races. You try to make it work.”These are the years for racing. Although Graham starts 26th in the 33-car field Sunday, he has been encouraged by how his car has run this month. And when the N.H.R.A. season has a western swing later this summer, he plans to spend time in California, cheering his wife on.“It’s just an understanding of what we do — the stresses, the ups and downs, how your moods can change when you’re not running good,” Courtney said. “That support is huge. That was one thing I learned is that we could share this together.”A version of this article appears in print on May 28, 2016, on Page D2 of the New York edition with the headline: Racing Spouses Were Already Part Of Family Business.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.