By BEN ROTHENBERGMAY 27, 2016
PARIS — In a difficult era for American players in men’s tennis, the 6-foot-10 John Isner has become a steady, if not towering, standard-bearer.Isner, seeded 15th at the French Open, recovered from being down by two sets to one and then by 0-2 in the fifth set by reeling off six consecutive games to beat Teymuraz Gabashvili of Russia, 7-6 (7), 4-6, 2-6, 6-4, 6-2, on Court 2 on Friday afternoon.The comeback victory put Isner, 31, into the second week for a third consecutive Grand Slam event, the best such streak in his career. As he warmed up, Isner could hear Jack Sock losing in five sets to Albert Ramos-Vinolas next door at Court 3, so he knew he was again the last American man standing, a role he has had at seven of the last nine Grand Slam events.“Maybe I go a bit underappreciated,” Isner said of his role in American men’s tennis. “But for me, personally, I feel like I’ve done a good job. The fact that I’ve been top 20 in the world six years in a row is something I can hang my hat on, for sure. I want to do that again this year. I’ve been the top American four years in a row — that’s something I never would have imagined, being in that spot, ever, heck no.”AdvertisementIsner, who reached a career-best ranking of No. 9 in 2012, has won 10 career singles titles, all on the lowest rung of the ATP Tour. The current American men’s ladder has a lower top in recent years than it has ever had before, and stints in the ATP top 10 have been rare since the retirement of Andy Roddick, the last American man to win a major tournament (the 2003 United States Open).AdvertisementIsner’s résumé further pales in comparison with that of America’s top female player, Serena Williams, who has held the WTA’s top spot for more than three consecutive years and at the French Open is in pursuit of a 22nd Grand Slam singles title, which would tie the women’s record for the Open era. But despite Isner’s lesser profile, he still comes under scrutiny.Get the big sports news, highlights and analysis from Times journalists, with distinctive takes on games and some behind-the-scenes surprises, delivered to your inbox every week.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.“He was the No. 1 American forever, it seemed like,” Isner said of Roddick, “and at every Grand Slam he played — maybe outside of this one — there were a lot of hopes pinned on him. I feel that a little bit, but not to the same extent. But it’s a good position to be in. I like this spot.”The post-Roddick era has been the bleakest in the history of American men’s tennis, and without Isner, the landscape would be apocalyptic. Isner accounts for 10 of the 26 third-round appearances that American men have had at major tournaments since Roddick retired at the 2012 United States Open, and Isner’s six-year tenancy in the top 20 has been, more often than not, the country’s sole representation in an echelon it once took for granted.“He’s kept us relevant for a few years,” Sock said of Isner. “The younger guys now are definitely pushing and trying to get up there with him.”Isner acknowledged that the current crop he has led had been less successful than previous ones.“It’s definitely not the American tennis of the early 2000s, or ’90s,” Isner said. “I have been the No. 1 American for a long time now, generally around 14, 13 in the world — which I’m very proud of — but it’s not the same. It’s not what American tennis fans are accustomed to.”He added: “I guess it could be worse if I wasn’t around. Hopefully, I’m around for a long time to come, and I think I can be as well.”To keep going at this tournament, Isner will need to improve on his 1-5 record in the round of 16 at Grand Slam tournaments. His path will get more difficult in his next match when he faces second-seeded Andy Murray, who got some useful repetitions against another big server, the 6-foot-11 Ivo Karlovic, in winning by 6-1, 6-4, 7-6 (3).On a day in which Rafael Nadal withdrew from the tournament, eighth-seeded Milos Raonic, a towering server from Canada, grimaced with pain in his left hip during an otherwise routine 7-6 (4), 6-2, 6-3 win over the lucky loser Andrej Martin.AdvertisementThe other top-10 seeds who were in action advanced as well, with No. 3 Stan Wawrinka and No. 9 Richard Gasquet both winning in straight sets and No. 5 Kei Nishikori needing five sets to beat Fernando Verdasco.A version of this article appears in print on May 28, 2016, on Page D3 of the New York edition with the headline: Again, Isner Is Last U.S. Man Standing.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.