

      By DAVE CALDWELL and 
    
JILL PAINTER LOPEZ

MAY 28, 2016

On May 30, 1911, Ray Harroun bested a field of 40 drivers to win the International 500-Mile Sweepstakes Race at Indianapolis Motor Speedway, then two years old. That race is now simply known as the Indianapolis 500, and it has been a late May tradition since then, except for six years during the world wars.On Sunday, the speedway will host the Indy 500 for the 100th time. The New York Times spoke to nine past winners about their early memories and favorite moments of the race, and their most treasured spots at the speedway. (Interviews have been edited and condensed.)One of three four-time winners of the Indianapolis 500, Foyt, 81, made 35 consecutive starts from 1958 to 1992, a race record. He said he used to listen to the race on the radio while working at a garage for his father. But when he first raced at Indy, in 1958, he was not sure he wanted to return.  They had that big crash, when Jerry Unser went over the wall. Pat O’Connor lost his life. They had that crash the first lap. I didn’t know if I really wanted to race there or not. I was just used to being on my little quarter-mile racetrack, and this was two and a half miles. What I liked about it was that it was like the Kentucky Derby. It’s a tradition race, and if you do good here, the world knows it. I don’t know how to put it in words. It’s a feeling you dreamed about. To win this race, everything’s got to fall your way, and everything’s just got to happen that day or you’re not going to win it. I don’t care who you are. I felt I lost it two or three times I should have won it, and I won it a couple of times I shouldn’t have. Everything’s got to fall your way. I guess the highlight came in 1977. I became the first four-time winner, and I had my own car that we built, my own motor, and I drove it. That was a big achievement there. It’s not fun when you’re not driving. It’s a lot better when you’re driving. You see, you got some drivers, and they’re real good ones, and you see the mistakes that some of these boys make, and you don’t understand why.  Jones, 82, is the oldest living Indy 500 winner. He won as a driver, in 1963, and twice as an owner, in 1970 and 1971 with Al Unser behind the wheel. He still thinks about the ones that got away, in 1961 and 1962, his first two Indy 500s.I should have won — shoulda, coulda — my rookie year. I led the race for 27 laps and had a chance to win. I lost a cylinder in my engine. I came back in 1962 and was the first to run 150 m.p.h., and really had them covered. I was long gone. Then I lost the brakes and had to make a couple of pit stops without any brakes — or brains, either. Anyway, so when I won the next year, in 1963, I already felt like it owed me that.We used to say that the tires were skinny and the drivers were fat, and today it’s the other way around — the drivers are skinny and the tires are fat. They’ve put so much emphasis into the cars that they’re taking the talent away from the drivers, in my opinion. I think if they went back to some of the earlier model cars, where they have the flat bottoms where guys are going to have to start backing off in the corners, it makes a difference in the drivers’ talent.I get the same feeling today when I first go over there and drive in underneath the tunnel. It’s like the first time: You always have that little shiver thing, much like you do when you started the race. Before you come in, you can’t imagine how large it is and how much history is there.Andretti, 76, won four IndyCar championships and set records for starts, laps led and pole positions. He is second in career victories. But he won the Indy 500 only once. His son Michael holds the record for most 500 laps led without a victory, and his son Jeff, nephew John and grandson Marco have also failed to win the race, leading to the creation of the term Andretti Curse. Andretti, who was born in Italy and moved to the United States in 1955, saw the Indianapolis 500 for the first time as a spectator three years later. I was 18. It was 1958. I had been in this country for three years. There was an uncle who took my brother and me to Indianapolis. We drove from Pennsylvania. We slept in a car in Georgetown. There was a place you could park there. We were at Turn 4, watching the race, I think from the second row. I walked the track after the race. We snuck in there and walked the track. I remember the first turn, looking back at the tower and everything, and the pagoda. At that time, there weren’t too many facilities that looked that imposing. Today, you have many Taj Mahals. At that time, that was the one that was the most imposing. You know, in my own mind, I said, “We’re going to be here someday.” That was my dream. Seven years later, we were. I had some good times there. I was on the pole twice, in ’66 and ’67. I was competitive. I had car issues. I had mechanical problems in ’68. Also in ’68, the engine blew on the first lap. In ’69, I arrived there with a state-of-the-art, four-wheel-drive Lotus, which was a takeoff from the turbine chassis of the year before, which dominated. We had this Ford engine. I was practicing and setting records. All of a sudden, it was two days before qualifying, I had a bad accident and fire, and destroyed the car. There were other things breaking on the other two team cars, the Lotus cars. They decided to withdraw the cars, being dangerous. I had one day to bring the spare car out, the car we never intended to race there. We had no idea of the reliability of this car, and throughout the race, I had big overheating problems, and I thought, Oh my God, here we go again. I kept motoring on. I was up front, you know, the entire way. I led a lot of laps. Here I go and win it. I won it by almost two laps. I figured, this is one of the most unlikely races I ever thought I was going to win.   Another four-time winner, Unser, 76, holds the record for the longest span between a first (1970) and last (1987) victory, and is the oldest driver to win, claiming the 1987 race a few days before his 48th birthday. He is not the only winner in his family. His brother Bobby won in 1968, 1975 and 1981, and his son Al Jr. won in 1992 and 1994.  When I first went back there, it was 1964, and I went to see my brother Bobby. I walked into that place, looked around and said, “They put this many people in here?” And that isn’t near the grandstands they have today. It was just amazing to look around and to think I said they could never fill that many grandstands and have that many people. When I finished second in ’67, I thought I accomplished the world. And I really thought I did, until the next day: I’m walking up and this guy comes up, kind of a friend, and he says, “Hey Al, where did you finish yesterday?” I said, “What do you mean, where did I finish? I ran second.” He said, “Oh.” It proved one thing, they only know one place, and that’s the winner. It really did teach me something that day. Here I thought I accomplished the world running second, and I did, I don’t care what they say. I still feel like that, but yet the people didn’t know. In ’69, I broke my ankle riding a motorcycle in the infield. They wouldn’t let me run with a broken leg. It happened the first weekend of qualifying; it got rained out. I was riding a motorcycle. I went down a little ditch and fell and broke my leg. I didn’t get to race. Then I came back in ’70 and I won the race. Parnelli Jones tried to make me sign a contract that I wouldn’t ride motorcycles anymore. I told him no. The next year, I came back and won it again – this is pretty easy. In ’72, I ran second. I was mad because I finished second. You get spoiled, I guess you can call it.  There’s years, like in ’70, I knew if everything went good I was going to win the race that day. In ’78, I was going to be happy for whatever I received. About halfway through, I was leading the race. You think, man, now I’ve got to be able to finish first again. There may be luck involved or God guides you in the right way, and there I was, winning the race. In ’87, I won, but there was a lot in between I should’ve won, and we all say that. Mears, 64, became a dominant driver in Indianapolis, but growing up in Bakersfield, Calif., he said, the 500 seemed a world away.  Indy wasn’t on my radar. I didn’t grow up around here, I never dreamed of racing here. It was way out of my league. I didn’t qualify the first time here, in 1977. But that was the first time here, physically on the grounds, and I remember that the size of the place was just incredible. It was very intimidating just from the size alone. It was kind of awe-inspiring, obviously. But the main thing that really jumped out at me, other than the size when you first come in, was when I walked out on the main straightaway. I’d seen it on TV, when all 33 cars, lined up three abreast coming down the straightaway to the green flag, and I remember how big and roomy it looked. But then you walk out there in person, you step over the pit wall and onto the straightaway, and you look around and say, “There’s no way 33 cars can fit three abreast down here! It’s too narrow!” And then, obviously, was how long the straightaway was. It looked like you were going down a long hallway and turning left into a closet. It’s all really a blur. It doesn’t soak in that you’ve won it until a few days later. You’re excited, you’re happy, everybody’s going crazy, but it didn’t really hit me. I remember three or four days later, one morning, getting ready to go, looking in the mirror and it just dawned on me: “You won!” Then I wanted to do double back flips. It’s been asked for years: Which victory is your favorite? They expect you to say it was your first, but it’s not. The first one will always have its place because it was the first, but for the reasons I’ve said, I didn’t really appreciate it as much as I should have. Not that I didn’t appreciate it, don’t get me wrong — it was as high on the list, obviously, as the Super Bowl. But I didn’t know how difficult it was and the history of the place, because it was so off my radar and I’d never dreamed about being here because it was out of my league. So I wasn’t a student of Indy. Then after you win it, you say, “Great, great, we won it, and we’ll go back to the track and win it the next year.” Well, then you go a few more years, and you don’t win it, now you’re getting a little older, a little wiser, I’m learning about the history of the place, what it all means. And you realize how difficult it is to do. You look around and say: “Man. Very few people get the opportunity to be here, let alone win the race.” That makes the second one even better. That same process happens again, even more so, for the third one. When the fourth one came around – I’m a lot older and a lot wiser – you look around and say, “Only two guys have ever won this thing four times. The odds are against you. What are the odds of that happening?” That, plus it’s late in your career. You don’t know how much longer you’re going to be around. So the chances of getting another one are getting slimmer all the time. So just that, in itself, made the fourth one the most special. But what really made it special is that Michael Andretti and I got to have our battle at the end. Got to have a shootout. That’s what really put the icing on the cake. That’s what you always gear for, every race. You gear for that shootout at the end. You’re constantly watching your competitors — who’s stronger, who are the yardsticks you’re measuring up to see how you can beat them. How good do we have to be? You work all race toward that, and you don’t necessarily want to show your hand, keep a little up your sleeve, but just gear up and be ready positionally for that shootout. Castroneves, 41, continues to try to join the exclusive club of four-time winners. He was inspired by the 1989 victory by his fellow Brazilian Emerson Fittipaldi and won the Indy 500 the first time he raced it.I was in my hometown in Brazil. I believe I was in the living room. I was just starting racing. For me, any type of racing, I don’t care what it was, I always ended up watching it. I saw it then, and I thought: Wow! This is awesome! So it was really cool just to see, but I never thought back then I was going to be racing there. Five years later, when I was racing in England, then I thought: O.K. Someday I’ve got to be there.I remember walking through Gasoline Alley. I thought: Jeez. I’ve never seen so many people at a race! It was like going to a big show and waiting for the start of a rock band, or something like that. But the only difference was that I was a part of the show.I like to get on the racetrack. That’s where I feel the most comfortable. Victory Circle is great to get into because you’ve accomplished something that not many people were able to accomplish. It’s Indianapolis. For me, this place is magical.When Franchitti, a 43-year-old Scot, was forced to retire after a 2013 crash, he had won three of the previous seven Indy 500s.  My earliest memory would probably be mid-1980s. It’s probably Danny Sullivan, when he spun and won it in 1985. I’d say that was my earliest memory. I remember very clearly the battle between Emerson Fittipaldi and Al Unser Jr., when they came together with one lap left to go in 1989. I would have been 15, 16 then. It was the speed, absolutely the speed. My brother and I had a computer game of the race, when we had early computers, and we would play that game and look at the number on the dash. We’d be amazed by it. When we were watching the race on TV, they’d say they’re averaging 210 miles per hour, and I’d think, How is that even possible? That famous camera angle, on the exit of Turn 2, with the flowers. The cars would just zing past, and the flowers would move with the air moving. That noise that they made as they just buzzed past the camera, that really captured my imagination as a kid. After competing in the race, I realized what people had been talking about all these years — they’d been saying, “You have to get to Indy.” I remember Al Jr., after he won in 1992, saying, “You just don’t know what Indy means!” I always thought, What does Al mean? The more I was in the race, the more I understood what Al was talking about. The competition has changed, I think, because of the way the cars are now, the way the cars are designed, the aero packages of the cars. They punch a bigger hole in the air. So, even if you have a fast car, it’s more difficult to get away from the pack. There’s no guy taking off. I remember in 2010, we were able to get a 14-second lead at one point. That’s not going to happen anymore. You’re really in this draft, for track position, to get yourself in the right position. To me, this has always been a great event. It just tops anything I’ve ever been to, whether I was competing or working here with the Ganassi team, or driving the pace car, as I did in 2014. The atmosphere is the same. You see this tension on everybody’s face at the track leading up to qualifying. The stakes, obviously, are high, but also is the desire to win. That weighs on people, too. They’re all walking around thinking: How can I go faster? How can I fix the problems? I like to go visit the Yard of Bricks when the place is quiet. If we’re having our Ganassi Christmas party, and there’s nobody else there, I like to be able to walk out to the Yard of Bricks and just enjoy the track and the whole place when it’s quiet. Back when I was driving, I’d run on the golf course every night — just get away from all that other craziness. Dixon, 35, who grew up in New Zealand, will make his 14th start at the Indy 500 on Sunday. The reigning IndyCar champion, he says his victory at Indianapolis in 2008 took awhile to sink in. The month had gone so smoothly for us. We were fastest probably 60, 70 percent of practice days. We’d won the pole. We led a ton of laps in the race, the last 15 laps when we were leading, and I’m just thinking: Something’s got to go wrong, you can’t have a race go this smoothly or a month in Indianapolis go this smoothly.I think the problem with those last 15 laps is that they weren’t enjoyable. It was like, man, I think I can hear the engine doing something. I feel the car is doing something different. You think it’s going to be snatched away from you. I didn’t even remember seeing the checkered flag.The team came on the radio saying, “Hey, you’ve won the Indianapolis 500.” I was thinking: I can’t believe we finally won it. Then you go through those moments putting the wreath on, drinking the milk. It just feels weird. You’ve watched so many of these on video throughout the years, and especially at Indianapolis when you’re practicing for the month, the TV in your motor home or the truck is just continuous on previous races.So you’ve seen this process over and over and over again. You hear of great drivers with fantastic teams, and they’ve never had the chance to win there. You think you might be one of those few that maybe gets a chance as well. It is nice to get one off your back. It was probably about two weeks before it sunk in.On race day morning, walking out of Gasoline Alley, you get goose bumps every time, just the atmosphere, walking out and seeing the amount of people. It’s very cool.As I always say, I’ve been lucky enough to go to World Cups, Olympic Games, Super Bowls, and nothing touches Indianapolis on race day. I might be a little biased.In 2014, Hunter-Reay, a Texan, was the first American to win the race in eight years, the longest stretch without a champion from the United States. Hunter-Reay, now 35, had the second fastest average speed in the race’s history, 186.563 miles per hour – about 112 m.p.h. faster than Harroun’s average in 1911. Early in childhood, just being on the floor in front of the TV, with my Hot Wheels, just watching my heroes race in the Indy 500. I always watched it with my parents as a kid, back in the days when Mears was doing really well. Just the enormity of the whole event was overwhelming at times. You could never prepare yourself for the first time you walk out for driver introductions, and there are 250,000 people in one spot. The museum is amazing. To walk and look at the first winner, all the way up to the most recent winners, you can basically see the history of the automobile and its progression for development. That’s just fascinating to me. I just like, at the end of the day, to take a golf cart out with my boys and my wife, and you can drive through the golf course there. It’s amazing how big the track is — you actually feel like you’re escaping it because it has a golf course inside it. You can get out of that pit-lane feeling. Advertisement