By JOSH PLANOSJULY 19, 2017
The tournament hung in the balance for Xander Schauffele, who remained patient and did not try to control what he could not. He had just saved par on No. 17 in the final round of the Greenbrier Classic on July 9, so he knew exactly where he stood.The moment was basically staring him in the face. “As much as I wanted to keep my head down, there was a 30-foot-by-30 scoreboard behind the green,” he said later. The scale of some moments is easier to moderate than others.Minutes later, Schauffele, a 23-year-old PGA Tour rookie, stood on the 18th tee, a co-leader in the tournament, looking at the 161-yard homestretch. He pulled out a pitching wedge, lined up and took an aggressive pin-seeking cut.The shot settled three feet from the hole. Schauffele is one of 11 players on tour this season who have successfully hit every putt from that distance, and his birdie closed a 3-under-67 final round to finish at 14-under 266.AdvertisementStefan Schauffele — Xander’s father and the only swing coach he has ever had — is certain that Sebastián Muñoz and Robert Streb, who were playing the 17th hole, watched that tee shot.Advertisement“There was intent there,” Stefan said. “Knowing that, with them watching, if he stays aggressive, he can absolutely influence what they’re doing on hole 17. He had to go for the kill shot.”When the roars from No. 18 had subsided, Muñoz and Streb both missed birdie putts. Neither scored in the red on the final hole, either.In just his 23rd start on tour, Schauffele won his first tournament and $1.278 million, a sum greater than his entire professional earnings to that point.Stefan, who watched it on TV with his wife and older son at home in San Diego, glued to the couch on the back nine, breathed in the moment. “It was much more emotional than I had envisioned,” he said.Two hours later, Xander turned on his cellphone and talked on FaceTime with his family. Everyone was in tears, he said.The win moved Xander into the Top 100 in the world golf ranking for the first time in his career, an achievement that, Stefan said, “was a master plan at work.”Stefan was born to a family of athletes, and he continued the legacy, hoping to make the German Olympic team in the decathlon. That dream ended when he was involved in a car crash with a drunken driver at age 20, losing his vision in his left eye; two years of hospital visits followed.AdvertisementBy the time he was healthy again, he had lost contact with his classmates and decided to move to the United States. “I couldn’t stand driving by the burned-out spot on the highway anymore,” he said.Stefan had traveled to California previously, so he settled in San Diego to start his next chapter. He met his wife, who is Taiwanese and grew up in Japan, and eventually found a new sport.“I realized after a little while that the ball doesn’t move,” he said, laughing.He attended the San Diego Golf Academy and was taught by an instructor who likened the mechanics of golf to those of throwing the javelin and discus, events Stefan had once specialized in. Within 15 months, he was a scratch golfer.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.When Xander was born, he was entranced by any sport involving anything round. “A ball-and-boy story,” as Stefan put it.By the time Xander was 13, he was driving the ball more than 300 yards, with his father as his swing coach.“My job was to protect him from golf teachers who really don’t, in my opinion, know what they’re talking about,” Stefan said.Xander attended San Diego State University and excelled under Coach Ryan Donovan, who jokingly equated the Xander-Stefan dynamic to Magic Johnson, now the Los Angeles Lakers president of basketball operations, taking care of Lonzo Ball while managing LaVar, his outspoken, hands-on father.Xander, a team captain, would relay information about his teammates to Donovan. “I knew where everybody was at and what everybody was doing,” Donovan said, laughing. “But nobody knew where I was getting that information.”When Xander turned professional, his father became his caddie. “We butted heads,” Xander said. “But I didn’t have enough money to really pay for anyone. Of course, it wasn’t worth it, because I was playing better when he wasn’t on the bag.”AdvertisementStefan, who caddied for his son briefly, still wears a number of hats. “He manages my travel,” Xander said. “He’s my swing and mental coach. He’s my dad.”Xander’s last month on tour has been a glossy one: a victory at Greenbrier, a top-35 finish at the Quicken Loans National, a top-14 finish at the Travelers Championship and a top-5 finish at the United States Open, his first major.This from a player who had missed seven cuts over the 17 events he played from October to early June, and who in January was ranked 299th in the world.With the win at Greenbrier, Xander became the eighth player under 25 this season to win a tournament on tour (the number has since risen to nine). No season since the tour began compiling records in 1970 has produced more.The win qualified him for the British Open, fulfilling a promise he made to his father, who took Xander’s older brother to Europe as a graduation gift.“I told Xander that his ticket to Europe needs to come from his play,” Stefan said.Xander won’t experience it alone — his whole family is going, too, he said.His goals are to make the cut and to stay mentally strong.“I know it’s not setting the bar very high,” he said. “But winning is pretty far-fetched, even if I just won.”A version of this article appears in print on July 20, 2017, in The International New York Times.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.See More »