By THE ASSOCIATED PRESSJULY 23, 2016
A year before golf’s return to the Olympics after a 112-year absence, the International Olympic Committee president, Thomas Bach, said it would be good if the sport had a wide range of players from as many countries as possible competing for medals.And that is what Rio Olympics will deliver next month — 41 countries in the men’s and women’s competitions — an example of golf’s global appeal.But the story has become more about who will not be playing.Jordan Spieth will be watching from home, perhaps still wondering if he should have set aside his personal concerns and gone to Rio de Janeiro. Rory McIlroy said he would not be watching at all, citing the Zika virus and then taking a swipe at golf as an Olympic sport, saying he would watch “the sports that matter.”Among the eligible players, 21 men said that they would not be going, nearly half of them citing concerns about Zika.AdvertisementThe women have carried the torch for golf, with only one player declining to go because of Zika, a mosquito-borne virus that has been linked to birth defects. Stacy Lewis of the United States, ranked No. 8 in the world, has questioned whether the men make too much money to care about the Olympics.AdvertisementLewis is getting married in the fall, and hearing so many men cite Zika because they plan to start families caused her to look more closely at the threat.“I talked to a lot of different people and basically went into the conversation thinking in my head, ‘O.K., give me a reason why I shouldn’t go,’” Lewis said. “And none of those people ever gave me a reason why I should not go.Get the big sports news, highlights and analysis from Times journalists, with distinctive takes on games and some behind-the-scenes surprises, delivered to your inbox every week.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.“I want to be a part of the Olympics. I think the Olympics are bigger than any golf tournament on the planet. It’s bigger than the Masters. It’s bigger than the U.S. Open. It’s bigger than the Women’s Open. It’s the biggest thing out there, and I want to be a part of that.”None of the top four in men’s golf will be part of the Rio Games. The men will have eight of the top 20 in the world, including the Masters champion Danny Willett of England and the British Open champion Henrik Stenson of Sweden.The women will have nine of the top 10, only because South Korea has five players in the top 10 and countries are allowed to send only four representatives.The men’s competition is scheduled from Aug. 11 to 14, followed by the women from Aug. 17 to 20. Regardless of who plays, medals will be distributed to a golfer for the first time since George Lyon of Canada won the gold in St. Louis against a 77-man field — three Canadians and 74 Americans.Women did not play.The Format The men and women will compete in medal play over 72 holes, just as they do throughout the season. The International Golf Federation has been criticized for not having a team format, which might have given more players motivation to attend. Ty Votaw, the vice president of the I.G.F., has said that support from players is imperative in golf’s bid to get back in the Olympics and that most of them wanted a 72-hole format.AdvertisementThe Course For the longest time, the biggest headache in golf’s return to the Olympics was getting the golf course built. The American golf architect Gil Hanse was selected to design Olympic Golf Course in Barra da Tijuca, Brazil, and it was delayed because of politics and environmental lawsuits. A test event was not held until March and involved nine Brazilian players. The course could be the star of the Olympics. It is to become Rio’s only public course after the Olympics.Male Favorite Stenson is the highest-ranked player, at No. 5, and is coming off perhaps the greatest final round in a major when he won the Open at Royal Troon. He is a likely favorite for the men’s gold, along with the two-time Masters champion Bubba Watson of the United States, Sergio García of Spain, Rickie Fowler of the United States and Justin Rose of England. Andy Murray won a gold medal in tennis before he won a Grand Slam event, and that could be a strong possibility in golf. García, Fowler, Patrick Reed and Matt Kuchar of the United States are among the highest-ranked players never to have won a major.Female Favorite Women’s golf does not have as much depth as the men, and there are fewer surprises in the big events. While the Koreans have strength in numbers, the favorites start with Lydia Ko of New Zealand and Brooke Henderson of Canada, teenagers who are No. 1 and No. 2 in the world and who won the first two majors in the L.P.G.A. season. Lexi Thompson is the highest-ranked American and a major champion. Lewis is the most accomplished American, though she is going on two years without a victory.The Future The biggest competition might be a year after the Olympics, when the I.O.C. will vote on which events will be part of the Tokyo Games, and whether golf will remain part of the Olympic program beyond 2020. Golf’s future has taken a big hit with so many male stars pulling out, and the I.G.F. has said it hopes the I.O.C. will consider the myriad problems in Brazil in assessing the withdrawals.A version of this article appears in print on July 24, 2016, on Page SP10 of the New York edition with the headline: As Top Male Golfers Skip the Olympics, The Sport’s Top Women Converge on Rio.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.