AdvertisementSupported byBy Zach SchonbrunGLENDALE, Ariz. — From the sideline, Isaiah Hicks could sense a big play coming from his North Carolina teammate Kennedy Meeks just by the look on his face. Hicks whispered to a teammate, “He’s getting this.”The Tar Heels’ rebounding ethic is so deeply instilled in the program that it often cannot be described with words, only feelings. It is not occasionally drilled — it is consistently, incessantly reinforced. In other words, North Carolina is the best rebounding team in the country for a reason.So when Hicks saw that look from Meeks — that look that told him Meeks would have an advantage no matter where the ball bounced — he felt good about the Tar Heels’ chances of holding off Oregon in the final seconds of their national semifinal game Saturday night.And Hicks’s intuition was dead on. Meeks proceeded to slide around Oregon’s Jordan Bell, using his girth to bump him out of position, and then wrestled the ball out of Bell’s hands to end up with the rebound of yet another missed North Carolina free throw.Had Meeks not done so, the Tar Heels would not have been able to then run out the final seconds, and might not have escaped with their 77-76 victory. Oregon might have had enough time to score the winning basket. In that case, it would have been the Ducks, and not the 32-7 Tar Heels, preparing to face 37-1 Gonzaga for the national championship game at University of Phoenix Stadium on Monday night.On Sunday, Meeks’s coach and fellow players said that his last-grasp heroics were hardly a fluke.“We don’t just line up there and turn around and start to go back,” Coach Roy Williams said. “We do try to rebound those free throws.”You might say that Williams is a tad obsessed with box-outs. It is, in today’s widespread 3-point-oriented style of play, an unconventional intricacy to circle as a priority. But it rarely escapes his focus.Williams brings it up during walk-throughs.“You turn your head and don’t look to box out, he’ll say something,” said Sean May, a former Tar Heel player and now the team’s director of player personnel.Williams brings it up in practice.“You get sick and tired of him yelling,” forward Justin Jackson said.Williams brings it up even while watching other teams during film sessions.“If Gonzaga is playing Arizona, ‘Look at Arizona, Arizona didn’t box out,’” May said. “‘That’s not what we do.’”Williams’s affinity for rebounding is nothing new, but this year, he has the players that can fulfill his expectations. The size and experience of North Carolina’s front line — primarily the 260-pound Meeks — enabled the Tar Heels to lead the nation this season in every major rebounding statistic, setting a team record for rebounding margin (12.7 per game) and topping all teams in offensive-rebounding percentage for a third consecutive year.In reality, Saturday’s game was not the best showcase for North Carolina’s strength on the boards. Oregon, though undersized, actually matched the Tar Heels with 43 rebounds in the game, just the fifth time all season that North Carolina did not outrebound its opponent.But the Ducks could not come up with the rebounds when they counted most. Instead, twice in the final six seconds, the Tar Heels pulled in critical offensive rebounds after four consecutive missed free throws, securing a win that very nearly slipped away.And Meeks became just the fifth player in the past 40 years to score 25 points and grab 14 rebounds in a Final Four game.“It’s pretty much the reason why we won,” Jackson said.Gonzaga, which happens to lead the nation in defensive rebounds per game, should be equipped to handle North Carolina’s ferocity inside. The Bulldogs have their own large-bodied center, the 7-foot-1 Przemek Karnowski, and a 7-foot backup, Zach Collins, whom they occasionally play on the floor together.“They have more size than anybody we’ve played all year long,” Williams said. “Our big guys are going to be challenged in a lot different way than they have been before.”But Gonzaga Coach Mark Few has already emphasized that his team is going to need more than just its two big men to keep North Carolina off the glass. It was going to have to be a team effort.“Coach Few has been on the guards a little bit, like ‘You guys have got to go down to help,’” guard Josh Perkins said. “We took the message.”North Carolina’s players said, at times, they can grow weary of Williams’s incessant reminders to box out and hit the boards. It is not as much about fundamentals or execution as it is about imploring his players not to take the little aspects of the game for granted.“We do a couple drills, like boxing-out drills or workaround drills,” the freshman forward Tony Bradley said. “But it just comes. I guess it’s just attitude.”Now they recognize it is a reason that they are still playing, and possibly a reason they will be cutting the nets down on Monday night.Advertisement