By AGENCE FRANCE-PRESSEAPRIL 1, 2017
LOS ANGELES — The head of Los Angeles’s bid for the 2024 Olympics ruled out issuing an ultimatum to the International Olympic Committee on Friday, taking a veiled swipe at rival city Paris as the battle for the Games heats up.The LA 2024 chairman, Casey Wasserman, said in an interview that I.O.C. moves to explore the possibility of awarding both the 2024 and 2028 Summer Games at the same time at a vote in September were “absolutely right.”But while Wasserman argued forcefully that Los Angeles was the best candidate for 2024, he stopped short of issuing an ultimatum.The Paris co-chairman Tony Estanguet had warned last month that it was “now or never” for the French capital, and that if the city’s tilt at 2024 was not successful, “we will not come back for 2028.”Advertisement“Now or never sounds like an ultimatum to me,” Wasserman said at his Los Angeles office. “I have been in business a long time. I never had a successful relationship or partnership with any entity by issuing an ultimatum.Advertisement“We will not issue an ultimatum.”Wasserman was speaking amid intense speculation concerning the race for 2024, which will be decided at an I.O.C. vote in Lima, Peru, on Sept. 13.The I.O.C. is looking at the option of awarding two Olympics at once in order to capitalize on the Paris and Los Angeles when fewer and fewer cities are willing to take on the financial and logistical responsibilities of staging an Olympic Games.“It’s exactly the kind of idea and strategic initiative the I.O.C. should be thinking about,” Wasserman said. “But if you take a step back, if you look at the strategic rationale, it points to the importance and the necessity of L.A. going first.”Get the big sports news, highlights and analysis from Times journalists, with distinctive takes on games and some behind-the-scenes surprises, delivered to your inbox every week.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.The Los Angeles bid, which would require no major infrastructure projects or venue construction, making use of existing facilities, offered the prospect of “calm and stability” for the Olympic movement, Wasserman said.“No political interference, tremendous support from our citizens, no capital projects, no budget overruns: That’s L.A.,” Wasserman said. “And that calms and creates stability.”Pressed on whether there was any chain of events in which Los Angeles officials might consider staging the Games in 2028, Wasserman said the city remained focused only on 2024.“No one’s a candidate for 2028,” he said. “I think that’s a hypothetical and it’s not worth discussing. The IOC’s got a process. We’ve had no conversations with the IOC about that process. We don’t know what their intent is.Advertisement“We don’t know what their approach is going to be, so for anyone to comment on 2028 is premature.”He also said there had been no discussions with the I.O.C. about the possibility of a joint 2024/2028 award.“They’ve not reached out to us,” Wasserman said. “Other than the public statements they’ve made, we’ve had nothing.”With the 2016 Rio de Janeiro Olympics mired in corruption allegations, and questions raised about venues that have been left to rot, the stakes for the I.O.C. could not be higher as it ponders its choice for 2024.Wasserman said the Olympic movement was at a “turning point.”“The next host of the Olympics had better get it right,” Wasserman said. “I don’t think the Olympic movement wants to be put in a position of having seven more years of the kind of challenges they have had in the past. The Olympics deserves better. The movement deserves better.”A version of this article appears in print on April 2, 2017, on Page SP6 of the New York edition with the headline: Los Angeles Official Vows No Ultimatum.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.