AdvertisementSupported byBy The Associated PressRANCHO MIRAGE, Calif. — Lexi Thompson could not even tee off on Friday until shortly before sunset, and on Saturday, she had to return to the Dinah Shore Course at Mission Hills Country Club before dawn to start a 28-hole day.Thompson is excelling under unusual conditions at the ANA Inspiration, the L.P.G.A. Tour’s first major championship of the year, and that has put her in prime position to play for her second major title.Thompson, a 22-year-old American, claimed the tournament lead while completing a wind-delayed second round on Saturday before moving to two shots ahead of Suzann Pettersen of Norway with a third-round 67. After a long day of play in the wind and sun, Thompson was at 13-under-par 203 heading into Sunday’s final round.“I struggled a little bit off the tee and had a few more rough shots than I wanted, but you can’t ever complain about a five-under round,” Thompson said.Thompson won her only major title here in 2014, and she simply excels at Mission Hills. She smashed her drives and got great results from her inconsistent putter on the way to six birdies in the third round, keeping a competitive field squarely behind her.“I just love this golf course,” Thompson said. “I get to hit a lot of drivers, and it just sets up nicely for me all over.”Thompson and Pettersen stayed ahead of a field that posted unusually low scores. The two-over cut, at 146, matched the lowest cut score in tournament history.The golfers did it despite intermittent returns of the desert wind, which forced an early halt to play on Thursday and led to two days of catch-up, with 56 golfers completing their second rounds on Saturday morning. The field got caught up on a postcard-perfect desert day, and warm weather was expected Sunday.“It’s definitely not a usual week, what we’re used to, but it’s a major week,” Thompson said. “We have to deal with the wind conditions and whatever weather we get.”Pettersen shot a 68 in the third round to reach 11 under par, and Minjee Lee of Australia joined three South Koreans — Inbee Park, So Yeon Ryu and Mi Jung Hur — at 10-under 206. Michelle Wie; Cristie Kerr; the world No. 2, Ariya Jutanugarn; and Karine Icher were five shots behind Thompson, at eight under.“I think I’ve always said, since the first time I saw this place, it really fits my eye,” said Pettersen, a two-time major champion.She added: “I’m driving the ball well, and that’s a major key on this golf course. I’ve got a big job to do. The leaderboard is packed behind me as well. You’ve got to expect to go out there and shoot low. There’s a lot at stake, but I’m all in for it.”Advertisement