By THE ASSOCIATED PRESSMARCH 31, 2017
DALLAS — Allisha Gray scored 18 points, A’ja Wilson had a double-double, and South Carolina is going to its first national championship game after beating Stanford, 62-53, on Friday night in a women’s national semifinal.Wilson had 13 points and 19 rebounds for the Gamecocks (32-4), who lost in the semifinal of their only other Final Four appearance two years ago. They went ahead to stay with 13 straight points in the third quarter.Stanford (32-6) took a big hit when the star senior guard Karlie Samuelson sprained her right ankle about four and a half minutes before halftime after the Cardinal had taken an 8-point lead with a 13-1 run.South Carolina’s Dawn Staley, who played for Stanford Coach Tara VanDerveer on the United States women’s team that won the 1996 Olympic gold medal, won as a coach against VanDerveer for the first time in six tries.AdvertisementStaley also made three consecutive Final Four appearances as a player for Virginia from 1990 to 1992. Two of those appearances resulted in semifinal losses to VanDerveer and the Cardinal, who went on to their only national titles in 1990 and 1992.Get the big sports news, highlights and analysis from Times journalists, with distinctive takes on games and some behind-the-scenes surprises, delivered to your inbox every week.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.Samuelson was hurt making a move toward the basket. She stepped on the foot of South Carolina guard Bianca Cuevas-Moore, and her right foot then slid on the floor before twisting awkwardly. She grabbed near her ankle with both hands after falling down.AdvertisementTwo teammates came off the bench to carry Samuelson off the floor.Samuelson, who finished scoreless while playing 25 minutes and taking only two shots, returned to start the second half. But she was back on the bench after 73 seconds, standing behind the bench briefly while stretching her ankle and grimacing. She entered the game several more times but was clearly far from 100 percent.Samuelson’s younger sister, Katie Lou, played for Connecticut in the other semifinal game Friday night in the home of the N.B.A.’s Dallas Mavericks. The Huskies, the four-time defending national champion, played Mississippi State.Erica McCall had 14 points and 14 rebounds for the Cardinal but made only 7 of 19 shots. Alanna Smith had 14 points and 12 rebounds.The Gamecocks went ahead, 35-33, when Wilson, with defenders surrounding her as they did much of the game, found Bianca Cuevas-Moore open for a 3-pointer that she hit from in front her teammates on the bench.Stanford missed three shots on its next possession, and South Carolina quickly extended the lead on the freshman Tyasha Harris’s one-handed bullet pass to Doniyah Cliney, who was open for a layup.That was the only assist for Harris, who finished with 10 points.We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.