By KAREN CROUSEJULY 19, 2017
SOUTHPORT, England — Glenn McLaughlin, an avid golf fan, traveled all the way from Australia to stake out his spot behind Royal Birkdale’s first green. His goal was to take a selfie with Tommy Fleetwood, whom he has identified as golf’s next star, before the start of the 146th British Open this week.At Muirfield in 2013, McLaughlin said, he singled out Jordan Spieth, who subsequently won two majors and spent 26 weeks as the world No. 1. McLaughlin thought his enthusiasm for Fleetwood was cutting edge, like Brian Epstein discovering the Beatles at the Cavern Club in nearby Liverpool. Then he saw the size of the gallery at the first hole on Monday and realized he had loads of company.Born and raised in Southport, Fleetwood as a teenager won his club championship at Formby Hall, roughly six miles as the sea gull flies from Royal Birkdale. In these parts, Fleetwood was identified as a future star long before he became the top-ranked men’s amateur or posted any of his 13 top-10 finishes, including two victories, in the past 12 months.Royal Birkdale was the course closest to Fleetwood’s childhood home, and yet on Monday his mother, Sue, kept asking how to get to the next hole. She said she had never walked the course. Fleetwood’s father, Peter, had, but only on the cart path that snakes through the closing holes, alongside the family’s dog, Cookie, who would be straining on her leash.AdvertisementDuring Fleetwood’s youth, the closest that he and his father came to playing the course, considered one of the premier private layouts in Britain, was when they would sneak onto the grounds through an opening on the fifth hole and hit a shot or two during the members’ cocktail hour.Advertisement“What was the worst that could happen — someone came out and said, ‘Get off the course, you ruffians’?” asked Peter Fleetwood, who acknowledged his role as the instigator of their trespassing forays. He laughed and added, “We raised him all wrong.”Tommy Fleetwood is embracing his leading role this week as the local ruffian who made good. “It’s very cool that a course I would have crept on now and again is where I’m playing the Open,” he said.The last Englishman to claim the national golf championship was Nick Faldo in 1992 at Muirfield in Scotland. An Englishman has not won the tournament on English soil since Tony Jacklin in 1969 at Royal Lytham & St. Annes.Justin Rose, the highest-ranked English golfer, finished fourth at Royal Birkdale in 1998 as a 17-year-old amateur, and has not improved upon that in 14 subsequent starts here as a pro. Rose, the 2013 United States Open champion, mentioned the great expectations as a boulder-size impediment to victory, and he is hardly the first to venture down that booby-trapped path. As the tennis star Andy Murray experienced for years at Wimbledon, Britain comes together this time every summer to suffocate its own in the name of support.Fleetwood, 26, has failed to make the cut in his three previous British Open appearances. He summarily dismissed the suggestion that he would be burdened by extra pressure this week playing in front of a hometown crowd.“Obviously it’s going to be a different experience, for sure, something that I’ve never experienced before,” Fleetwood said. “But it will be great to have so many people out there rooting for you. It doesn’t happen all the time when you have that many people, and they all want you to do well. So I think it will be nice, and I’m sure it will make me smile.”As he played a nine-hole practice round with the Scottish amateur Connor Syme on Monday, three days before the tournament’s start, Fleetwood’s parents walked outside the gallery ropes. They were approached by a steady stream of people offering warm wishes and free cups of cold ale. Sue Fleetwood could not place some of the faces who engaged her in conversation, but it did not matter. Anyone rooting for her son is a friend of hers.AdvertisementTommy Fleetwood has a smile that can cut through a gray English winter day, and long curly hair that beckons the eye, though his locks apparently are not for everybody. “He needs a haircut,” groused one man who saw Fleetwood shortly after he arrived at the first tee.Sue Fleetwood, a wig maker and hairdresser who trimmed her son’s hair when he was a child, was not surprised.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.“His hair used to be an obsession with people,” she said. “If he’d let me loose, I’d chop it off.”But it’s not going to happen, she added. Fleetwood will not cut his hair, his mother said, because his apparel sponsor, Nike, “likes his hair to be long because it looks a little different.”She was confident her son would hold up in the spotlight just fine. In his late teens, Fleetwood was accepted to the Italia Conti Academy of Theater Arts in London, his mother said. In choosing golf over drama, he simply chose a different stage.Pro athletes are entertainers, after all. But for most of last year, Fleetwood got to every tee box and froze like an actor who had forgotten his lines. His driving, which had been his strength, deserted him. He did not know where the ball was going, and the panic that ensued made it difficult at times for him to draw his club back. From October 2015 to September 2016, Fleetwood’s world ranking dropped 126 spots, to 188.Fleetwood looked to his hometown for answers. He returned to his childhood coach, Alan Thompson, and persuaded a longtime family friend, Ian Finnis, to leave his job as a teaching pro at Formby Hall to become his caddie. Fleetwood also hired the putting guru Phil Kenyon, who works out of Formby Hall.This year his progress has been striking. In January, three days after his 26th birthday, Fleetwood held off Dustin Johnson, who was on his way to becoming the world No. 1, to win the European Tour event in Abu Dhabi. He was second behind Johnson at a World Golf Championships event in Mexico City in March and fourth at the United States Open in June. Two weeks later, he won the HNA Open de France, and a week after that he reached a career-high 14th in the world rankings.“I don’t particularly like talking about it much, but after a year of struggling, when you start playing better, you have a much better perspective on the game,” Fleetwood said, adding: “You can have ups and downs, and I know that as good as anybody because I’ve had them. And I think you just have to take this game in your stride, really.”AdvertisementPeter Fleetwood was knocked off his stride when asked if he had contemplated the prospect of his son ending England’s long victory drought at his hometown tournament. “I don’t know,” he said. “We don’t think like that.”He considered the question for a few seconds. “It would mean a very good night out,” he said.Tommy Fleetwood’s rise has not changed his profile much. He can still enjoy a very good night out in peace.“I got recognized at the market the other day, but, no, nothing that spectacular,” he said. “There’s nobody fainting in the street as I walk past.”McLaughlin, the fan from Australia, did a mild swoon after jostling with others in a successful bid to take a selfie with Fleetwood.“He could be a superstar of the future,” McLaughlin said.In 2013, two men who had watched Fleetwood fall in love with the game on Southport’s municipal course acted on the same hunch. They pooled their money and placed a 500-pound bet on Fleetwood to win the British Open at 66-1 odds. This is the final year they can collect.A version of this article appears in print on July 20, 2017, on Page B10 of the New York edition with the headline: A Trespasser No Longer.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.