By MARC TRACYMARCH 13, 2016
Perry Ellis speaks loudest on the basketball court. Not in the sense of how well he plays, although Ellis, a Kansas senior, is one of the country’s best players and the leading scorer on the top team. But in the sense of how much — and how loudly — he literally talks when on the court.On defense, like a catcher in baseball, Ellis, a 6-foot-8 power forward, stands near the baseline, rotating as the opposing offense moves the ball along the perimeter. He tells guards where their men are. He yells out warnings of oncoming screens. If an offensive player breaks free for a clear shot, as he closes out he also barks at the shooter to try to disrupt him.“We’ve still got little things we can get better at, but over all, we’re talking pretty well,” Ellis said after his top-ranked Jayhawks easily beat Kansas State in the Big 12 tournament quarterfinals. It was almost as if he were speaking of a team scrapping for an N.C.A.A. tournament spot.The scarcity of Ellis’s talk away from the court imbues his words with value. As Jamari Traylor, a role player who has been Ellis’s teammate for four years, put it, “Few words, but it means something coming from him.”AdvertisementPart of Ellis’s authority stems from his biography. While Kansas, a university with a national reputation and fan base, has players from Massachusetts and Virginia, Ukraine and Mali, Memphis and Chicago, Ellis grew up in the state, in Wichita, and recalled being a Jayhawks fan as early as sixth grade. Several teammates said they were aware of this, and of how, unlike them, Ellis knew of Kansas’s magic well before stepping into Allen Fieldhouse for the first time as a high school junior.Ellis carries himself seriously. The freshman Carlton Bragg Jr. spoke of him “getting outside of his box” to relate to looser teammates; Evan Manning, his roommate, testified that Ellis had a goofier side but declined to elaborate, precisely because, Manning said, “it’s a different side of him he doesn’t let everyone see.”Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.Ellis’s style of play is similar: rarely transcendent, almost never too low. He leads his team in scoring (16.0 points) and rebounding (6.0) — solid but not gaudy numbers. And though he is not among Division I leaders in any statistic, he is rated the fifth-best player in the country by KenPom.com’s efficiency-obsessed ratings.“Perry’s always Perry,” Traylor said. “You know what you’re going to get.”Kansas, the top overall seed, is perhaps the deepest and most talented team in the field. But while the Jayhawks have been a No. 1 or 2 seed each of the last four years, they have not reached the Final Four since 2012. And look out for No. 5 Maryland, possibly, as a potential matchup in the round of 16.AdvertisementVillanova could meet Temple in the round of 32 in Brooklyn, stirring memories of Big Five battles. The teams have been playing each other since 1914 but have met only once in the N.C.A.A. tournament, in 1970.Hawaii, the 13th seed, went 7-2 on the road this season, and its trips are never easy. Guards Roderick Bobbitt and Quincy Smith ranked 1-2 in the Big West in steals, while No. 4 California’s turnover margin (minus-2.48) was second to last in the Pacific-12.ZACH SCHONBRUNA version of this article appears in print on March 14, 2016, on Page D7 of the New York edition with the headline: Chatter on the Court.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.