By THE ASSOCIATED PRESSMARCH 15, 2016
ANAHEIM, Calif. — Jakob Silfverberg scored three goals for his first N.H.L. hat trick, leading the Anaheim Ducks to a 7-1 rout of the Devils on Monday night.Corey Perry scored his team-high 29th goal, Nick Ritchie had his first in 25 N.H.L. games, and Ryan Kesler got the go-ahead goal early in the second period. Andrew Cogliano added a goal and two assists, helping Anaheim beat the Devils for the fifth straight time.The former Anaheim forward Devante Smith-Pelly scored for the Devils, who failed to complete a sweep of their three-game California trip after a 3-0 win over the San Jose Sharks and a 2-1 overtime victory against the Los Angeles Kings.The Ducks remained 2 points behind the Pacific Division-leading Kings, who won, 5-0, at Chicago.Kesler put the Ducks ahead, 2-1, at 3 minutes 44 seconds of the second period with his 15th goal, using defenseman David Schlemko as a screen and beating Keith Kinkaid to the stick side with a one-timer from 30 feet out. Kinkaid was making his fourth straight start in place of the injured Cory Schneider.AdvertisementSilfverberg got his first goal of the night at the five-and-a-half-minute mark, jumping on a loose puck in the slot and whipping it past Kinkaid’s stick after Josh Manson’s shot was blocked by Schlemko.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.At that point, Devils Coach John Hynes used his only timeout to try to slow down the Ducks’ momentum. But it was no use. Silfverberg made it 4-1 at 9:56 of the period, converting a perfect setup by Kesler from behind the net. Silfverberg completed his hat trick with 12:47 remaining.AdvertisementCogliano opened the scoring 32 seconds after the first intermission, converting a rebound of Silfverberg’s slap shot from the top of the right circle. The Ducks’ lead lasted 37 seconds, as Tyler Kennedy carried the puck behind the net and set up Smith-Pelly in front for his 10th goal.The Ducks, who did not have a power-play opportunity against the Devils in their 2-1 victory at Newark on Dec. 19, got their only one in the rematch when the former Ducks forward Kyle Palmieri was sent off for hooking Clayton Stoner at 6:05 of the second.This was the 12th time the Devils have played all three California teams on a trip. The only time they swept was in November 2000, when they beat the Ducks by 5-2, the Kings by 6-1 and the Sharks by 3-2. Martin Brodeur stopped 71 of 76 shots in those games.We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.