By SETH BERKMANJAN. 20, 2017
MINNEAPOLIS — Kendall Coyne gathered the puck and was in the open ice almost instantly, darting toward the University of Minnesota goalie Sidney Peters. Faced with an unforgiving predicament, Peters sprawled out to no avail. Coyne went to her backhand and easily scored, a trademark goal from one of the world’s fastest players.Last year, such skills earned Coyne the Patty Kazmaier Award as the nation’s top college women’s hockey player while she was playing for Northeastern.On this night in January, she was competing for the Minnesota Whitecaps, a collection of unpaid Midwestern hockey nomads who barnstorm against college teams. Coyne occasionally shares shifts with players like Hannah Brandt, Stephanie Anderson, Jocelyne Lamoureux-Davidson and Monique Lamoureux-Morando, all recent members of the United States national team.The Whitecaps are considered a professional team, but they do not play in the Canadian Women’s Hockey League or the National Women’s Hockey League, the sport’s two prominent leagues. Created in 2004, the Whitecaps have remained independent through much of their history. At times, that unconventional arrangement has nearly led to the team’s dissolution, but as the Whitecaps persevered, their members were able to cultivate a nuanced view of the women’s hockey world shaping around them.AdvertisementAfter the game against Minnesota, the Lamoureuxs, twin sisters who are two-time Olympic silver medalists, spent the night at the house of Brandt’s parents just outside the Twin Cities. The next morning, the three Whitecaps car-pooled to another exhibition.AdvertisementThe two-hour drive to the University of Minnesota-Duluth is a straightforward path up Interstate 35. Many Whitecaps see the best future for women’s hockey as a similarly clear route: a merger between the C.W.H.L. and N.W.H.L.In 2015, entering her senior year at Minnesota, Brandt was taken second over all in the inaugural draft of the N.W.H.L., the first professional women’s hockey league to offer salaries. The longer Brandt examined her options, though, the Whitecaps became a better choice than the four-team, Northeast-based N.W.H.L., she said.Brandt works near St. Paul for a company that provides care for people with disabilities. With weekend games and fewer practice obligations, the Whitecaps offered a more flexible schedule for national team training. As a Minnesota alum, she also had access to the Gophers’ home rink, Ridder Arena.When the N.W.H.L. cut player salaries in November amid financial difficulties, the decision by Brandt and some of her Whitecaps teammates looked like a safe one.“A lot of what’s gone on has been very unprofessional,” said Lamoureux-Davidson, who with her sister has been a keen observer of the United States women’s national soccer team’s fight for pay equality. “Hopefully someone gets the situation straightened out, but what’s going on right now I think is unacceptable. You’re going to put a professional league together, you want to be treated as such. I think if that were happening in any other men’s professional league, players wouldn’t be playing.”Both the Lamoureuxs are married and work in Grand Forks, N.D., their hometown. They have established a suitable balance between their personal and professional lives. Lamoureux-Morando, who has almost a decade of experience with USA Hockey, played one year in the C.W.H.L. with the Boston Blades while her husband worked in Boston, but moved back home before last season.“The Whitecaps definitely have stayed neutral and are pretty much watching to see what happens,” Lamoureux-Morando said. “But if you look at the N.W.H.L., I mean any logical person would say that’s probably not the smart move to join in that league right now considering their financial situation.”While financial support from the N.H.L. would be important for women’s professional hockey, Lamoureux-Davidson said the N.H.L., like the Whitecaps, seemed to be in a wait-and-see mode, because “it doesn’t make sense on their end to support one league over the other.”AdvertisementThe Whitecaps started with a fairly modest mission. Jack Brodt and Dwayne Schmidgall founded the team so their daughters, Winny Brodt Brown and Jenny Schmidgall Potter, would have a place to play after college. Brown and Potter, both 38, still play for the Whitecaps.In 2014, after a stellar career coaching women’s hockey at Minnesota, Laura Halldorson was asked by Brodt and Brown to help gain entry into the C.W.H.L.Halldorson said the Whitecaps, a nonprofit, received funding for travel from a small base of contributors and family foundations. For the expansion bid, the team raised about half of the money needed to support a new franchise, estimated at $500,000. The C.W.H.L., now in its 10th season, does not offer salaries but has relationships with individual N.H.L. teams and a growing list of sponsors.When the C.W.H.L. ultimately decided not to expand beyond its five teams, the Whitecaps took advantage of the abundance of top-level Midwest college programs to create a schedule. Following the C.W.H.L. model, Halldorson also strengthened a relationship with the Minnesota Wild.The Wild’s chief operating officer, Matt Majka, said it was the N.H.L.’s responsibility to use its promotional power “to support and grow the game at all levels.”“I do think it makes a difference when the N.H.L. ordains something; the rest of the hockey world is going to listen,” Majka said, adding, “I think it’s coming to a critical mass with women’s hockey very quickly now.”The Wild have not offered direct financial support to the Whitecaps, but Majka said the organization was looking for ways to further its contributions. In December, the Wild held a Girls Hockey Weekend, where fund-raising efforts benefited the Whitecaps. The Wild also have had discussions about hosting a doubleheader with the Whitecaps at its arena in St. Paul, the Xcel Energy Center.Advertisement“I think long term, the N.H.L. is the key to a sustained women’s league, similar to the W.N.B.A.,” said Halldorson, who is now the Whitecaps’ coach. “In the meantime, we think it’s important to align ourselves with the Wild.”Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.Halldorson has not had conversations with either women’s league recently regarding expansion, but said the Whitecaps maintained good relationships with both. Commissioner Dani Rylan of the N.W.H.L. said her league would review expansion options over the next year. With its strong participation numbers and fan support, the Minnesota market is an obvious candidate.“When the time comes when we are able to expand beyond the Northeast — and a corporate partner that can help us with travel would be crucial — we’d have to look at Minnesota,” Rylan said.The Whitecaps have deep roots in the area because of their youth programs, started by Brown and Chris Peterson in 2007.The Minnesota senior Lee Stecklein was drafted second over all by the Buffalo Beauts in the 2016 N.W.H.L. Draft, but has not decided where she will play next season. Like Brandt, Stecklein grew up playing for the Jr. Whitecaps, and said she saw a certain appeal training among the Whitecaps who fostered her game.Brown said the Jr. Whitecaps have had more than 100 alumni make N.C.A.A. rosters. Skating on the same line with Brandt, whom Brown remembers as a toddler, reinforces to her the importance of patience in deciding the Whitecaps’ future.While the luster of a professional league continually lingers, the Whitecaps stay closely aligned with and protective of their original mission, to provide a top-quality outlet for women’s hockey players. A majority of the roster is not constituted of national team players — they are mothers, coaches and other women with nonhockey full-time jobs.One such player, Amy Stech, who joined the Whitecaps in 2010, is nervous and excited about the prospect of expansion, which might not leave roster spots for players like her.“There’d be tough cuts,” Stech said. “But if that’s what needs to happen to grow the sport, a lot of us could see the big picture and allow that to happen.”AdvertisementCoyne has no regrets about forgoing other professional hockey options.After she graduated from Northeastern, with a second Olympic appearance in her sights, joining the Whitecaps was an easy decision, she said, helped by a close relationship with Halldorson. Much of her life was based in the Midwest.A native of the Chicago area, Coyne works for the Chicago Blackhawks in fan and community development, including expansion of the team’s initiatives in girls’ hockey. She reasoned that commuting to the East Coast would not have been beneficial on several fronts.“I see my teammates out East, the stress that they’re under with the contract-based salaries and the pay cuts that are going on internally,” Coyne said. “I’ve been provided a stress-free environment with great people, great teammates and great competition. For now, I do think it’s good that we’re independent here, but I foreshadow that they will be in a league one day, and it will grow and this team will be the backbone of that.”A version of this article appears in print on January 21, 2017, on Page D1 of the New York edition with the headline: Nomads in No Hurry to Change.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.