
Sports of The Times By                     
 WILLIAM C. RHODEN
 
APRIL 3, 2016
HOUSTON — Marcus Paige and Jalen Brunson represent two sides of college basketball’s most vexing issue: How old should a college player be before having an opportunity to play in the N.B.A.?Paige, North Carolina’s senior all-American guard, and Brunson, a starting freshman guard for Villanova, will face each other on Monday in the N.C.A.A. men’s basketball championship game in Houston.While Brunson is the hotshot recruit, Paige is a billboard for staying in college for four years. He truly knows the ups and downs of a college career.After Saturday’s impressive 83-66 victory over Syracuse, Paige said he was able to savor the moment a bit more because he was older.Advertisement“I think it’s because I’m older,” Paige said, “and because this is the first time. After failing to get here so many times, you finally get here. That’s what kind of makes you able to cherish the moment more.”Over his career, Paige has experienced the highs and the lows. Losses here, losses there.Will Brunson opt for the N.B.A. after one season? Or will he follow in the footsteps of his father, Rick Brunson? The elder Brunson was a four-year starter for Temple from the 1991-92 season to 1994-95.Temple reached the round of 8 in 1993 when the Owls were beaten by Michigan’s Fab Five. The elder Brunson was an undrafted free agent. He played in Australia, then in the Continental Basketball Association. In the N.B.A. he played for the Portland Trail Blazers, the Knicks, the Chicago Bulls, the Toronto Raptors, the Los Angeles Clippers and others.He finished his career here in Houston, and will watch his son play as a freshman for the national championship.“This is so surreal,” he said. “Every morning I wake up and I pinch myself. Nothing I’ve accomplished in my life compares to watching my son do this. This is more than anything I could imagine.”AdvertisementUnlike so many freshman in the “one and done” era, Jalen Brunson has a scale and a perspective to use before he leaps to the N.B.A.He watched his father get cut eight times. During the summer his father made him ride his bike around the track as he ran his daily five miles.And this was just to hold down the 15th roster spot.After Saturday’s 95-51 victory over Oklahoma, Jalen Brunson said he knew who his father was as a player and knew how he was able to play for nine seasons.Jalen Brunson remembers as if it were yesterday.“Just being able to watch him, later in his career, and see how hard he had to work just to be where he was,” the younger Brunson recalled. “It wasn’t like he was a star on any team. He was a backup, a journeyman. I gained so much respect for him seeing how hard he had to work for that.”Brunson was noncommittal about when and if he might leave school. But he said he knew this much: The N.B.A. is not the candy land many of his peers may think it is.“If I want to be one of those players in the N.B.A. who just stays on one team, who’s a franchise player,” Brunson said, “I’ve got to do a lot more. It’s a process. It’s something he’s instilled in me.”Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.Leaving college after a year has become a vanity issue, a measure of talent: If a player leaves after one season, it means he is highly skilled. Stay and that’s a signal of less talent.Jalen Brunson has the advantage of knowing that longer may mean better.The elder Brunson does not want his son to have the kind of career he had, with multiple stops and one-year stands.“As a parent I am trying to prevent that,” Rick Brunson said. “You always want to give your son an easier path. He does have the mental tenacity to do what I did, but as a father I don’t want him to make the mistakes that I made.”AdvertisementMany of the stories about the Brunsons’ relationship involve how intense Rick is, how hard he is on Jalen.The reason, Rick Brunson said, is that he himself did not work hard in college, and that made him travel the long meandering road as a pro.He did just enough to get by.“I didn’t work my tail off in college as I should have,” he said. “I didn’t live in the gym. I was going to parties, I was hanging out. I was living the college life. I was enjoying myself. I was in college, I was going to be there for four years.”The message he has drilled into his son since high school has been the opposite: Be the last one out of the gym, every day. Be the first one in the gym, every day.“And shoot. Shoot. Shoot.”I don’t think Brunson has to worry about his son’s work ethic, or his focus. As a college player, the younger Brunson may be more like Paige than his fun-loving father.After North Carolina disposed of Syracuse on Saturday, I asked Paige if he had any advice for his freshman opponent about savoring this moment.“I would hope to not give him any advice for Monday,” Paige said, “but as a senior speaking to a freshman in the moment, you’ve got to cherish this because you never know if you’ll get back.”He added, “It’s one of those things that you’ve got to enjoy the moment, enjoy the team you have, take advantage of soaking this in and use it to build for your future.”Asked about Paige’s advice, Brunson said: “It’s not that easy. I’m trying so hard just to stay focused and keep my eye on the prize. After the season, I’m definitely going to enjoy this magical season, this nice little run we’ve had. As of right now, I’m being focused.”AdvertisementSort of like father, like son.Email: wcr@nytimes.com We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.See More »