
Sports of The Times By                     
 JULIET MACUR
 
APRIL 3, 2016
HOUSTON — At halftime of their national semifinal game against Oklahoma on Saturday, the Villanova Wildcats huddled together, leaning close, some on their tiptoes, to hear their team preacher, Ryan Arcidiacono.His voice was rising, and his face was reddening.“Let’s keep pushing,” he said as several of his teammates whooped and hollered.Then, “We can’t be lackadaisical like we were against Kansas!”And “Don’t talk about it, be about it!”His midgame sermon lasted just a few minutes, eliciting nearly every word of agreement short of “hallelujah” from his fellow Wildcats.AdvertisementThen the preacher, who just happens to be a point guard, returned to the court with his team. The Wildcats started the half 14 points up. They ended 44 points up as they headed to Monday’s championship game against North Carolina.AdvertisementIn a title game between two teams that have been dominant in this tournament, small differences are likely to matter.Could be that North Carolina’s Brice Johnson shows exactly why he is projected to be chosen high in the second round of the N.B.A. draft. Or could be that Villanova’s Josh Hart continues to score and score.Or maybe, just maybe, Arcidiacono will be the difference. Not because of his scoring. After all, in his four years as a Villanova captain, he has averaged fewer than 13 points per game, per season. But it could be because of his leadership and spunk.Those intangibles could mean a lot in a game between teams so evenly matched.Every team at the Final Four has an outstanding leader, the on-court coach who keeps the team on track and motivated. Marcus Paige does that for the Tar Heels. Arcidiacono fills that role for the Wildcats. Those two are the best leaders of college teams in recent history. Very different ones, but so good.Paige is deliberate and thoughtful and admits to “yipping and yapping and coaching” on the court throughout every game. Arcidiacono is fiery and aggressive. Both set the tone for their teams and keep them under control. Both also keep their teammates rapt when they speak — and those fellow players respect them so much that they listen and follow through on their advice. Several Tar Heels said they considered Paige their team dad. Several Wildcats said Arcidiacono was the team’s official big brother.“Marcus’s jersey is going to be hanging from the rafters at Chapel Hill someday,” North Carolina’s Theo Pinson said. “So why shouldn’t I do exactly what he says? We don’t question him.”Guaranteed, though, that Arcidiacono would win a hustle contest against Paige. He is known for chasing loose balls. In chasing them, he often runs into, or over, the scorer’s table.AdvertisementHis acrobatics have become so legendary that upon arriving at NRG Stadium here, Patrick Farrell, a Wildcats senior, took one look at a big video screen that was affixed just below the scorer’s table and laughed.“Ooh, that video board is going to have big problems if there’s a loose ball and Arch goes after it,” Farrell said to an assistant coach. “How long do you think it will last?”Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.Arcidiacono’s legend will last much longer.Villanova Coach Jay Wright considers him one of the greatest players in Wildcats history. Just look how he has helped transform the program, the coach said.Arcidiacono arrived at Villanova in 2012, after the team had gone 13-19 the previous season, and was named a captain. Since then, he has ushered the Wildcats to three Big East conference regular-season titles. Now the team is on the precipice of winning its first national title since 1985.Arcidiacono won’t admit to playing an integral role in that ascendance, but he has. Instead, he insists that he has just been a support player. Of course, he’s one who studies strategies and statistics and the history of the game, and who keeps the team chugging away on the court with both his actions and words — but is still a support player.“Throughout my whole career, I just thought that I’m not the most athletic on the court, but I could try to outsmart everyone to try to gain any little advantage I could have,” Arcidiacono said.One recent advantage: his skills as a speaker. His teammates have noticed that his talent as an orator has improved since his freshman year, when he came in as a more reserved, lead-by-example kind of guy.Farrell, who shares an apartment with Arcidiacono and two other teammates, said Arcidiacono had always talked a lot about the game. Ask him who won, let’s say, the 1997 national championship, and Arcidiacono will know right away — and will also tell you the ’96 champion and the ’98 one, too, Farrell said.This season, though, Arcidiacono has blossomed as a motivational speaker. And all of his teammates have been impressed by the change.Advertisement“I haven’t seen him read any motivational speaking books or watch any videos, but maybe he’s done it when we’re not watching,” Farrell said. “I have seen a few John Wooden books in his room. Whatever it is, he’s speaking to us with more of a flow than he ever has.”Farrell could see Arcidiacono as a coach someday — probably at Villanova, which is about 30 miles from Arcidiacono’s hometown, Langhorne, Pa. If he doesn’t coach, maybe Arcidiacono could become a salesman, like his father, Farrell said.“He would be good selling things, because he can talk anyone into anything,” Farrell said.This week, Arcidiacono’s job is to talk his team into winning a championship. He has said, over and over, by text and by phone and in his prepractice speeches and on the court during workouts, that the Wildcats’ goal is to win it all.One game to go, he said. Just one more push. So everyone must lock in and focus.“We’re all in this together,” he told them before practice on Sunday.All together, with Arcidiacono leading the way, loud and clear.Email: juliet@nytimes.com A version of this article appears in print on April 4, 2016, on Page D1 of the New York edition with the headline: A Player Who May Talk Villanova to a Title.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.See More »