
Sports of The Times By                     
 JULIET MACUR
 
APRIL 2, 2016
HOUSTON — It’s been hard to miss Buddy Hield.There he was at this N.C.A.A. tournament, smiling and trash-talking and sprinting up the court on a fast break to pull up early and sink a 3 from way beyond the arc.And whoa, look at Hield again, cutting through a cluttered lane as if it were a wide-open slice of blacktop on a neighborhood court, for an easy layup that no one could stop.Hield, a senior, was here and there and everywhere as Oklahoma’s star guard. Not just this season, but in past ones, too. So many seasons that it seems like forever.Those Sooners who played with him against Villanova on Saturday in a national semifinal — they looked so familiar. Why? Because most had played with Hield for what amounts to an eternity at this level of college basketball.AdvertisementThe core four in Oklahoma’s starting five this season — three seniors and a junior — each scored at least 1,000 points with the program and started 105 consecutive games together.AdvertisementThat’s one impressive streak, considering all that could have derailed it. Stomachaches. Twisted ankles. Family problems. Suspensions. A coach who wants to change things up, just because. Life choices, as in deciding to forgo this college thing to head to the N.B.A. (Because you know Hield is headed to the N.B.A., where he will shine.)Instead, the core four — Hield, Isaiah Cousins, Ryan Spangler and Jordan Woodard — stuck together, which was great for Oklahoma basketball. It’s why the Sooners came within two victories of a championship.It doesn’t matter that the Sooners were blown out, 95-51, in the semifinal, losing to a Villanova team that made a remarkable 71 percent of its shots from the field. This Oklahoma team was still great for college basketball.The one-and-done mentality, with players heading to the N.B.A. after just one year, has eroded the richness of the college game. It used to be that Final Four teams were chock-full of seniors, players you recognized and rooted for or against, based on years of past performances. That was part of the beauty of the tournament.Not anymore. These days, deep into the championship push, it’s uncommon to see a team dominated by players just months from a college degree. More common is seeing underclassmen, and the best of those young players often have one foot in the N.B.A. draft.Get the big sports news, highlights and analysis from Times journalists, with distinctive takes on games and some behind-the-scenes surprises, delivered to your inbox every week.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.No one could have guessed that the Oklahoma players who came together years ago would have clicked the way they did, and for so long. The chemistry they created was a miracle of recruiting by Oklahoma’s assistants, Coach Lon Kruger said before Saturday’s loss. They assembled a Final Four team from guys who couldn’t be more different.Hield grew up in Eight Mile Rock, a village outside Freeport, the Bahamas, where he, his six siblings and his mother slept on the floor, on two mattresses pushed together. He stole milk crates from his grandmother and sawed off the bottoms of them so he could fashion makeshift basketball hoops. He would nail those hoops onto backboards he built from plywood he had stripped from buildings.AdvertisementLong past sundown, his mother would shout into the night for Hield to come inside — he was keeping everybody awake with his constant dribbling. He arrived at Oklahoma via Sunrise Christian Academy in Wichita, Kan.Then there’s Spangler, a white kid from Bridge Creek — an Oklahoman who had always wanted to play at Oklahoma. The problem was that he wasn’t recruited by the Sooners. So he had to get there via Gonzaga, by transferring after his freshman year.And there’s Woodard, a black kid from Arcadia, Okla., who was actually recruited by Oklahoma.From way across the country came Cousins, from Mount Vernon, N.Y. He’s a tough kid from a tough place, and his mother wanted to get him out of there. Then, bad luck: While on a school break in 2014, he was shot in the shoulder when gang members were shooting at one another. He bounced right back into basketball, without needing surgery.This season’s fifth starter was Khadeem Lattin, whose grandfather David Lattin, known as Big Daddy, was one of the players in the all-black Texas Western starting five that beat Kentucky in the 1966 N.C.A.A. title game.“For those backgrounds to mesh together would have been hard to project,” Kruger said.But sometimes, for some reason, those players do mesh — and it’s magic.Every player came to Oklahoma with his own story. But to succeed, the Sooners leaned on Hield, who averaged 25 points per game — and 29.3 in the N.C.A.A. tournament before his disappointing 9-point outing against Villanova.That dominance could easily stir up jealousy. Yet the others accepted their supporting roles because, honestly, Hield was just so charismatic and likable.Just look at how he reacted to Saturday’s embarrassing loss. He didn’t pout or cry or bury his head beneath a towel after Kruger took him out of the game in the waning minutes. He turned to his teammates and shook their hands and told them he loved them. He assured them that they would be brothers and friends forever.“It hurts now, but this one game doesn’t define us,” Hield told them. “It’s been fun. It’s a tough loss, but life goes on.”AdvertisementEven before the game, Kruger reminded his players to appreciate how special their run was.Good advice, because Hield and his team were not only hard to miss; they will also be missed.Email: juliet@nytimes.com A version of this article appears in print on April 3, 2016, on Page SP2 of the New York edition with the headline: A Familiar Look, Now Rarely Seen.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.See More »