By BEN SHPIGELJAN. 20, 2017
With the Jets owner Woody Johnson heading across the Atlantic to serve as the United States ambassador to Britain, it is not known how his appointment will affect the day-to-day operations of the team. But a recent precedent, in which the Pittsburgh Steelers’ chairman, Dan Rooney, held the ambassadorship to Ireland from 2009 to 2012, offers a possible blueprint.Rooney surrendered his positions on National Football League committees and ceded the day-to-day operations of the Steelers to his son, Art Rooney II, the team’s president. Dan Rooney still made it to Steelers home games, as well as to owners meetings.Get the big sports news, highlights and analysis from Times journalists, with distinctive takes on games and some behind-the-scenes surprises, delivered to your inbox every week.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.Johnson currently serves on three N.F.L. committees — for media, finance and business ventures — but he will probably have to resign from all of them because of his new post overseas.Some owners, like Robert K. Kraft of the New England Patriots, work from an office at the team facility, but Johnson, 69, does not. That could ease the transition to a new management structure for the Jets, with Johnson’s younger brother, Christopher Wold Johnson, said to be in line to assume a more visible, and important, role with the team.It is worth noting that Johnson presides over a Jets hierarchy that is different from previous regimes, in which both Coach Todd Bowles and General Manager Mike Maccagnan report to him. How that will be impacted by his ambassadorship is unclear at the moment.A version of this article appears in print on January 21, 2017, on Page D2 of the New York edition with the headline: How Johnson Might Balance  Ambassadorship and the Jets.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.