AdvertisementSupported bySports BriefingTrevor Siemian is Peyton Manning’s successor.Denver Broncos Coach Gary Kubiak told the team Monday that Siemian would be the starting quarterback in the season opener against the Carolina Panthers on Sept. 8. Siemian will be the first quarterback with zero passing attempts to take over a defending Super Bowl champion in Week 1.Kubiak informed Siemian, Mark Sanchez and Paxton Lynch of his decision before telling their teammates at their morning meeting.Siemian, a seventh-round selection out of Northwestern last year, has just one N.F.L. snap on his résumé, a kneel-down when he was the No. 3 quarterback last year behind Manning and his longtime backup Brock Osweiler. Manning retired a month after Denver’s 24-10 win over the Panthers in Super Bowl 50, and Osweiler left for Houston 48 hours later.General Manager John Elway quickly acquired Sanchez from the Eagles and drafted Lynch in the first round. The Broncos are expected to cut Sanchez.JETS’ HARRIS UNCERTAIN FOR OPENER Jets Coach Todd Bowles said it was too early to know whether linebacker David Harris (shoulder) would be available for the Sept. 11 season opener against Cincinnati. Harris sustained a “bad bruise,” Bowles said, on the final defensive snap before halftime in the Jets’ preseason game against the Giants.Harris, who did not practice Monday, has not missed a game since 2008. BEN SHPIGELCHARGERS’ TOP PICK REACHES ACCORD Defensive end Joey Bosa, San Diego’s top pick, ended his monthlong holdout when he signed a four-year contract.The team announced the signing five days after the two sides went public in their spat over payment of Bosa’s $17 million signing bonus and whether the contract would have offset language. Bosa, the No. 3 overall pick out of Ohio State, was the last rookie to sign. The deal came a day after San Diego’s defense played poorly in a 23-10 exhibition loss at Minnesota.Rick Porcello became the majors’ first 18-game winner and the first Red Sox pitcher in 70 years to open a season 13-0 in Fenway Park, going seven solid innings in Boston’s 9-4 victory over the Tampa Bay Rays. Porcello (18-3) allowed three runs and six hits, striking out seven.Mookie Betts hit his 30th homer, a solo shot, and drove in two runs for the Red Sox.BLUE JAYS TOP ORIOLES Josh Donaldson hit his fourth homer in two days and Jose Bautista also went deep in support of Marco Estrada, leading the Toronto Blue Jays over the Orioles, 5-1.Toronto leads Boston by two games and third-place Baltimore by four games in the American League East.The authorities in Kuwait ordered the police to seize the state’s Olympic committee offices and the soccer association in the latest round of a sporting power struggle.The action on Sunday heightened a standoff that has led to Kuwait’s being suspended by the International Olympic Committee and by FIFA, soccer’s governing body, since October. Kuwait did not take part in this year’s Rio Olympics and will not contest the qualifiers for soccer’s 2018 World Cup.The move came after the government’s sports commission ousted Sheikh Talal Fahad Al-Sabah as head of the Kuwait Football Association and the national Olympic committee. (AGENCE FRANCE-PRESSE)Advertisement