By THE ASSOCIATED PRESSDEC. 20, 2016
Kirk Cousins threw an interception and fumbled near his goal line as the Redskins coughed up their easiest path to the playoffs with a 26-15 loss to the defending N.F.C. champion Carolina Panthers in Washington on Monday night.Washington (7-6-1) could have clinched a playoff berth by winning its final three games, but now it needs help. Carolina (6-8) kept its wild-card hopes alive and dealt a serious blow to the Redskins’ chances with two weeks left in the season.Cousins finished 32 of 47 for 316 yards with far too many missed throws in a game with such high stakes.Panthers quarterback Cam Newton showed no ill effects from a shoulder injury sustained last week, throwing for 300 yards and two touchdowns.AdvertisementJAGUARS INTERESTED IN COUGHLIN The Jacksonville Jaguars are looking to their past to potentially find their future head coach.AdvertisementGeneral Manager Dave Caldwell said Monday that the former Giants coach Tom Coughlin “would be somebody we’d be interested in talking to” about the team’s coaching vacancy.The Jaguars (2-12) fired Gus Bradley after the team’s ninth consecutive loss Sunday. Doug Marrone was named the interim coach Monday. Bradley went 14-48 in four seasons in Jacksonville, the worst winning percentage (.225) of any N.F.L. coach with at least 60 games.Coughlin, 70, was Jacksonville’s first head coach, leading the Jaguars to a 68-60 record in eight seasons (1995-2002). Coughlin resigned last January after 12 seasons with the Giants, but he has made it clear he wants to return to coaching. He is currently serving as a senior adviser to the league’s football operations department.“Tom’s a great man and a great person, and we’ll see where it goes,” Caldwell said. “There will be a lot of guys we’re interested in talking to.”SAVAGE TO START FOR TEXANS Tom Savage will start at quarterback for the Houston Texans against the Cincinnati Bengals on Saturday.Coach Bill O’Brien announced the decision a day after Brock Osweiler was benched against the Jacksonville Jaguars and Savage came on in the second quarter.Savage threw for 260 yards to help Houston rally from a 13-point deficit for a 21-20 win in his first regular-season action since 2014.AdvertisementOsweiler threw two interceptions before he was benched to give him 16 interceptions and 14 touchdowns this season.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.A scheduled game between the host Carolina Hurricanes and the Detroit Red Wings was postponed because of unplayable ice.A Freon leak in the cooling system at PNC Arena was discovered earlier in the day. The issue was fixed, but not in time to restart the game. N.H.L. rules state a game cannot start less than 22 hours before a team’s next scheduled contest, and the Red Wings are set to play at Tampa Bay at 7:30 p.m. Tuesday.“I’ve seen games canceled for ice storms and weather, but this is the first one I’ve seen because of a seal in the compressors,” Carolina General Manager Ron Francis said.PREDATORS DEFEAT FLYERS Ryan Ellis had the only score in the shootout as the Nashville Predators gave the host Philadelphia Flyers their second straight loss, 2-1, after a 10-game winning streak.Los Angeles Clippers forward Blake Griffin will have minor surgery on his right knee this week and is expected to be sidelined for three to six weeks. The Clippers said the surgery would be “a routine arthroscopic procedure.”HAWKS OVERCOME WESTBROOK’S 46 POINTS Paul Millsap hit the go-ahead 10-footer with 12.7 seconds left, and the Atlanta Hawks overcame Russell Westbrook’s 46 points to beat the host Oklahoma City Thunder, 110-108.N.B.A. TWEAKS ALL-STAR VOTING The selections for the N.B.A. All-Star Game in New Orleans on Feb. 19 will be based on voting by fans (50 percent), players (25 percent) and news media (25 percent), the league announced. Previously, only fans made the selection.Sadio Mane grabbed the winner in the fourth minute of injury time as Liverpool beat host Everton, 1-0, to move into second place in the Premier League.AdvertisementDaniel Sturridge, a substitute, made a low long-range shot that dribbled against the post, and Mane tapped in the rebound. Liverpool moved above Manchester City and back to 6 points behind Chelsea, which has won its last 11 matches.The Pirates bolstered their bullpen, agreeing to a two-year, $11 million contract with reliever Daniel Hudson.Hudson, 29, was 3-2 with a 5.22 E.R.A. in 70 appearances for the Arizona Diamondbacks in 2016.Katie Lou Samuelson scored eight of her 26 points during a key third-quarter run, and No. 1 Connecticut beat No. 12 Ohio State, 82-63, for the host Huskies’ 85th consecutive victory. The Huskies (10-0) are five games away from matching their N.C.A.A. record, set from 2008 to 2010.A version of this article appears in print on December 20, 2016, on Page B8 of the New York edition with the headline: Panthers Complicate Redskins’ Playoff Path.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.