Two youth programs have sprung up in Marshall, where Pop Warner, Boys & Girls Club and seventh-grade tackle teams were discontinued over safety concerns.By KEN BELSONDEC. 1, 2016
MARSHALL, Tex. — Two years ago, as fears over head injuries and the long-term consequences of collisions on the field intensified, this small town in the heart of football country took the unlikely step of trying to roll back tackle football.The junior high school scrapped the seventh-grade tackle team because of safety concerns. The Pop Warner youth program had shut down because of a lack of players. This year, worried about potential liabilities, the local Boys & Girls Club dropped tackle football.Yet in late October, the crack and thud of helmets and shoulder pads punctuated the warm evening air as about 100 boys ran into one another, a sign that tackle football is not done here after all. The players were on the Marshall Longhorns, one of two programs that started in the past year, organized by parents and coaches who believe tackle football has its virtues and is more fun for the boys.“My kids love it, so I love it,” Qwanneshea Johnson said as she watched her sons Quentravious, 11, and Jourdan, 7, practice at West End Park. “They love the contact, and I don’t really worry because they teach them the fundamentals.”AdvertisementThe emergence of the Longhorns and the Conquering Lions, a rival organization, is a sign of the complex attitudes toward tackle football as parents across the nation wrestle with the decision of whether to let their children play.Participation in tackle football by boys 6 to 12 has fallen by nearly 20 percent since 2009, according to the Sports and Fitness Industry Association, although last year it rose by 1.2 percent, to 1.23 million.Schools in several states, including Maine, Missouri and New Jersey, have shut down their tackle football programs because of safety concerns and a shortage of players.Prospective players, including many in Marshall, have been steered toward other sports, leading coaches, players and fans who feel that the dangers of football have been exaggerated to fill the vacuum. They think that boys should be challenged, not coddled, and that football is a good way to challenge them.That sentiment is acute in this northeastern Texas town of 24,000, a former railroad crossroad. A proliferation of teaching colleges and cultural institutions once garnered Marshall the nickname the Athens of Texas. Yet it is also a football hotbed, having sent numerous players to top colleges and professional teams, including the Hall of Fame quarterback Y. A. Tittle.AdvertisementThe two new youth programs grew easily, even as more boys opted to play baseball and soccer.Started last year by former coaches from Pop Warner and the Boys & Girls Club, the Lions and the Longhorns have each filled four teams of boys 5 to 12 years old, about 200 players in all.The makeup of the teams, however, reflects a socioeconomic undercurrent that has not gone unnoticed here: Most of the players on the new tackle teams are African-American — the town is about 40 percent black — and come from communities where the sport is more often seen as a pathway to eventual prosperity.Despite the enthusiasm for the sport, the debate over the virtues of tackle football is far from settled, whatever the longstanding tradition has been.“If he wants to play in junior high school, that’s fine, but I’d just as soon he not play football,” said Matt Moore, who is happy his 10-year-old son prefers baseball and flag football. “Now that we know about the dangers, you can no longer claim ignorance.”Still, for every parent like Moore, there are others who believe tackle football provides a good outlet for boys in need of discipline and exercise. They recognize that the sport has potentially devastating effects but believe that better-trained coaches can reduce the risks.“It can be a barbaric sport, but these coaches teach them the proper technique,” said Chad Hygh, a former high school linebacker whose 9-year-old son, Caleb, plays for the Lions. “Some of the steps they are taking to make it safer are good. There was a lot more hitting in my day.”Many of the coaches for the Lions and the Longhorns have taken the Heads Up course, a program aimed at teaching safe tackling techniques. It was developed by the nonprofit organization U.S.A. Football, which has received tens of millions of dollars from the N.F.L.Critics have accused U.S.A. Football of exaggerating the benefits of the program, but the tackle football coaches in Marshall endorse it. They say they are confident that football can be made safer if players are taught proper tackling habits at a young age.Advertisement“Safety is always a concern, but everywhere you go, there’s a concern,” said Desmond Andrus, a founder of the Lions. “But if you’re always worried, you make it safer. The N.F.L. is doing everything they can to make it better, and that’s the same thing we’re doing here.”In conversations with parents and coaches in Marshall, it was clear that the notion of football as the best way to toughen youngsters and potentially earn them a college education was more closely held in the black community. Indeed, most of the members of the Lions and the Longhorns, as well as many of the players on the local high school team, the Mavericks, are black.This is consistent with support for football among African-Americans elsewhere in the country. According to an HBO Real Sports/Marist Poll released last month, 43 percent of whites and Latinos are less likely to let their children play football because of the risk of brain trauma, compared with 28 percent among African-Americans.The divide between white and black extends beyond the playing field in a town where sit-ins and civil rights marches were common in the 1960s, and where the economic gap between white and black families remains wide. The median household income among African-American families in Marshall is $25,616, nearly 40 percent less than among white families.Julius Maloy, the general manager of the Longhorns, said his organization had received few donations or sponsorships from the business community.“The problem is people don’t want to invest in kids from the projects,” Maloy said, motioning to public housing buildings where some of the players live.Still, coaches on the Lions and the Longhorns — nearly all of whom are black — say that football strengthens their community. Many parents who watched their sons practice said that they were grateful their children had a safe place to exercise and that the coaches kept after them to study and respect others.“It’s a way of keeping kids off the streets, giving them something to do,” said Marlon Hawkins, a Longhorns coach whose son and nephew play for the group. “Maybe half of them are dreaming of playing in the N.F.L., and we tell them: ‘The ball there on the ground will take you around the world. It’s your ticket.’”Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.Andrus and the Lions’ other founder, Clarence Haggerty, agreed. Beyond teaching the fundamentals of the sport, they try to be role models to the boys, some of whom do not have fathers at home. The Lions’ motto, “Play hard; pray harder,” is reinforced at every practice.AdvertisementAndrus and Haggerty coached at the Boys & Girls Club. Bryan Partee, the club’s director, had heard concerns from board members about the safety of the game and the club’s potential exposure to lawsuits over injuries. With support for tackle football at the club in doubt, Andrus and Haggerty left to start the Lions. Unlike the Boys & Girls Club, whose teams played only in Marshall, the Lions intended to travel to other towns to play, something that would expand the boys’ horizons.“It brings out his character to hit a kid you’ve never seen before,” Andrus said.Partee, whose father, Dennis Partee, was a punter and kicker in the N.F.L. from 1968 to 1975, defended the decision to drop tackle football. He said that Clint Harper, the football coach at Marshall High School, who pushed to end the seventh-grade tackle program in 2014, told him that many youngsters were not taught the right way to tackle and were susceptible to injury.“We’re not on a crusade — we’re on the side of safety,” said Partee, whose soccer and flag football teams have grown considerably. “The contact stuff is just outside our youth development strategy.”Partee said that some parents felt as if the club had “jumped the gun” by ending its tackle program but that he was not anti-football. He sold the club’s football equipment to the Lions, and he said that Andrus had helped children and was “filling a need.”The devotion of the coaches was obvious on a Saturday in late October when the Lions traveled about an hour to Henderson to play their last regular-season games. Andrus and the other coaches were on the field from the first game, which involved 5- and 6-year-olds playing flag football, to the fourth game, a matchup of 11- and 12-year-olds — spending about seven hours in the hot sun.The coaches were stern, urging the players not to back down and to hit anyone who hit them. In the second game, for 7- and 8-year-olds, the team from Henderson built a 30-0 lead by halftime. One Lion cried after his wrist was stepped on. Another boy nicknamed Bran Bran walked off the field with his head down after Henderson scored a touchdown.“Everyone hold your head up and dry your tears,” yelled Bob Boyd, one of the few white coaches. “They did exactly what they wanted to do. They intimidated you.”Linda Morris, whose grandson, Cordiay Wilbert, was on the team and who helped the Lions on the sidelines, came next.Advertisement“When they hit you, you hit ’em back,” she said. “Be tough. This is the game of football.”Andrus took a couple of boys aside to give them tackling tips and to offer encouragement amid the tough love.Soon, the players returned to the field, where they smacked helmets as they tried to tackle opponents. Cedric Wrighten, whose collegiate football career was derailed by concussions, said he and the other coaches taught the boys to keep their heads up. He was confident enough in their instruction that he let his two sons play for the Lions. They “love football, but I got to make sure they play the right way,” he said.For all the angst about head trauma nationally, the parents of the Lions and Longhorns players said that the coaches were taking the right approach and that football would remain as strong as ever in Marshall.“My son has changed 110 percent” since joining the Lions, said Rocky Underwood, whose boy, Chevy, plays on the team for 11- and 12-year-olds.At first, “when he got hit, he cried,” Underwood said. “But football’s made him tougher. Like my wife said, if it’s not broken or bleeding, you need to get back out there.”A version of this article appears in print on December 4, 2016, on Page SP6 of the New York edition with the headline: Tackle  Football  Makes a Comeback.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.