DEC. 17, 2016
Grambling State won the Celebration Bowl when it blocked a late extra-point kick, which had been set back 15 yards by an excessive-celebration penalty, to hold off North Carolina Central, 10-9, in Atlanta on Saturday.Grambling’s Joseph McWilliams swatted kicker Brandon McLaren’s 35-yard attempt with 2 minutes 14 seconds remaining to preserve the Tigers’ lead and give them the national championship for historically black colleges.Down by 10-3, North Carolina Central had a chance to pull even after Quentin Atkinson shook loose and caught a 39-yard touchdown pass from a scrambling Malcolm Bell. But Atkinson took off his helmet while reveling with the crowd, drawing a personal-foul penalty.“I do want to apologize to my team for that,” Atkinson said, “because that was a selfish act. I’m not selfish, but it was the heat of the moment, and I was excited to bring the team back with an outstanding play.”AdvertisementRUSHING RECORD BROKEN Donnel Pumphrey broke the Football Bowl Subdivision career rushing record in his final college game, running for 115 yards and a touchdown to lead San Diego State over Houston, 34-10, in the Las Vegas Bowl.AdvertisementPumphrey passed the former Wisconsin star Ron Dayne’s mark of 6,397 yards on a 15-yard run early in the fourth quarter, finishing his career with 6,405 yards.ANOTHER DIVISION II CROWN Northwest Missouri State won its second consecutive Division II national championship, 29-3, over North Alabama in bitterly cold and snowy weather in Kansas City, Kan. Kyle Zimmerman and Randy Schmidt each threw touchdown passes for the Bearcats.F.C.S. FINAL SET Hunter Wells fired a 6-yard touchdown pass to Kevin Rader as time expired and visiting Youngstown State beat Eastern Washington, 40-38, to advance to the Football Championship Subdivision national title game.Get the big sports news, highlights and analysis from Times journalists, with distinctive takes on games and some behind-the-scenes surprises, delivered to your inbox every week.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.AROUND COLLEGE FOOTBALL Richard McQuarley ran for two short touchdowns as New Mexico won its second bowl game in more than half a century, 23-20, over Texas-San Antonio in the New Mexico Bowl at Albuquerque.  Justice Hansen threw three touchdown passes to Kendall Sanders as Arkansas State beat Central Florida, 31-13, in the Cure Bowl in Orlando, Fla.  Marcus Cox rushed for 143 yards and a touchdown and Michael Rubino kicked the go-ahead 39-yard field goal as Appalachian State beat Toledo, 31-28, in the Camellia Bowl in Montgomery, Ala.  Nick Ferrer threw three touchdown passes to Seth Coate, and Saint Francis of Indiana beat previously undefeated Baker University of Kansas, 38-17, to win the National Association of Intercollegiate Athletics title in Daytona Beach, Fla.Bernard Hopkins, 51, was knocked out of the ring in the eighth round of what he had said would be his farewell fight against Joe Smith Jr. in Inglewood, Calif. Hopkins, a former light heavyweight champion who had never been knocked out in his career, was knocked through the ropes by a left hand, according to The Ring magazine. Smith won by technical knockout.Russell Westbrook had a career-high 22 assists in his 50th triple-double, adding 26 points and 11 rebounds to help the Oklahoma City Thunder beat the visiting Phoenix Suns, 114-101. Westbrook, the league’s leading scorer, is averaging double figures in points, rebounds and assists.Jimmy Vesey and Mats Zuccarello each scored in a penalty shootout as the Rangers beat the host Nashville Predators, 2-1. Rick Nash scored in regulation and Henrik Lundqvist made 31 saves, including stopping Ryan Johansen to start the shootout.AdvertisementAROUND THE N.H.L. Adam Cracknell scored a tiebreaking goal early in the third period to lead the host Dallas Stars over the Philadelphia Flyers, 3-1, ending their 10-game winning streak.  Derick Brassard scored the go-ahead goal early in the second period and the Ottawa Senators beat the visiting Devils, 3-1, extending their losing streak to five.Chelsea won its 11th straight in a Premier League season for the first time when Diego Costa’s header secured a 1-0 win at Crystal Palace. Chelsea surged to 9 points ahead in the league exactly a year after José Mourinho was fired as coach with the club near the relegation zone.COLLEGE TEAM SUSPENDED The men’s soccer team at Washington University in St. Louis was indefinitely suspended late Friday for what the university called sexually explicit comments and other inappropriate behavior toward the women’s soccer team in an online document from 2015.Malik Monk set a Kentucky freshman record with 47 points and hit the go-ahead 3-pointer with 16.7 seconds left to lead the No. 6 Wildcats past No. 7 North Carolina, 103-100, in Las Vegas. Justin Jackson scored 34 for the Tar Heels.BUTLER UPSETS INDIANA Kelan Martin scored 28 points as No. 18 Butler beat No. 9 Indiana, 83-78, in Indianapolis to end the Hoosiers’ five-game winning streak.A version of this article appears in print on December 18, 2016, on Page SP8 of the New York edition with the headline: Grambling Wins Title on Blocked Extra Point.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.