
On Soccer By                     
RORY SMITH

NOV. 17, 2016
Nothing, perhaps, has better captured what it means when Atlético Madrid faces Real Madrid than what Luis Aragonés uttered a few minutes before the final of the 1992 Copa del Rey.Aragonés, the Atlético coach at the time, had gathered his players in the dressing room of Real’s Santiago Bernabéu Stadium for a final pep talk. First, he outlined his tactical plan. Then, he turned the rhetoric up a notch. Atlético was on enemy territory, he said, but there was nothing to fear, no reason to feel intimidated or inferior.“There are 50,000 fans out there who would die for you,” he told his players. “You must die for them.”There will be plenty of managers echoing Aragonés across Europe this weekend. After a two-week hiatus for the year’s final international break, the continent’s major leagues return with a flourish, with showpiece encounters dotting the schedules in England, Spain, Italy and Germany.AdvertisementWithin the space of 10 hours Saturday, Manchester United will play host to Arsenal, Bayern Munich and Borussia Dortmund will meet in the Bundesliga, and then local hostilities will be resumed in Madrid. Twenty-four hours after that, Italy will settle down to watch Inter and A.C. Milan meet in that city’s derby.AdvertisementComing so soon after domestic matters were set aside to make space for international affairs, it seems almost a show of strength, Europe’s great leagues flexing their muscles and demonstrating that clubs, not countries, draw the crowds and command the attention.More than that, however, the weekend is a chance for all four leagues to showcase their wares to a global audience in the continuing — and ever more fevered — battle to win both fans and sponsors across the world.In that sense, the Premier League’s offering is the most fitting. Manchester United versus Arsenal is not a derby, not in a traditional intracity sense, but so rich is its recent mythology — from Roy Keane’s thinly veiled threats to Patrick Vieira to Cesc Fàbregas’s flinging pizza — that it has become, more than any other individual match, the defining clash of the Premier League era.This edition has an added dose of soap opera drama, of course, in that it represents the latest chapter in the long rivalry between the clubs’ managers, José Mourinho and Arsène Wenger.The timing is perfect, just a few weeks since a biography of Mourinho was published in which it was claimed that the Manchester United manager told a friend he would one day encounter Wenger “outside the pitch and I will break his face.”Wenger has insisted that revelation would not stop him from “respecting the ritual of the Premier League” and shaking Mourinho’s hand. But he said he was confident, too, that “it is not the controversy that makes the audience, it is the quality of the game.”This is a weekend on which that theory can, to some extent, be tested: After all, purely in terms of the caliber of the teams involved, it is hard to make a case for United-Arsenal being any higher than the third most attractive match this weekend.Advertisement“You could not ask for more,” Hans-Joachim Watzke, chief executive of Borussia Dortmund, said of Saturday’s visit by Bayern Munich. “The two biggest, most important, most successful teams in Germany playing each other.”Get the big sports news, highlights and analysis from Times journalists, with distinctive takes on games and some behind-the-scenes surprises, delivered to your inbox every week.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.Dortmund-Bayern, certainly, seems to shade its English equivalent on paper: Both teams are in the Champions League; Dortmund is Bayern’s only likely rival for the Bundesliga championship; and between them the sides could name as many as 12 World Cup winners.If anything, though, the true highlight of the weekend is in Spain, where Real and Atlético have now achieved twice what their counterparts in Milan could never quite pull off.In the early 2000s, Milan seemed to be Europe’s soccer capital. Inter and Milan were both frequent contenders for the Serie A title, and both were regulars in the final stages of the Champions League. In 2003 and 2005, only the vagaries of the Champions League draw — they met in the semifinal and then the quarterfinal rounds — prevented Milan from becoming the first city to send two representatives to the competition’s final.Hernán Crespo, the Argentine striker who represented Inter against Milan in 2003 and Milan against Inter two years later, said those Champions League meetings proved it was, then, “a game of international importance.” Though he is adamant the match remains a “beautiful” derby, few would afford it that status now. The clubs will meet Sunday evening in varying states of disrepair: Inter with new Chinese owners and a new manager, Stefano Pioli, and Milan reliant on a raft of young hopefuls.Instead, the sport’s European power base has shifted west to Madrid, which, in two of the last three seasons, has gone where no city has gone before and seen its two biggest teams, Atlético and Real, contest the Champions League final. This, now, is the most compelling, most delicately poised, highest quality city derby in the world.“There is a real sense of pride that both teams are so strong,” said José Antonio Martín, a chronicler of Atlético’s history under the pseudonym Petón. He is in no doubt that the old spirit, as exemplified by Aragonés, endures, but those meetings on soccer’s ultimate stage have fostered something approaching a common bond.“It hurt losing the two Champions League finals, of course, but the atmosphere around the games was something to cherish,” he said.This, then, is the weekend’s standout match, and yet audience numbers are unlikely to reflect that. After all, despite Wenger’s assertion, it is not the caliber of soccer that decides how many choose to watch. More often, the decisive factor is what time the match starts.AdvertisementManchester United and Arsenal will kick off at 12:30 p.m. in Britain on Saturday. That puts the match at a disadvantage in the United States — all 10 of the most-watched games on NBC last season started at lunchtime on Saturdays in New York — but well positioned to attract a prime-time audience in Asia.The Bundesliga has done all it can to step in. Fox Sports will broadcast Dortmund’s meeting with Bayern live on network television, rather than its usual cable home, in an attempt to reach as many viewers as possible. The game will be shown in every country in the world except North Korea, allowing the Bundesliga to estimate the game’s technical reach — the number of people who could watch, should they choose to — at one billion.Of course, only a fraction of that number will tune in. Audience figures are not only rarely published but routinely overestimated.The Premier League’s data, for example, show that a total “captured audience” — people watching at home, on television — of 42 million saw its matches in China alone last season. Spread across more than 100 live games, that equates to an average of only a few hundred thousand per match.The so-called noncaptured audience, those watching on smartphones or in public places, doubled that number but still signaled that fewer than a million people watched any one game in a country with a population of 1.4 billion.Spanish, Italian and German league games all fared worse; as Michael Bolingbroke, the former Inter chief executive, observed, Italy is not helped by its tendency to stage the biggest games in the European evening, when Asia is “asleep.” Spain does the same.That explains, of course, why all four leagues are so determined to expand their reach as much as possible: The potential for growth is almost exponential. This weekend, all four have a chance to win new converts, some of the most intense divides in sport bridged in the service of a single, unified aim.A version of this article appears in print on November 18, 2016, on Page B9 of the New York edition with the headline: On Rivalry Weekend, Battle Is for Viewers.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.See More »