DEC. 16, 2016
Russell Wilson threw three touchdown passes, Tyler Lockett had 130 yards receiving and a score, and the Seahawks won the N.F.C. West title with a 24-3 victory in Seattle over the Los Angeles Rams on Thursday night.After slogging through the first half, Wilson threw a 1-yard touchdown pass to Doug Baldwin late in the third quarter for a 17-3 lead and then put the game away on a 57-yard touchdown strike to Lockett on the second play of the fourth quarter.Jared Goff completed 13 of 25 passes for 135 yards for the Rams before leaving in the fourth quarter to be checked for a possible concussion.PATRIOTS CLAIM RECEIVER The New England Patriots claimed receiver Michael Floyd off waivers, three days after he was arrested on suspicion of driving under the influence in Scottsdale, Ariz.AdvertisementThe arrest caused the Arizona Cardinals to release Floyd on Wednesday. Floyd, 27, was found unconscious behind the wheel of a running vehicle at an intersection.AdvertisementThe Patriots need a receiver, as Danny Amendola is ailing. Floyd, a five-year veteran, had 33 receptions for 446 yards and four touchdowns with the Cardinals this season.(REUTERS)GIANTS MAY HAVE BROKEN RADIO RULE The Giants might have violated an N.F.L. rule by using a radio briefly during Sunday night’s win over the Dallas Cowboys. Coach Ben McAdoo was shown on television using a walkie-talkie on the sideline during the fourth quarter of the Giants’ 10-7 victory. The league has a policy that prohibits coaches from using a radio during a game.Virginia Tech Athletic Director Whit Babcock confirmed that a former assistant coach turned broadcaster at Wake Forest had provided a former Hokies assistant with “some game plan information” in 2014.Babcock said in a statement that he had no indication that the information was shared with staff members or used during the game. He did not identify the Hokies assistant. Wake Forest won that game, 6-3, in double overtime.Virginia Tech joined Louisville and Army in acknowledging involvement in the scandal.Sean Woods resigned as Morehead State’s coach after an independent investigation into allegations by two players that Woods had assaulted them.Woods resigned two days after being charged with misdemeanor battery in Evansville, Ind. Two players said they had had altercations with Woods during a Nov. 19 game at the University of Evansville.RECORD ROUT BY BAYLOR In the biggest Division I women’s basketball rout ever, No. 3 Baylor overwhelmed Winthrop, 140-32, in Waco, Tex.AdvertisementRick Nash scored an unassisted goal short-handed in the third period, and two Rangers goalies combined to shut out the Stars, 2-0, in Dallas.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.Nash broke up a pass by Jamie Benn near the Rangers’ blue line, skated down the ice and put a snap shot past Dallas goalie Antti Niemi at 7 minutes 8 seconds. Mats Zuccarello added an empty-net goal.Henrik Lundqvist started in net for the Rangers for the first time in six games but left for 5:31 of the first period after the Stars’ Cody Eakin hit him behind the net. Lundqvist finished with 27 saves. His brief replacement, Antti Raanta, had none.BLACKHAWKS 5, ISLANDERS 4 Richard Panik scored the tiebreaking goal with 6 minutes 13 seconds left in the third period to lift Chicago to a victory at Barclays Center.BLUES 5, DEVILS 2 Vladimir Tarasenko had a goal and two assists and Alex Pietrangelo scored the go-ahead goal as host St. Louis beat the Devils.Major League Soccer Commissioner Don Garber announced plans for the league’s expansion to 28 teams, including a deadline for prospective owners’ applications and a new franchise fee.The fee for the two teams expected to be granted next year is jumping to $150 million. Garber also set a Jan. 31, 2017, deadline for applications by potential owners or ownership groups.The league has expanded to 22 teams with the addition of Atlanta United F.C. and Minnesota United F.C., which will debut next season. The Los Angeles Football Club will join the league in 2018 as the 23rd team.The league announced that it was “making progress” on plans to add a team in Miami — a bid that includes David Beckham — that would bring the league to 24.AdvertisementU.S.A. Gymnastics is under scrutiny after an Indianapolis Star investigation into claims by at least 368 young gymnasts that they were sexually assaulted by coaches or other adults involved in the sport.The newspaper’s article came on the heels of its report in August that found that U.S.A. Gymnastics officials had failed to alert the authorities when its coaches were accused of sexual abuse.The Star reported that many of the adults accused of misconduct had been allowed to move from gym to gym, including some that were certified by U.S.A. Gymnastics.(AGENCE FRANCE-PRESSE)A version of this article appears in print on December 16, 2016, on Page B11 of the New York edition with the headline: Seahawks Beat Rams to Clinch N.F.C. West.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.