By THE ASSOCIATED PRESSDEC. 14, 2016
Running back Adrian Peterson was back on the practice field for the first time in nearly three months for the Minnesota Vikings, who hope he can give them the jolt they need to chase down a playoff berth.Peterson’s rehabilitation of a torn meniscus in his right knee is nearly complete. Wearing a black brace on his right knee, Peterson took handoffs from quarterback Sam Bradford, ran routes and went through some agility drills.Peterson had said in an interview with D.J. Skee of dashradio.com that he was targeting the Dec. 24 game in Green Bay, Wis., for his first game since the injury occurred, against the Packers in Week 2.CARDINALS RELEASE RECEIVER The Arizona Cardinals released wide receiver Michael Floyd two days after he was arrested on charges of driving under the influence and failure to obey a police officer. In five seasons, Floyd caught 242 passes for 3,739 yards and 23 touchdowns.AdvertisementTen Minnesota football players, who were suspended this week after a fresh investigation into a reported sexual assault at an off-campus apartment in September, will not play in the Holiday Bowl against Washington State.AdvertisementThe same allegations led to three-game suspensions for four of the players earlier this season, and they are now benched again, along with six of their teammates.Bojan Bogdanovic scored 23 points, Sean Kilpatrick had 22, and the Nets sent the Los Angeles Lakers to their eighth straight loss with a 107-97 victory at Barclays Center.Brook Lopez added 20 points for the Nets, who again played without Jeremy Lin but avoided a third consecutive defeat. Trevor Booker grabbed a season-high 18 rebounds.GRIZZLIES 93, CAVALIERS 85 Troy Daniels scored 20 points, and Marc Gasol had 17 points and 11 rebounds to lead Memphis to a victory over the short-handed Cleveland Cavaliers, who left their top three scorers at home to rest.LeBron James, Kyrie Irving and Kevin Love did not make the trip for the Cavaliers, leaving an average of more than 70 points per game back in Cleveland.CLIPPERS 113, MAGIC 108 Austin Rivers made seven 3-pointers and scored 25 points in his return from a concussion to help Los Angeles win at Orlando.Bryan Rust flipped a backhander past Tuukka Rask 1 minute 24 seconds into overtime to give the Penguins a 4-3 victory over the Boston Bruins in Pittsburgh. Matt Murray stopped 41 of the 44 shots he faced to improve to 10-0-1 in his last 11 home starts.AdvertisementSHARKS 4, SENATORS 3 Kevin Labanc scored the lone goal in four rounds of a shootout to give San Jose a victory at Ottawa. Joe Pavelski, Brent Burns and Chris Tierney scored in regulation for the Sharks, and Martin Jones made 29 saves.Get the big sports news, highlights and analysis from Times journalists, with distinctive takes on games and some behind-the-scenes surprises, delivered to your inbox every week.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.The Chicago Cubs made another addition to their bullpen after the departure of Aroldis Chapman, agreeing to a one-year, $6 million contract with reliever Koji Uehara.Uehara, a 41-year-old right-hander, spent the past four years with Boston. He went 2-3 with a 3.45 E.R.A. and seven saves in 50 appearances last season.BOTH SIDES APPROVE LABOR DEAL Owners and players have ratified baseball’s five-year collective bargaining agreement, extending their labor peace to 26 years, through 2021.After eight work stoppages from 1972 to 1995, the sides have negotiated deals without a strike or a lockout in 2002, in 2006, in 2011 and this year.A Cesc Fàbregas goal earned Chelsea a 1-0 win at Sunderland, a 10th straight victory in the Premier League and a 6-point lead over Liverpool and Arsenal.In other Premier League matches, Adam Lallana scored two goals and set up another to inspire Liverpool to a 3-0 home victory over Middlesbrough; Manchester City lost midfielder Ilkay Gundogan to a serious knee injury but defeated visiting Watford, 2-0; and Zlatan Ibrahimovic scored an 88th-minute winner for Manchester United, which collected consecutive victories in the league for the first time since August with a 2-1 win at Crystal Palace.SECOND ACT TO BEGIN AGAINST SERBIA Bruce Arena’s second stint as the United States soccer coach will start with an exhibition against Serbia on Jan. 29 at Qualcomm Stadium in San Diego. The match is the first of two planned exhibitions before World Cup qualifying resumes March 24 at home against Honduras.A version of this article appears in print on December 15, 2016, on Page B14 of the New York edition with the headline: Louisville Says Wake Forest Broadcaster Shared Plays.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.