By THE ASSOCIATED PRESSDEC. 9, 2016
The police are investigating a break-in and the scrawling of racist graffiti at the Moonachie, N.J., home of Giants fullback Nikita Whitlock.The break-in is being investigated as a hate crime, Sgt. Richard Behrens told The Record of Hackensack, N.J. Jewelry and electronics were also stolen, he added. Whitlock, who is black, showed reporters the graffiti on walls inside his home.Whitlock is on injured reserve with a foot injury. He was suspended for 10 games without pay in September for violating the N.F.L. policy on performance-enhancing substances.MANGOLD PUT ON INJURED RESERVE Nick Mangold’s season is over — and his tenure with the Jets might be as well. Mangold, the team’s longtime center, was placed on injured reserve after aggravating an ankle injury during the Jets’ 41-10 loss to Indianapolis on Monday.AdvertisementLouisville quarterback Lamar Jackson won the Walter Camp player of the year award, beating his fellow Heisman Trophy finalists Deshaun Watson of Clemson and Jabrill Peppers of Michigan. Jackson accounted for 51 touchdowns this season and has averaged 410 yards per game in total offense.The United States Patent and Trademark Office has denied the Vegas Golden Knights’ trademark application a little more than two weeks after the N.H.L. franchise unveiled its name and logo. The office cited potential confusion with the team name for the College of St. Rose in Albany, which is also the Golden Knights.Bill Daly, the N.H.L.’s deputy commissioner, said the league would outline why it believed the name should be registered by a June 7 deadline.RANGERS 2, JETS 1 Kevin Hayes scored a power-play goal with 1 minute 9 seconds left in the third period to lift the Rangers to a victory in Winnipeg. Jets forward Drew Stafford was in the penalty box for high-sticking when Ryan McDonagh’s point shot through traffic deflected to Hayes, who capitalized for his 11th of the season.CANADIENS 5, DEVILS 2 Carey Price made 19 saves to help Montreal beat the Devils. Torrey Mitchell scored twice and Phillip Danault, Artturi Lehkonen and Max Pacioretty also had goals for the Canadiens in their return from a five-game trip.AdvertisementISLANDERS 3, BLUES 2 Anders Lee’s second goal of the game with just over seven minutes remaining lifted the Islanders to a victory over the St. Louis Blues at Barclays Center.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.DeMar DeRozan had 27 points, Kyle Lowry added 25, and the Raptors handed the Minnesota Timberwolves their 13th straight loss in Toronto, 124-110.WARRIORS 106, JAZZ 99 Stephen Curry scored 26 points, and Golden State controlled Utah from start to finish in a 106-99 victory in Salt Lake City. Curry had 14 points during a 29-1 run that made the score 29-5.Peter Jok scored 23 points, and host Iowa upset 25th-ranked Iowa State, 78-64, ending a three-game losing streak against its in-state rival. Isaiah Moss had 14 points to help the Hawkeyes beat a Power Five opponent for this first time this season.Manchester United won for the first time in 10 away games in Europe and advanced to the Europa League knockout stage by defeating Zorya Luhansk, 2-0.Midfielder Henrikh Mkhitaryan scored his first goal for United to begin the second half, and Zlatan Ibrahimovic came through at the end for his seventh goal in his last six matches.The former top 10 player Kathy Rinaldi will succeed Mary Joe Fernandez as captain of the United States Fed Cup team, the United States Tennis Association announced. Rinaldi will also have a role in the U.S.T.A.’s player development program.Dale Earnhardt Jr., who missed the final 18 races of the most recent Nascar season because of a concussion, has been medically cleared to return next year and will take part in the season-opening Daytona 500 on Feb. 26.The Ring Magazine is making Muhammad Ali its 1966 fighter of the year, half a century after refusing to give him the award because of his opposition to the draft for the Vietnam War and his connection with the Nation of Islam.“The editors at that time obviously felt strongly that Ali, while succeeding in the ring, didn’t meet other criteria they deemed important,” said Michael Rosenthal, the magazine’s editor in chief. “But we can see the injustice by today’s standards even if we take issue with some of things Ali said and did.”A version of this article appears in print on December 9, 2016, on Page B12 of the New York edition with the headline: Break-in at Giants Player’s Home.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.