AdvertisementSupported bySports BriefingBy The Associated PressMaria Sharapova advanced to the quarterfinals of the Porsche Tennis Grand Prix by beating Ekaterina Makarova, 7-5, 6-1, on Thursday in Stuttgart, Germany.In her second match after a 15-month doping suspension, Sharapova hit nine aces and held serve throughout. She converted three of her four break points.“Being in the quarterfinals here again is quite special,” said Sharapova, who won the event from 2012 to 2014.Less than 24 hours after beating Roberta Vinci in straight sets in her highly anticipated first match, Sharapova said that she felt she had “settled down a little bit.”“I was able to focus on the game,” she added. “I executed a great plan today, and I thought I was solid.”Sharapova, who tested positive for the banned substance meldonium at last year’s Australian Open, held off the only break point for Makarova at 5-5, then broke Makarova in the next game to close out the opening set.Sharapova was in control of the second throughout and wrapped up the win with two straight aces to raise her total for the tournament to 20. She improved to 7-0 against Makarova.The upsets continued Thursday. Kristina Mladenovic upended the two-time defending champion Angelique Kerber, 6-2, 7-5, and Anastasija Sevastova beat sixth-seeded Johanna Konta, 6-3, 7-5.NADAL AND MURRAY ADVANCE Rafael Nadal defeated Kevin Anderson, 6-3, 6-4, to reach the quarterfinals of the Barcelona Open, while Andy Murray struggled to join him. Murray had his hands full getting past Feliciano López, 6-4, 6-4. Nadal, a nine-time champion in Barcelona, will next face the qualifier Hyeon Chung of South Korea, who beat eighth-seeded Alexander Zverev of Germany, 6-1, 6-4.Sidney Crosby scored two goals in 52 seconds, Nick Bonino had the winner in the third period, and the Pittsburgh Penguins beat the Capitals, 3-2, in Washington in Game 1 of their second-round playoff series.Crosby versus Alex Ovechkin got much of the buzz heading into the showdown of two of N.H.L.’s best teams, and Ovechkin collected his fourth goal of the playoffs. Evgeny Kuznetsov tied it in the third, and Marc-Andre Fleury made 15 of his 32 saves in the final period to help the defending champion Penguins to the victory.NASHVILLE FORWARD HAS BROKEN LEG Nashville Predators forward Kevin Fiala broke his left leg in Game 1 in St. Louis and is recovering from surgery to repair his femur, the team said. Fiala, 20, was hit by Blues defenseman Robert Bortuzzo and went hard into the boards behind the St. Louis net at 1 minute 46 seconds of the second period of Nashville’s 4-3 victory Wednesday night. He was taken off the ice on a stretcher to the hospital.The Giants have picked up the fifth-year option on receiver Odell Beckham Jr.’s contract. The Giants announced the move hours before the N.F.L. draft. In each of his first three seasons, Beckham has led the Giants in receptions, receiving yards and touchdown catches. Beckham, a 2014 first-round draft pick, is the first Giants player to make the Pro Bowl in his first three seasons since the Hall of Famer linebacker Lawrence Taylor (1981-83). Beckham had 101 catches for 1,367 yards and 10 touchdowns last season in helping the Giants get back to the playoffs for the first time since 2011.Jordan Spieth showed off his stellar short game and Ryan Palmer made key putts as they posted a six-under-par 66 in foursomes for a share of the lead in the Zurich Classic, the first team event on the PGA Tour in 36 years.Spieth hit a bump-and-run from 100 feet to set up a birdie on the par-5 11th, chipped in for birdie on the 14th and closed out the round with a 15-foot birdie putt on the par-5 18th at the TPC Louisiana in Avondale, La.They were tied with Kyle Stanley and the 18-year-old Ryan Ruffels. Nick Watney made a 60-foot eagle putt from off the 18th green as he and Charley Hoffman were among four teams at 67 in alternate shot.THOMPSON SHOOTS A 69 Lexi Thompson shot a two-under 69 in her first L.P.G.A. Tour round since rule violations cost her a likely victory in the first major tournament of the year, leaving her four strokes behind the leader, M. J. Hur, in the North Texas L.P.G.A. Shootout.Hur had a bogey-free 65 on a blustery, sunny day at Las Colinas Country Club in Irving, Tex. Ariya Jutanugarn and Michelle Wie were a stroke back along with Katherine Kirk, Jennifer Song, Sung Hyun Park, Sandra Changkija and Marina Alex.Bryce Harper hit a three-run homer as part of an 11-run seventh inning, Trea Turner enjoyed another big game at Coors Field, and the Washington Nationals routed the Colorado Rockies, 16-5. Turner proved to be a pitcher’s nightmare throughout the four-game series. He hit for the cycle Tuesday, finished a triple shy of another cycle Wednesday and added a double and two singles in the finale. Washington finished 9-1 on its trip. CARDINALS SWEEP DOUBLEHEADER Randal Grichuk hit a two-out, two-run homer in the bottom of the ninth inning to tie the game and Matt Carpenter delivered a grand slam in the 11th, lifting the Cardinals over the Toronto Blue Jays, 8-4, in the first game of a day-night doubleheader in St. Louis. Dexter Fowler, Greg Garcia and Matt Adams each had three hits in the second game as the Cardinals beat the Blue Jays, 6-4.PHILLIES WIN SIXTH STRAIGHT Jeremy Hellickson (4-0) allowed one run over six innings to lead the Philadelphia Phillies to their sixth straight win, 3-2, over the visiting Miami Marlins.DODGERS BEAT GIANTS IN 10 Run-scoring singles by Andrew Toles and Justin Turner in the 10th inning led the Dodgers to a 5-1 victory over the host San Francisco Giants after Los Angeles pitcher Julio Urias made a solid start in his 2017 debut.LINDOR’S HOMER LIFTS INDIANS Francisco Lindor hit a long two-run homer in the seventh inning to lift the Cleveland Indians over the visiting Houston Astros, 4-3.Advertisement