By DAVID WHITEJAN. 20, 2017
Three of the quarterbacks in Sunday’s N.F.L. conference championship games have Super Bowl rings. The fourth is a leading candidate for this season’s Most Valuable Player Award.Advantage: no one in particular.The conference championships won’t be decided by the quarterbacks — Pittsburgh’s Ben Roethlisberger or New England’s Tom Brady in the A.F.C., or by Green Bay’s Aaron Rodgers or Atlanta’s Matt Ryan in the N.F.C.The final round of Super Bowl LI qualifying will come down to the doings, or the undoing, of the 42 other starters on offense and defense. Spoils to the best supporting casts.Here is a look at Sunday’s matchups and who we think will win them. All times Eastern.Time: 3:05 p.m. Line: Falcons by 5AdvertisementGreen Bay’s Aaron Rodgers has thrown 21 touchdown passes and one interception during an eight-game winning streak. Atlanta’s Matt Ryan has thrown 18 touchdown passes and three interceptions in his last eight games.AdvertisementThe tiebreaker goes to the better pass rush, which is more an exercise in theory than an actual practice with these two bottom-floor defenses.Rodgers seems to do his best work when he is on the lam from the pocket, faking left and right until he can make a deep throw on the move; so flushing him outside the hash marks only worsens the situation.The Falcons — starting with the N.F.L. sacks leader, linebacker Vic Beasley Jr. — must trap Rodgers from the outside and either force him to throw the ball before he wishes or take him down before he escapes to his improvisational zone.Blitzing isn’t always the brightest idea, given Rodgers’s rapid release. But consider one weak link: Running back Ty Montgomery, a converted wide receiver who too often gives blitzing defenders the bullfighter’s wave and lets them race right by him.If the front seven can’t slow down Rodgers, no one will. The Falcons ranked 28th in passing yards allowed per game, and season-ending injuries to two starters have forced them to use an undrafted rookie, Brian Poole, in nickel packages.Atlanta’s task should be easier since Green Bay’s Jordy Nelson, who had 1,257 receiving yards in the regular season, has been sidelined by fractured ribs. But then, Rodgers threw passes of 25-plus yards to five other receivers in last week’s 34-31 victory at Dallas.Get the big sports news, highlights and analysis from Times journalists, with distinctive takes on games and some behind-the-scenes surprises, delivered to your inbox every week.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.Ryan does just fine without his own preferred target, Julio Jones, the league’s second-leading receiver (1,409 yards). But Jones’s playing time has been limited the last three games by the lingering effects of a foot injury that kept him out of two other games.AdvertisementRyan threw touchdown passes to 13 teammates this season, an N.F.L. single-season record and a vivid illustration of why the Falcons led the league in scoring — for the first time in franchise history.The Packers’ defense, like its Atlanta counterpart, must find a way to pressure the quarterback into attempting regrettable throws. Green Bay ranked 31st, ahead of only New Orleans, against the passing game in the regular season, and its secondary simply does not have enough capable arms and legs to shut down Jones, Mohamed Sanu and Taylor Gabriel.If Green Bay over-invests in pass coverage, Devonta Freeman, who rushed for 1,079 yards, is sure to move the first-down sticks on delayed draws up the middle.Punters, stand down.Pick: Falcons.Time: 6:40 p.m. Line: Patriots by 6New England’s Tom Brady has four Super Bowl rings; Pittsburgh’s Ben Roethlisberger owns two. In terms of N.F.L. titles won, they are the most bejeweled pair of quarterbacks to face off in a conference championship game.How to beat them? Make each the only dimension in his offense.The Steelers have won nine consecutive games, sometimes in spite of Roethlisberger, who has thrown nine interceptions and only eight touchdowns in his last six starts. He has recently earned his keep with play-action passes to receiver Antonio Brown, a strategy that works best when the threat of a running game is credible.Le’Veon Bell is that credible threat. If the Patriots marginalize Bell, they can shift the workload to Roethlisberger. Four times this season, Roethlisberger has been pressed into making 40 or more pass attempts. Three of those times, the Steelers lost.Bell is the first N.F.L. player to rush for at least 150 yards in each of his first two postseason games. Making it three in a row will be a real chore against an industrial-strength Patriots defense that has not allowed a 100-yard rusher all season.Matchups on the offensive and defensive lines are a wash. It’s up to linebacker Dont’a Hightower and the hybrid safety Patrick Chung to meet Bell with open-field tackling. Covering him on passing routes is no easy day at the mill, either.AdvertisementThe idea of forcing Brady to beat you in the playoffs sounds ridiculous, but remember that Patriots Coach Bill Belichick disdains an unbalanced offense. The Patriots ran the ball on 46.5 percent of their plays in the regular season — their highest proportion in six years. Their 482 carries left them 17 behind the Cowboys, who led the league.When these teams met on Oct. 23 (a game Roethlisberger missed because of an injury), running back LeGarrette Blount punctured the Steelers’ defense for 127 yards and two touchdowns on 24 carries in a 27-16 victory. All Brady had to do was throw 26 times for 222 yards in 19 completions. Force Brady to throw all day, and you create chances for the pass rush, which is the going book on how to beat him in the playoffs.Then again, Brady has more postseason wins (23) than any other quarterback in N.F.L. history, so that’s not much of a book.Pick: Patriots.A version of this article appears in print on January 22, 2017, on Page SP3 of the New York edition with the headline: Supporting Casts Could Outshine Bejeweled Quarterbacks.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.