AdvertisementSupported bySports BriefingBy The Associated PressJimmie Johnson grabbed a rare victory at Bristol Motor Speedway in Bristol, Tenn., on Monday, giving him consecutive wins for the 11th time. It was just the second career win in Thunder Valley for Johnson, who considers that track one of his most vexing.His Hendrick Motorsports team hit on something during Saturday’s practice for his Chevrolet, and that locked him in for the race, which was postponed a day because of rain.“This track has been really difficult,” admitted Johnson, who last won at Bristol in 2007. But that Saturday find was “honestly, it’s what I’ve been looking for for 16 years.”“We finally figured it out,” Johnson said. “So, I’m very, very happy.”Johnson also won April 9 at Texas Motor Speedway, Nascar’s last event before Monday. That ended any chatter that Johnson, the seven-time and reigning champion, might not be up for a record eighth title.On Monday, Johnson contended with Kyle Larson, the points leader and most dominant driver of the day. A speeding penalty on Larson late in the race allowed Johnson to make it look easy in the end. Clint Bowyer finished second, and Kevin Harvick was third.Serena Williams is briefly back at No. 1 in the WTA rankings, despite not having played a match since January, and with plans to take the rest of 2017 off because she is expecting a baby. Thanks to a calendar quirk, Williams moved up one spot, swapping places with Angelique Kerber. The return to No. 1 came days after Williams let the world know via Snapchat that she was pregnant.Williams was able to supplant Kerber for at least a week because the women’s clay-court tournament this week in Stuttgart, Germany, was played a week earlier a year ago. Kerber, a two-time defending champion, can reclaim the top ranking by winning two matches in Stuttgart.Addison Russell set a career high with four hits, and Jason Heyward homered for the third time in four games and drove in four runs as the visiting Chicago Cubs jumped on the Pittsburgh Pirates early in a 14-3 victory.Kyle Schwarber, Kris Bryant and Miguel Montero all had two hits apiece for the Cubs. Ben Zobrist added three R.B.I. for Chicago as the defending World Series champions won for the fifth time in six games.Anthony Rizzo had three hits to extend his hitting streak to 13 games.ORIOLES 6, RAYS 3 Adam Jones hit a tiebreaking two-run homer in the seventh inning, Hyun Soo Kim and Jonathan Schoop also went deep, and host Baltimore beat Tampa Bay. It was the fifth win in seven games for the Orioles, who have the best record in the American League at 13-5.BREWERS 11, REDS 7 Eric Thames homered twice to raise his major-league-leading total to 10 as host Milwaukee beat Cincinnati. Hernan Perez added a three-run shot for the Brewers. Seven of Thames’s home runs have been against the Reds, and he has homered against them in five consecutive games.WHITE SOX 12, ROYALS 1 Matt Davidson had two hits and three R.B.I. in an eight-run sixth inning, Chicago’s highest-scoring inning in five years, and Chicago defeated visiting Kansas City. The Royals have lost five straight and have scored a major league-low 47 runs.TWINS 3, RANGERS 2 Brian Dozier hit a bases-clearing double as Minnesota beat host Texas, ending the Rangers’ four-game winning streak.Advertisement