By THE ASSOCIATED PRESSAPRIL 24, 2017
Cyle Larin scored twice as Orlando City beat New York City F.C. 2-1 at Yankee Stadium to move atop the Eastern Conference standings. David Villa scored in the 74th minute for N.Y.C.F.C., which had its 11-game home unbeaten streak come to an end.Nene scored 28 points on 12-of-12 shooting, and Houston won in Oklahoma City, 113-109, to take a three-games-to-one lead in their first-round playoff series. Nene helped the Rockets overcome an off day by James Harden, who finished with 16 points, shooting 5 of 16 from the field.CELTICS EVEN SERIES WITH BULLS Isaiah Thomas scored 33 points, and Boston beat the Bulls, 104-95, in Chicago to tie their first-round playoff series at two games apiece. Jimmy Butler led the Bulls, who briefly erased a 20-point deficit, with 33 points and 9 assists.Clarke MacArthur scored a power-play goal 6 minutes 30 seconds into overtime, and visiting Ottawa edged Boston, 3-2, to win the teams’ first-round playoff series in six games. Craig Anderson had 28 saves for the Senators.AdvertisementCAPITALS ADVANCE PAST LEAFS Marcus Johansson scored his second goal of the game in overtime, lifting Washington to a series-winning 2-1 victory over host Toronto in Game 6.AdvertisementCesar Hernandez, Aaron Altherr and Odubel Herrera hit consecutive homers in the eighth, Zach Eflin threw seven strong innings, and host Philadelphia beat the Atlanta Braves, 5-2, to complete a three-game sweep.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.Spain’s Rafael Nadal crushed his countryman Albert Ramos-Viñolas, 6-1, 6-3, at the Monte Carlo Masters to win the Monaco event for the 10th time and clinch the 70th title of his career.The Kenyans Mary Keitany and Daniel Wanjiru stormed to victories at the London Marathon. Keitany, 35, set a record for the London women’s event, breaking the 14-year-old mark of England’s Paula Radcliffe by 41 seconds. Keitany’s time was 2 hours 17 minutes 1 second. Wanjiru, 24, finished in 2:05:48, edging the race favorite Kenenisa Bekele of Ethiopia. (AGENCE FRANCE-PRESSE)Kevin Chappell made an 8-foot putt on the final hole to win the Texas Open by one stroke in San Antonio. Chappell shot a four-under-par 68 in the final round to finish at 12 under for the tournament, edging Brooks Koepka to earn his first PGA Tour victory in his 180th career start.AROUND GOLF Carlos Franco and Vijay Singh teamed to shoot a course-record 12 under par as they rallied from seven shots down to win the Legends of Golf in Ridgedale, Mo.  Bernd Wiesberger beat Tommy Fleetwood in a playoff to win the European Tour’s Shenzhen International in China.A version of this article appears in print on April 24, 2017, on Page D6 of the New York edition with the headline: Soccer; Orlando City 2, N.Y.C.F.C. 1.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.