APRIL 22, 2017
Marc Gasol hit a 12-foot floater with 0.7 of a second left in overtime on Saturday, and the Memphis Grizzlies edged the visiting San Antonio Spurs, 110-108, to even their first-round Western Conference playoff series, 2-2.The Grizzlies won despite blowing a 10-point lead with 7 minutes 38 seconds left in regulation and committing 23 turnovers that the Spurs turned into 31 points.Mike Conley set a team postseason record with 35 points for Memphis, and Gasol finished with 16.RAPTORS 87, BUCKS 76 DeMar DeRozan scored 33 points, and visiting Toronto beat Milwaukee to tie the teams’ first-round Eastern Conference series at two games apiece.HAWKS 116, WIZARDS 98 Paul Millsap scored 29 points, Dennis Schroder had 27, and host Atlanta cut Washington’s lead in their first-round Eastern Conference series to 2-1.AdvertisementMagnus Paajarvi scored at 9:42 in overtime, giving visiting St. Louis a 4-3 victory over Minnesota in Game 5 of their first-round playoff series and eliminating the Wild, 4-1.AdvertisementThe Minnesota slugger Miguel Sano punched Detroit catcher James McCann in the mask during a bench-clearing episode in the fifth inning of the Tigers’ 5-4 victory in Minneapolis.Two innings after Detroit outfielder JaCoby Jones was hit in the face by a pitch thrown by Twins reliever Justin Haley in the third, Tigers starter Matthew Boyd threw behind Sano, who pointed his bat toward Boyd and yelled at him. McCann intervened and appeared to put his mitt in the face of Sano, who reacted immediately with a right hand.Jones was taken to a hospital. Detroit Manager Brad Ausmus said Jones sustained a “nasty split lip” and would undergo a C.T. scan.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.Luis Robles had two saves to earn his fourth shutout, and Alex Muyl scored early to spark the Red Bulls to a 2-0 victory over the Crew in Harrison, N.J., leaving the teams tied atop Major League Soccer’s Eastern Conference standings at 4-3-1.Muyl’s second goal of the season came in the 11th minute when he used his body to knock down a centering pass from Kemar Lawrence and tapped it into the net when Crew goalkeeper Zach Steffen fell. Daniel Royer added a goal on a penalty kick in the 38th minute.CHELSEA ADVANCES TO F.A. CUP FINAL Eden Hazard came off the bench to send Chelsea into the F.A. Cup final with a 4-2 victory over Tottenham in London. Hazard shot the ball through a crowded penalty area into the net in the 75th minute and set up Nemanja Matic’s powerful strike off the inside of the crossbar in the 80th to secure a final against Arsenal or Manchester City, who play Sunday.Kevin Chappell birdied three of his final five holes and moved a step closer to his first PGA Tour victory with a one-under-par 71 at the Texas Open, giving him a one-stroke lead after three rounds in San Antonio.The defending champion Rafael Nadal of Spain beat David Goffin of Belgium, 6-3, 6-1, to move closer to a 10th Monte Carlo Masters title in Monaco. Nadal will meet Albert Ramos-Viñolas in an all-Spanish final after Ramos-Viñolas defeated Lucas Pouille of France, 6-3, 5-7, 6-1.NASTASE EJECTED The former star Ilie Nastase, Romania’s Fed Cup captain, already accused of making a racially offensive comment about Serena Williams’s pregnancy, was expelled from a playoff against Britain in Constanta, Romania, after making abusive comments to an umpire, the British player Johanna Konta and the British captain, Anne Keothavong, who also is pregnant.A version of this article appears in print on April 23, 2017, on Page SP7 of the New York edition with the headline: Pro Basketball; Grizzlies’ Overtime Win Over Spurs Ties Series.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.