By JACK KERRJAN. 20, 2017
East Timor, the national soccer team jokingly called the Little Samba Nation for its rapid, and sometimes suspect, naturalization of Brazilian players, has been expelled from a major Asian tournament and ordered to forfeit 29 matches after an Asian Football Confederation investigation found that documents of a dozen players had been falsified.An investigation by the organization found that officials of the East Timor soccer federation, the Football Federation Timor-Leste, had falsified birth and baptism certificates to register at least a dozen Brazilians as East Timor players in recent years.Officials of the Asian Football Confederation, who said they conducted their investigation in conjunction with FIFA, soccer’s world governing body, announced on Friday that they had expelled East Timor from the 2023 Asian Cup, the region’s continental championship, and ordered the team to forfeit 29 matches.Seven other matches, from the country’s failed 2018 World Cup qualifying campaign, could be invalidated by FIFA, potentially leaving the national team without a win in its brief history.Advertisement“These documents were submitted to the A.F.C. to demonstrate that the footballers were eligible to participate for F.F.T.L. representative teams through one or both of their parents being born in Timor-Leste,” a statement from the Asian Football Confederation said. “Such particulars were found to have been falsified.”Get the big sports news, highlights and analysis from Times journalists, with distinctive takes on games and some behind-the-scenes surprises, delivered to your inbox every week.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.The Asian Football Confederation said it had notified FIFA that ineligible players were fielded in seven qualifiers for the 2018 tournament. If the results of those matches are annulled, it would leave East Timor without a single win to its name. (East Timor’s federation joined FIFA in 2005, shortly after winning independence from Indonesia.) FIFA could also add its own punishment, potentially barring East Timor from qualifying for the 2022 World Cup, to be hosted by Asia in Qatar.AdvertisementIn addition to the penalties against the team, the Asian Football Confederation barred the East Timor federation’s general secretary, Amandio de Araujo Sarmento, for three years and fined another Timorese official, Gelásio Da Silva Carvalho, for interfering with a witness.The Timorese federation avoided official sanction itself, however, meaning it will continue to receive financing from FIFA and can still field teams in international friendlies and competitions like the Southeast Asian Games. The president of East Timor’s federation, Francisco Kalbuadi Lay, who is also a member of the A.F.C.’s executive committee, escaped sanction, despite the involvement of his organization’s flagship team in the eligibility scandal.The 12 Brazilian players found to have benefited from falsified documents also went unpunished. In a 2015 New York Times article, several seemed to acknowledge that they had received their passports under mysterious circumstances.“I received an invitation from them and they say: ‘We give the passport, you play for us,’ ” striker Patrick Fabiano said at the time. Fabiano was among the ineligible players listed by the Asian Football Confederation when it handed down its punishments on Friday.Still, without direct punishments, many of the players will continue to make a living playing in leagues like Thailand’s, where a spot on each club’s roster is reserved for a player from another Asian nation.“The investigation made no finding regarding the validity of the Timor-Leste citizenship held by those footballers,” the Asian Football Confederation said in its statement, effectively clearing the players to continue playing club soccer under Timorese nationality. “That is a question for the state authorities of Timor-Leste.”A version of this article appears in print on January 21, 2017, on Page D4 of the New York edition with the headline: East Timor Is Expelled From Asian Cup.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.