AdvertisementSupported bySports BriefingBy The Associated PressMarcel Kittel had little trouble winning the sixth stage of the Tour de France in a mass sprint finish Thursday with Peter Sagan and Mark Cavendish no longer in the race. Chris Froome held on to the leader’s yellow jersey after a sultry but uneventful day in the peloton.It was Kittel’s second victory in this year’s race and the 11th over all in his Tour career. As the other contenders bunched together on the right side of the road, Kittel burst around them on the left and easily created a comfortable gap that allowed him to celebrate as he crossed the line. The Stage 4 winner, Arnaud Démare, finished second, and Andre Greipel was third.Sagan, the world champion, was disqualified for elbowing Cavendish to the ground two days ago. The fall caused Cavendish, who has 30 Tour wins, to abandon the race with a broken shoulder.After signing a new deal with the Dallas Mavericks, Dirk Nowitzki will become only the second player to spend 20 N.B.A. seasons with the same team. News reports said Nowitzki had signed a two-year, $10 million contract. Nowitzki, 39, averaged 14.2 points in 54 games last season, his lowest average since his rookie season.AGENCE FRANCE-PRESSESPURS SIGN GAY The San Antonio Spurs have signed the veteran forward Rudy Gay. Gay averaged 18.7 points last season in Sacramento but was limited to 30 games before rupturing his left Achilles’ tendon.CLIPPERS ACQUIRE GALLINARI The Los Angeles Clippers acquired the sharpshooting forward Danilo Gallinari from Denver as part of a three-team trade that also involved Atlanta. Los Angeles sent Jamal Crawford, Diamond Stone, cash considerations and a protected 2018 first-round pick to the Hawks. The Nuggets receive a 2019 second-round pick from Atlanta.OLYNYK AGREES TO JOIN HEAT Kelly Olynyk has agreed to sign with the Miami Heat. The agent Greg Lawrence confirmed the decision. ESPN reported it would be a four-year deal worth in excess of $50 million. A 7-foot center with 3-point range, Olynyk spent his first four seasons with the Boston Celtics.Davis Love III shot a seven-under-par 63 in the Greenbrier Classic, leaving the 53-year-old star two strokes behind the first-round leader, Sebastián Muñoz. Love birdied four of his first five holes on the Old White TPC in White Sulphur Springs, W.Va., which was reconstructed after deadly floods forced the cancellation of last year’s tournament.Muñoz, a 24-year-old Colombian, was helped by five birdies on the back nine for a 61. The defending champion, Danny Lee, was at 64 along with David Lingmerth, Ben Martin, the rookie Xander Schauffele, Graham DeLaet and Nick Taylor.TWO SHARE LEAD IN L.P.G.A. EVENT The Belgian rookie Laura Gonzalez Escallon birdied three of the final four holes for a seven-under 65 and a share of the lead with Sei Young Kim in the Thornberry Creek L.P.G.A. Classic in Oneida, Wis.RAHM TRAILS BY ONE IN IRISH OPEN The rising Spanish star Jon Rahm upstaged the tournament host Rory McIlroy at the Irish Open by shooting a seven-under 65 to move one stroke off the first-round lead in Portstewart, Northern Ireland. Daniel Im of the United States, ranked No. 542, and Benjamin Hebert of France, ranked No. 254, held the lead after shooting bogey-free 64s.Data posted by Russian-linked hackers show the four-time Olympic gold medalist runner Mo Farah’s blood readings were once flagged by track’s governing body.The findings were part of his biological passport. Such passports, unlike traditional drug tests, track athletes’ blood data for signs of doping over a long period. A single suspicious passport sample on its own is not considered grounds for a ban and does not mean any trace of a banned substance was found. The data posted by the Fancy Bears group included correspondence from April 2016, reportedly from track’s governing body, that lists Farah among athletes whose blood data was considered suspicious.Los Angeles Dodgers third baseman Justin Turner and Kansas City third baseman Mike Moustakas have been elected to the All-Star Game in online voting for the final initial roster spots. Cubs third baseman Kris Bryant was second in the National League vote, leaving Cubs reliever Wade Davis as the sole representative of the World Series champions at Tuesday’s game in Miami.MILESTONE FOR SUZUKI Ichiro Suzuki’s eighth-inning single in the Miami Marlins’ 4-3 loss at St. Louis was his 3,054th major league hit. He passed Rod Carew to become the career hits leader for foreign-born players.SALE AND RED SOX LOSE Chris Sale struck out 12 in seven innings in a 4-1 loss at Tampa Bay. He became the first Red Sox pitcher to strike out 10 or more in 12 games before the All-Star break. Pedro Martinez had 11 in 1999.FRANCONA STILL IN HOSPITAL Cleveland Indians Manager Terry Francona remained hospitalized with no clear timetable for his return. Francona spent a third straight day at the Cleveland Clinic, where he has been undergoing tests — and possibly a procedure — to resolve the causes of his becoming lightheaded over the past month.HERNANDEZ ON ALL-STAR UMPIRING CREW Angel Hernandez, who sued Major League Baseball claiming racial discrimination, is among the umpires for the All-Star Game.The United States Soccer Federation completed plans to play its Sept. 1 World Cup qualifier against Costa Rica at Red Bull Arena in Harrison, N.J. The Americans will play Honduras four days later at San Pedro Sula, then complete the final round of the North and Central American and Caribbean region on Oct. 6 against Panama at Orlando, Fla., and four days later at Trinidad and Tobago.PLAYER EMERGES FROM COMA The San Jose Earthquakes said the Brazilian defender Matheus Silva had emerged from a coma, two days after he was rescued from Lake Tahoe.Baylor University has agreed to settle a federal lawsuit in which a former student accused it of fostering a “hunting ground for sexual predators” and mishandling an attack on her in 2015. The agreement is Baylor’s first settlement in a cascade of lawsuits filed over the past 18 months by women who said that they had been attacked and that their cases had been ignored or bungled by the university.The scandal, and the university’s investigation into how Baylor responded to assault allegations, led to the firing of the former football coach Art Briles and the demotion and eventual departure of former university President Ken Starr in 2016.Advertisement