JULY 5, 2017
Lionel Messi will play out the best remaining years of his trophy-rich career at Barcelona. The club said Wednesday that Messi had agreed to a three-year contract extension that will keep him with Barcelona through the 2020-21 season. By then, Messi, Barcelona’s career leading scorer, will be 34 and finishing his 17th season with the club.Messi has repeatedly said he wanted to play the best years of his career at Barcelona, before perhaps making a return to his native Argentina, which he left at 13 to attend Barcelona’s famed training academy, La Masia.Since making his debut with Barcelona’s first team at 17 in 2004, Messi has established himself as one of the best to ever play the game. He has won the FIFA world player of the year five times and has become the Spanish league’s career scoring leader.ARSENAL’S CLUB-RECORD SIGNING Arsenal signaled its intention to make an immediate return to the Premier League’s elite by paying a club-record 60 million euros ($68 million) to sign Lyon striker Alexandre Lacazette, one of Europe’s most productive players in recent years.AdvertisementRED BULLS DEFEAT REVOLUTION Gonzalo Veron scored in the 90th minute to give the Red Bulls a 3-2 victory over the New England Revolution in Foxborough, Mass. The Red Bulls’ Daniel Royer tied the score at 2-2 in the 55th minute on a penalty kick, and Veron scored from the corner of the 18-yard box on a fast break.AdvertisementThe Edmonton Oilers signed their star captain, Connor McDavid, to an eight-year, $100 million deal. McDavid, 20, led the N.H.L. in scoring with 100 points last season and won the Hart Trophy as the league’s most valuable player.Drafted first over all by the Oilers in 2015, McDavid has led Edmonton’s transformation from bottom dweller to contender. The Oilers reached the playoffs for the first time in a decade last season, eliminating San Jose before falling in seven games to Anaheim in the second round.RANGERS RE-SIGN FAST AND ADD CENTER The Rangers re-signed the restricted free-agent forward Jesper Fast and signed the free-agent center David Desharnais. Fast got a three-year contract worth $1.85 million annually. Desharnais received a one-year contract worth $1 million.Fast, 25, had six goals and 15 assists this past season. He is expected to be sidelined for five months after hip surgery in June. Desharnais, 30, gives the Rangers depth at center behind Mika Zibanejad and Kevin Hayes.The Knicks have signed their first-round draft pick, Frank Ntilikina. The 6-foot-5 French guard, the No. 8 overall selection, is playing for the Knicks’ summer league team in Orlando, Fla. Born in Belgium, Ntilikina, 18, averaged 5.1 points, 2.1 rebounds, 1.4 assists and 18.5 minutes in 31 games last season for Strasbourg in the French Pro A league.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.YOUNG AGREES TO JOIN WARRIORS The veteran guard Nick Young is getting a new start with Golden State, agreeing to a $5.2 million, one-year contract with the champion Warriors. Last month, Young declined the player option in his contract for next season with the Los Angeles Lakers.Cory Spangenberg hit a two-run homer and the visiting San Diego Padres beat Cleveland, 6-2, as the Indians played again without Manager Terry Francona.The Padres’ Luis Perdomo allowed one earned run in five innings and continued his turnaround after a rough start this season. He did not get his first win until his 11th start, but is 4-1 since June 12.AdvertisementFrancona missed his second straight game as he remained hospitalized at the Cleveland Clinic. Francona has been undergoing tests to determine what has been causing lightheadedness and increasing his heart rate.Chris Antonetti, the team’s president, said Francona would be away at least “a couple more days.” The 58-year-old Francona was scheduled to manage the American League squad at the All-Star Game next week in Miami, but those plans are on hold.AROUND THE MAJORS George Springer drove in the go-ahead run in the seventh inning, Josh Reddick and Marwin Gonzalez each had three runs batted in, and the visiting Houston Astros beat the Atlanta Braves, 10-4. Houston has won four straight and 12 of 15 to improve to 58-27 overall, best in the majors.  Matt Garza pitched into the seventh and Keon Broxton hit a two-run homer to lift the Brewers to a three-game sweep of the Baltimore Orioles with a 4-0 victory in Milwaukee.  Parker Bridwell pitched six scoreless innings, Kole Calhoun hit his 12th home run of the season, and the Los Angeles Angels avoided a road sweep with a 2-1 victory over the Minnesota Twins.Dallas Cowboys linebacker Damien Wilson was arrested on two counts of aggravated assault with a deadly weapon after he was accused of backing his truck into a woman and threatening a man with a rifle during a dispute with some tailgaters.The Frisco, Tex., police said Wilson was arrested Tuesday outside Toyota Stadium during the city’s Fourth of July celebration. Major League Soccer’s F.C. Dallas played Tuesday night at the stadium in Frisco, a suburb north of Dallas that is also home to the Cowboys’ practice facility.A version of this article appears in print on July 6, 2017, on Page B14 of the New York edition with the headline: Soccer; Messi and Barcelona Reach Deal on Extension.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.