JAN. 2, 2016
Printing a Nickname That May Leave a StainTo the Sports Editor:I find it disturbing that The New York Times, a newspaper that is so self-reflective and so thoughtful about its practices and standards, is continuing to print the racist slur that is the commercial name of the Washington football team. Other publications have taken the important and enlightened step of refusing to print the name of the team.Can there be any justification for continuing the benighted tradition of using such an offensive name to refer to the team? I can’t imagine that there is, and I am certain that in the very near future, this blindness to the pain the word inflicts will be a stain on the paper’s history.JANE DIMYAN-EHRENFELD, Silver Spring, Md.Blunders in PhiladelphiaTo the Sports Editor:Re “Unbrotherly Feelings,” Dec. 31: As a die-hard Eagles fan, I would like to say that the word “incompetent” perfectly describes what has taken place with our team the last three years. Chip Kelly has come into our city, replaced all of our top talent with below-mediocre players and gutted our franchise.Kelly reduced DeMarco Murray’s carries to two in the latter games of the season, a year after he was the N.F.L.’s leading rusher. In his last news conference, Kelly eluded responsibility for player personnel, despite having been given complete keys to the kingdom and having made terrible roster decisions.AdvertisementCHRIS LANG, Bethlehem, Pa.Rethinking the Extra PointTo the Sports Editor:Field-goal kickers already had a magnified role in the outcomes of games before this season’s change in the rule for extra points. Now their extra-point misses, almost nonexistent before, are likely to decide a number of games. Having a team’s fortunes so heavily dependent on a specialty player cannot be healthy for professional football.AdvertisementSince the extra point had become superfluous, the rule makers should have awarded 7 points for a touchdown, with the scoring team having the option to take 6 points instead and try for a 2-point conversion. This simple expedient would have eliminated the extra-point try and left the scoring unchanged, except for the couple of missed extra points each year.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.MICHAEL HORSTEIN, Los AngelesOne-of-a-Kind GlobetrotterTo the Sports Editor:When, years ago, the New York Times crossword called for a five-letter word meaning “Meadowlark,” I instantly filled in, in ink, “Lemon.” I felt betrayed when that answer proved incorrect. For anyone who ever saw him on the court, there was only one Meadowlark.DAVID R. SHERIDAN, Delmar, N.Y.Doubts About ManningTo the Sports Editor:Re “Doping Claims Raise Nagging Questions,” Dec. 28: Hadn’t Peyton Manning done enough, accomplished enough and aged enough to pack it in with a broken neck? Walk away while he still could? For a year or two, I thought I was wrong. He came back to a high level of play. Then this season, he was not the player he used to be. And with all that neck and back surgery, do you just go along your merry way and feel fine the rest of your life?I am also glad that in this recent craze of concussion awareness, someone has finally mentioned steroids.EDDIE ISAACS, Forest Hills, N.Y.A version of this letter appears in print on January 3, 2016, on Page SP7 of the New York edition with the headline: Printing a Nickname That May Leave a Stain.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.