By BILLY WITZMARCH 20, 2017
LOS ANGELES — When Didi Gregorius, who is playing for the Netherlands in the World Baseball Classic, and Joe Espada, who is coaching for Puerto Rico, crossed paths at a hotel here on Sunday afternoon, those two Yankees exchanged hellos.More significant than what was said was what was not: Gregorius did not mention the discomfort in his right shoulder.But by Monday morning, Gregorius was on his way back to Tampa, Fla., to be examined by Yankees doctors instead of playing in a W.B.C. semifinal at Dodger Stadium. He will not return to the tournament.The injury to Gregorius highlights the underlying tension between major league clubs, who pay players like Gregorius millions of dollars, and the tournament, which players participate in mainly for national pride.AdvertisementGregorius, who has rarely taken a day off while playing shortstop for the Yankees during the past two seasons, asked to come out of an exhibition game the Netherlands was playing Saturday afternoon in Arizona. He had felt a twinge in his shoulder while turning a double play as he was playing second base.AdvertisementA magnetic resonance imaging examination later revealed a moderate strain of the muscle in his shoulder, an injury that Hensley Meulens, the Netherlands’ manager and a coach for the San Francisco Giants, described as “not that bad.”“I’m sure he could have played, because it doesn’t bother him to hit,” said Meulens, who used Gregorius primarily as a designated hitter in the tournament because of a wealth of major league shortstops on his Netherlands squad, including the two-time Gold Glove winner Andrelton Simmons of the Los Angeles Angels and Xander Bogaerts of the Boston Red Sox.“But we don’t know if it’s going to get worse, or if he dives, so that was the precaution that was taken, and rightfully so,” Meulens added.The most demanding task that managers have in the W.B.C. is communicating with the managers of their players’ clubs, who can be unhappy with the amount of game action the players are getting — or not getting. San Diego Manager Andy Green complained forcefully that his third baseman, Yangervis Solarte, had largely sat on the bench for Venezuela.The United States’ manager, Jim Leyland, is so attuned to the issue that he will continue to alternate his catchers throughout the tournament. Buster Posey will be behind the plate in Tuesday’s semifinal against Japan, and if the Americans advance to Wednesday’s championship, it will be Jonathan Lucroy’s turn to catch.For the Yankees, the injury to Gregorius is accompanied by an unpleasant flashback. In 2013, Yankees first baseman Mark Teixeira injured his wrist hitting off a batting tee while practicing with the United States team. It seemed an innocuous injury, one that was expected to sideline Teixeira for 10 days to two weeks. Ultimately, he played only 15 games that year before season-ending surgery and attributed a disappointing 2014 season to a long recovery.Get the big sports news, highlights and analysis from Times journalists, with distinctive takes on games and some behind-the-scenes surprises, delivered to your inbox every week.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.Yankees General Manager Brian Cashman was circumspect when asked about the injury risk to players in the tournament, for which some spent nearly four weeks away from their clubs.Advertisement“The W.B.C. is a joint effort between Major League Baseball and the players’ union,” he said. “If you play a sport, you can get hurt.”That much is true. In this tournament, Venezuelan players were hit especially hard. Kansas City Royals catcher Salvador Perez (knee), Detroit Tigers first baseman Miguel Cabrera (back), Miami Marlins outfielder Martin Prado (hamstring) and Arizona Diamondbacks pitcher Silvino Bracho (hamstring) were all injured, though none of their physical problems appear to be serious.But sitting out the W.B.C. does not insulate players from injury, either. Colorado first baseman Ian Desmond, who recently signed a five-year, $70 million free-agent contract with the team, is expected to be out until late April after breaking his left hand when he was hit by a pitch during an exhibition game.“This is a sport where injuries happen,” said Andrew Miller, a reliever for the United States team and the Cleveland Indians. “Ideally, you take care of yourself as well as you can and prepare for everything.’’But, he added, there is a big difference in intensity between spring training and the W.B.C.In a spring training game, Miller said, he might simply work on throwing fastballs down and away. The game result hardly matters. But in the W.B.C., he said, “guys are out here trying to get outs and get hits.” The games do matter, and Miller has to pitch accordingly.But Miller, despite a heavy 2016 workload that was extended into November when the Indians made it the World Series last fall, believes there is a benefit to playing in the W.B.C.“I was hoping that this was a chance that I’d go through this experience and feel like I had gotten better instead of just gotten ready,” Miller said. “I think that’s going to be the case.”Meanwhile, the Yankees are left to consider alternatives to Gregorius.Shortstop is a deep position for the Yankees, but their best prospects are not quite ready to play at the major league level. Gleyber Torres is having a torrid spring, but he is only 20 and has not played above Class A. Tyler Wade, 22, is another emerging prospect, but he has not played above Class AA.AdvertisementThe utility infielder Ronald Torreyes could be a short-term fix, and second baseman Starlin Castro, as well as Ruben Tejada and Pete Kozma, has major league experience at shortstop.“At least on the defensive side, I feel pretty comfortable, somebody filling in for a matter of days,” said Espada, who coaches the Yankees’ infielders. “If it’s weeks or a month, or whatever the case may be, then we’ll see.”The Yankees should know more by Wednesday morning, after Gregorius undergoes a dye-cast magnetic resonance imaging exam. Until then, Cashman will do what many general managers and managers do when watching the W.B.C. He will keep his fingers crossed.A version of this article appears in print on March 21, 2017, on Page B9 of the New York edition with the headline: Strained Shoulder Ends Gregorius’s Stint at World Baseball Classic.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.