By THE ASSOCIATED PRESSFEB. 2, 2017
Alabama came up just short last month in its bid for a second straight national title on the field, but the Crimson Tide’s dominance on the recruiting trail remains as strong as ever.According to composite rankings of recruiting services compiled by 247Sports, Alabama finished atop the team standings for the seventh consecutive year.Alabama’s class includes seven of the top 34 players rated by 247Sports: running back Najee Harris, offensive tackles Alex Leatherwood and Jedrick Willis, outside linebacker Dylan Moses, wide receiver Jerry Jeudy, defensive end LaBryan Ray and quarterback Tua Tagovailoa.JAILED RECRUIT The Michigan State recruit Donovan Winter was sitting in an Orlando, Fla., jail while other recruits across the country were signing letters of intent.AdvertisementA police report showed that Winter, a defensive end, was facing charges of burglary and larceny of a firearm. He had verbally committed to Michigan State, but it was uncertain whether his scholarship offer still stood.AdvertisementPENN STATE TRIAL SET Penn State’s former president and two other ex-administrators learned that they will go to trial in Harrisburg, Pa., next month, nearly six years after the Jerry Sandusky child molestation scandal became public.Judge John Boccabella set jury selection for March 20 in the criminal trial of Graham Spanier, the former university president; Gary Schultz, a former Penn State vice president; and Tim Curley, the former athletic director. They are charged with endangering the welfare of children.ONE BAYLOR SUIT FILED, ONE DROPPED Colin Shillinglaw, the former director of football operations at Baylor, has filed a lawsuit arguing he was unfairly named as contributing to the university’s mishandling of student sexual assault complaints. Shillinglaw, who was fired last year, says that Baylor leaders and others were defamatory in unfairly blaming him when it was the university’s public safety officials who were responsible for handling assault complaints.On the same day that suit was filed, lawyers said that Art Briles, the team’s former coach, dropped his defamation suit against four officials he had accused of making false statements against him. Briles had sued three regents and a university vice president for libel and slander, claiming they falsely stated that he knew of reported assaults and alleged gang rapes by players and did not report them.The Blues abruptly fired Coach Ken Hitchcock, cutting short his final season in St. Louis and putting the coach-in-waiting Mike Yeo in charge of the underperforming team months earlier than planned. General Manager Doug Armstrong announced the change one day after the Blues’ fifth loss in six games.CAPITALS 5, BRUINS 3 Nicklas Backstrom had three points, and Alex Ovechkin continued to climb the N.H.L.’s goal-scoring charts as the Capitals beat the Boston Bruins in Washington. Backstrom had a goal and two assists, setting up T. J. Oshie and Ovechkin, who passed Ron Francis for 27th on the all-time list.Josh Jackson had 23 points and 10 rebounds, then helped third-ranked Kansas prevent No. 2 Baylor from getting off a potential tying shot in the closing seconds of the Jayhawks’ 73-68 victory at home.AdvertisementFrank Mason III added 19 points, including two free throws to seal the win, and Devonte Graham scored 13 as the Jayhawks (20-2, 8-1) pulled a game ahead of the Bears (20-2, 7-2) in the Big 12 race.VILLANOVA 66, PROVIDENCE 57 Jalen Brunson scored 15 of his 21 points in the second half, and No. 4 Villanova held off host Providence. Josh Hart added 17 points and 8 rebounds for the Wildcats (21-2, 8-2 Big East), who led by as many as 13 in the second half before Providence (14-10, 4-7) turned up its defensive pressure and made a late run.VIRGINIA 71, VIRGINIA TECH 48 Devon Hall had 17 points, 9 rebounds and 4 assists, and No. 9 Virginia beat visiting Virginia Tech. London Perrantes scored 14 for the Cavaliers (17-4, 7-2 Atlantic Coast Conference). The Hokies (16-6, 5-5) got 14 points from Seth Allen.CHARGE AGAINST PLAYER MAY BE DROPPED Kansas forward Carlton Bragg Jr., who has been suspended by the Jayhawks, will enter a diversion program after being charged with possession of drug paraphernalia. If Bragg meets the terms of the agreement, the charges will be dropped.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.UCONN ROLLS ON In a women’s game, Napheesa Collier had 25 points and 10 rebounds to help Connecticut (21-0, 9-0 American Athletic Conference) to its 96th consecutive win with a 97-69 victory over Temple (16-5, 6-2) in Philadelphia.BAYLOR 83, IOWA STATE 52 Alexis Prince scored 22 points, and second-ranked Baylor (22-1, 11-0 Big 12) beat host Iowa State (12-10, 3-8) for its 20th straight win.LeBron James scored 27 points, Kyrie Irving had 14 and a career-high 14 assists, and the Cavaliers, coming off a losing record in January, defeated the Minnesota Timberwolves, 125-97, in Cleveland.The Cavaliers held a 3-point halftime lead but took control midway through the third quarter. James was 11 of 14 from the field.CELTICS 109, RAPTORS 104 Isaiah Thomas scored 19 of his 44 points in the final quarter to lift the Celtics over the Toronto Raptors in Boston in a showdown for first place in the Atlantic Division. It was the fifth straight win for the Celtics, who moved one and a half games ahead of the Raptors.AdvertisementFORWARD TURNS HIMSELF IN Sacramento Kings forward Matt Barnes turned himself in to the New York City police and was charged with misdemeanor assault in a December nightclub incident, his publicist said. Barnes, 36, has denied allegations he choked a woman and assaulted two other people at the Avenue nightclub in the Chelsea neighborhood after the Kings lost to the Knicks.(AGENCE FRANCE-PRESSE)Essam el-Hadary, Egypt’s 44-year-old goalkeeper, saved two spot-kicks in a penalty shootout win over Burkina Faso to lead his country into the Africa Cup of Nations final. El-Hadary saved shots by Kouakou Koffi and Bertrand Traore to give Egypt a dramatic 4-3 win in the shootout in Libreville, Gabon.The game ended in a 1-1 draw after 120 minutes, with Mohamed Salah’s 66th minute goal for Egypt canceled out by Aristide Bance’s goal for Burkina Faso seven minutes later. Egypt will play the winner of Thursday’s semifinal between Ghana and Cameroon for the championship.PREMIER LEAGUE Manchester City dismantled West Ham United, 4-0, to revive its fading title aspirations, but Manchester United’s hopes suffered a potentially fatal blow with a goalless draw against struggling Hull.  (REUTERS)COPA DEL REY Luis Suárez and Lionel Messi scored superb first-half goals to guide Barcelona to a 2-1 win at Atlético Madrid in the first leg of their semifinal.ITALIAN CUP Francesco Totti converted a penalty kick deep into stoppage time to send Roma to the semifinals against its intercity rival Lazio with a 2-1 win over Cesena.A version of this article appears in print on February 2, 2017, on Page B17 of the New York edition with the headline: College Football; Alabama Is Still No. 1 on the Recruiting Trail.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.