By JAMES WAGNERFEB. 25, 2017
PORT ST. LUCIE, Fla. — The Mets had targeted Saturday’s game, their first home contest of spring training, as an opportunity for most of their regular position players to take the field together. Even the often-injured third baseman David Wright, whose throwing has lagged behind his hitting during his recovery from neck surgery, was able to serve as the designated hitter.But the Mets’ plan to roll out their expected lineup for 2017 was not to be in an 8-6 loss to the Washington Nationals. First baseman Lucas Duda, who missed four months last season with a stress fracture in his back, sat out with stiffness in his hips. The injury has Manager Terry Collins concerned enough that he checked out his internal options, with Wilmer Flores starting at first.Duda felt stiffness in his back and his hips after a recent workout. Although his back improved, his hips remained troublesome, Collins said, prompting Duda to receive a cortisone shot in each hip on Friday.Collins said he had received no indication that the stiffness in Duda’s hips was related to last year’s back injury, but everything in the lower body is connected, he noted.Advertisement“We’re very fortunate at this time we’ve still got a ton of camp left,” Collins said.During workouts before Saturday’s game, second baseman Neil Walker took ground balls at first base, which he had already expected to do during spring training as the Mets push to be more versatile. Walker, who was expected to make his exhibition debut on Sunday, has never played first base in the major leagues.Get the big sports news, highlights and analysis from Times journalists, with distinctive takes on games and some behind-the-scenes surprises, delivered to your inbox every week.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.Collins said he also spoke with right fielder Jay Bruce about taking ground balls at first base next week “for precaution purposes.” Bruce played three games at first in 2014.Advertisement“We’ve just got to protect ourselves,” Collins said.Given the Mets’ glut of middle infielders, which includes Jose Reyes, Asdrubal Cabrera and Flores, Wright would seem like a natural fit to try first base. But Collins said that would not be possible until Wright was able to handle third base — in other words, until he could throw.Wright began throwing in private last week for the first time since having neck surgery in June, but he is throwing only from about 60 feet every other day.“It’s a lot of drills I haven’t done since I was kid, of trying to get my arm in the right slot,” Wright said. “Because of some of the effects of surgery, it has taken a little longer than expected because you’re really reteaching your body how to throw.”Wright said he was also trying to avoid bad habits he adopted when compensating for the neck injury early last season, although he will still throw sidearm at times because it is occasionally necessary at third.“I have to go back to throwing the way I was when everything was pain-free,” Wright said.Although Wright only hit on Saturday, going 0 for 2, the Mets viewed it as an important step in his return to third base. They may have a new problem, however, on the other side of the diamond.A version of this article appears in print on February 26, 2017, on Page SP3 of the New York edition with the headline: Mets Evaluate Their Options at First Base After Duda Is Sidelined by Hip Stiffness.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.