By MIKE VORKUNOVFEB. 24, 2017
GREENBURGH, N.Y. — Hobbled as he was, Kristaps Porzingis took the floor Friday during the Knicks’ practice. He joined in with his teammates in a free-throw competition at the end of the session, exchanging shots with Courtney Lee at one basket. Part of Porzingis’s attire: ankle-high socks and flip-flops.Porzingis will probably don dress shoes Saturday night for the Knicks’ game against the Philadelphia 76ers at Madison Square Garden. A sprained right ankle is likely to keep him out after he was injured Thursday during the Knicks’ 119-104 loss to the Cavaliers in Cleveland. Porzingis saw a doctor on Friday and said that he had been told that he had suffered no ligament damage.It was a kernel of good news for the team and Porzingis, its 21-year-old budding star. Coach Jeff Hornacek pronounced him doubtful for Saturday, and Porzingis would not commit to returning Monday, either, for a home game against Toronto.Get the big sports news, highlights and analysis from Times journalists, with distinctive takes on games and some behind-the-scenes surprises, delivered to your inbox every week.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.“I think that’s a possibility, but, again, I don’t want to say anything that’s going to get me in trouble,” he said. “I don’t want to say that I’ll play.”AdvertisementThe Knicks will surely miss him. At 23-35, they now own the eighth-worst record in the N.B.A., and their playoff hopes have rapidly diminished. They did not bring in any help at the trade deadline this week, and Hornacek used Friday’s practice as another reset, focusing on fundamentals like slipping screens and boxing out. The Knicks, it is clear, are still in some disorder. Derrick Rose called the triangle offense — the style made famous by Phil Jackson, the Knicks’ team president — random, and Hornacek said the team was still getting used to it.Rose, who was reported to be potential trade bait at the trade deadline, had a lengthy conversation with General Manager Steve Mills after practice but left soon after. After the conclusion of his session with reporters, Rose said he was in a hurry because he had to catch a plane. Where, a reporter asked, was he headed?Advertisement“Chicago,” Rose said.A Knicks official later said Rose had been joking.A version of this article appears in print on February 25, 2017, on Page D4 of the New York edition with the headline: Pro Basketball; No Ligament Damage for Porzingis.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.