

 Michael Powell
 

SPORTS OF THE TIMES
JAN. 10, 2016
MINNEAPOLIS — The snapped football flew high and hard at the quarterback, like a chin-high inside fastball. As it was approximately 148 degrees below zero at that time, it would have been like trying to catch a block of ice.Seahawks quarterback Russell Wilson, who had been having a pretty mediocre day to that point, saw the football roll behind him. He scampered, picked up the ball and peered downfield.His line of sight was consumed by three or four Vikings defenders, steam rising from their mouths as if they were draft horses, rumbling at him. “Uh-oh,” he thought to himself. “It looked like a whole bunch of bears.” He felt his evolutionary flight response kick in and then did what he does best, which is to scramble. He rolled right, deking, shoulder-faking, a kid improvising.The rookie wide receiver Tyler Lockett floated downfield with his hands up. Whop. Wilson tossed him the ball, and Lockett ran as if his hair was on fire. A couple of plays later, the Seahawks scored an improbable touchdown, their first of the day. The score then was Vikings 9, Seahawks 7.AdvertisementTeam Houdini was up to its old tricks, crawling out of another trap of its own devising. The Seahawks began the season playing so poorly, going 2-4, that they appeared almost out of the postseason race by mid-October. Then, as this team is prone to do, it crawled out of its crypt.AdvertisementIn truth, Wilson’s improvisation in Minneapolis would register as just a warm-up by day’s end. The pièce de résistance had nothing to do with skill and everything to do with luck: The Vikings’ place-kicker had a chance for a point-blank, playoff-game-winning field goal with just seconds on the clock. Somehow he missed.
            Get the latest tweets from @NYTSports, including breaking news, analysis and live updates.        Afterward, Vikings Coach Mike Zimmer, his face an unsightly blotch of frostbite-like pink and red, stood at the lectern and peered out through watery eyes.“We missed a chip-shot field goal,” he said softly. “That’s life. But it was a chip shot.”Yes it was.A hardy perennial of postgame news conferences is listening as players attribute their team’s pure dumb luck to Him and His Son. So Seahawks safety Kam Chancellor claims that he knew the kicker would miss and attributes his assurance to God. Cornerback Richard Sherman speculated that Jesus would have approved of the Seahawks’ team effort.God, perhaps preoccupied with a tricky black hole, has so far declined to offer a comment. Jesus’ telephone number is unlisted.In truth, the Vikings played a fierce game Sunday. Their defenders at times called to mind the team’s Purple People Eater past, as they chased down the always-elusive Wilson as if trying to trap a firefly in a jar.At halftime, the Vikings led, 3-0, prompting more than a few to speculate that it was simply too cold to think, much less to score. The Seahawks accumulated just 39 yards passing and 47 rushing in the first half, and as a team they looked as if they missed the Northwestern dampness.AdvertisementAnd yet, with the game on the line, there was that scampering Wilson. Vikings linebacker Anthony Barr shook his head when asked how Wilson had turned a blown snap into a game-breaking play.Get the big sports news, highlights and analysis from Times journalists, with distinctive takes on games and some behind-the-scenes surprises, delivered to your inbox every week.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.“To have the whereabouts to look upfield and get the ball off ...” he said, shrugging, clearly frustrated.“Kudos to him,” he added.This game, even with its silly God talk, came as a bit of a relief after Saturday night’s A.F.C. playoff game between the Pittsburgh Steelers and the Cincinnati Bengals, which served, with its impressive stupidity and violent gratuitous hits, to demonstrate why football is so often indefensible. As player after player was laid out, as a quarterback returned to the field presumably in enough pain to keep the maker of Percocet in business for months, you are reminded once more that there is to football a recklessness about men’s lives.I would be dishonest to suggest I walk out of step with this march. I wasn’t covering that game, and yet I watched, including the 22 replays of particularly brutal brain-jarring hits. And then the ratings come in, with CBS chortling about its audience share, and, well, better for now to concentrate on the players who ran about the stadium in Minneapolis on Sunday and, at least to my eye, did not deliver too many concussions.Let me pause, also, to note that along with a few players recklessly running about the field in short sleeves, we got to watch the Vikings’ cheerleaders dance in the subzero temperatures and shake in their mukluks for slightly more than the cost of gas for their cars. This gilded league could of course take care of this problem of cheerleader poverty by rooting about in its loose change drawer and by forcing teams to pay a proper wage.Commissioner Roger Goodell would rather pretend that these women are independent contractors.For now, let’s return to the game, which through halftime appeared to make a star of cold that was borderline insane. The Seahawks’ Sherman noted that the ball did not fly right in temperatures like those more often found on the plains of Mars. Asked how he had managed, Sherman smiled. He was born in Southern California; this not his natural habitat.“It was all good until my eyelashes froze,” he noted.Wilson said his jaw had been so stiff with cold that he had trouble calling out to his teammates. “Your mouth kept freezing,” he said.In the end, though, a win — however frozen — is a win, even if this one required a degree of luck that was improbable even for Team Houdini.Email: powellm@nytimes.com A version of this article appears in print on January 11, 2016, on Page D3 of the New York edition with the headline: Seahawks Pull a Win From Their Long Sleeves.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.See More »