By THE ASSOCIATED PRESSJAN. 18, 2016
Taylor Hall ended a scoring drought with two goals, Cam Talbot stopped 30 shots, and the visiting Edmonton Oilers added to Florida’s slide by beating the Panthers, 4-2, on Monday night.Teddy Purcell had a goal and two assists for Edmonton, which led, 3-0, after two periods and then withstood a Florida rally in the third. Jordan Eberle also scored for the Oilers.Hall, who also had an assist, had scored just one goal in his previous 14 games.Reilly Smith and Quinton Howden scored early in the third period for Florida, which has dropped four straight games since winning 12 in a row. Al Montoya gave up three goals on the first seven shots he faced, and the Panthers had their club-record home winning streak stopped at seven games.Since their winning streak, the Panthers have been outscored, 16-5.Purcell’s goal with 1 minute 28 seconds left sealed it, the score coming when Montoya was heading toward the bench for an extra attacker. Montoya stopped 19 shots.AdvertisementFlorida was again without the All-Star defenseman Aaron Ekblad, who has not played since taking a violent hit from Edmonton’s Matt Hendricks on Jan. 11. Hendricks was penalized for boarding and subsequently suspended three games, coincidentally returning to the Oilers’ lineup on Monday.AdvertisementAnd Florida was waiting for him.Fans booed him when he got on the ice, and raised their volume when Hendricks was shown on the scoreboard video screens early in the game. Moments after that, Panthers defenseman Erik Gudbranson squared off with Hendricks — getting at least 11 right-handed punches in, while the Oilers’ forward did all he could just to stay on his feet.The fight was one-sided. The game was not, but the Oilers — the N.H.L.’s worst road team this season — will take it.Get the big sports news, highlights and analysis from Times journalists, with distinctive takes on games and some behind-the-scenes surprises, delivered to your inbox every week.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.Hall opened the scoring not even two minutes after the fight ended, taking a pass from Purcell near center ice after a Florida turnover and coming in on a breakaway. He beat Montoya to the stick side, and Eberle’s goal with 2:08 left in the first gave Edmonton a 2-0 lead.Hall struck again early in the second, again getting set up by Purcell.Talbot gave up the two quick goals to Smith and Howden early in the third, but settled back into a groove from there and denied two big Florida flurries in the final minutes.BLUES 5, PENGUINS 2 Paul Stastny had a goal and three assists, and St. Louis beat the visiting Pittsburgh . The Blues have won four of five since a five-game losing streak.CANUCK TO FACE OLD TEAM  When the Anaheim Ducks traded Emerson Etem to the Rangers last summer, the young right wing from Long Beach with the “LB” tattooed behind his ear embraced his new challenge. But it was not a good fit.He struggled in training camp and was in and out of Coach Alain Vigneault’s lineup. Etem found himself on the move yet again.AdvertisementThis month, the Rangers traded him to the Vancouver Canucks of the Western Conference for forward Nicklas Jensen and a 2017 sixth-round draft pick. At just 23, Etem is adjusting to his third N.H.L. team.He will play his fifth game with the Canucks on Tuesday against the Rangers at Madison Square Garden.Henrik Sedin, the Canucks’ captain, said: “He’s shown so far that he’s very, very speedy. I think for him to get the confidence back and knowing he’s going to play here and get regular shifts.”A version of this article appears in print on January 19, 2016, on Page B10 of the New York edition with the headline: Sports Briefing | Hockey; Blues Rout the Penguins.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.