By BRAD SPURGEONMAY 27, 2016
Lewis Hamilton, the reigning Formula One world champion, is without question one of the most charismatic and incisive drivers in the series today.But this season, he has been attracting attention of a different sort. Not just because the smooth good-boy image of his early years has been replaced by that of a jaunty jet-setter attending fashion shows, writing music and hanging out with celebrities at flashy events between races. It’s also because after winning the title each of the past two years ahead of his Mercedes teammate, Nico Rosberg, Hamilton, 31, has suddenly had more bad luck and errors this season than in all his previous nine seasons combined.The bad run came to a head at the Spanish Grand Prix two weeks ago. Hamilton, 43 points behind Rosberg, 30, who leads the series and had won the four races up to then, was involved in a spectacular collision with his teammate on the first lap that knocked both drivers out of the race.The stewards judged that neither driver was more responsible that the other for the crash, which they qualified as a racing incident. But Niki Lauda, the usually supportive nonexecutive chairman of the Mercedes team, blamed Hamilton.Advertisement“Lewis was too aggressive to pass him, and why should Nico give him room?” said Lauda, who has long been among Hamilton’s fervent supporters and who helped persuade the Briton to join Mercedes in 2013. “It was a miscalculation for Lewis.”AdvertisementIt was yet another disaster for a driver who only the day before had scored the pole position and seemed at last poised for a change of fortune. He appeared to have lifted himself up since the previous race, the Russian Grand Prix in Sochi, where he had been forced to start in last place, having experienced the same engine problem during qualifying at two races in a row.“I don’t know what the word is, I can’t really describe what I feel right now — it’s not a great feeling,” he said in Russia, looking like he had reached an emotional nadir. “You’re almost helpless at some point. We’ve worked so hard, with my mechanics and my engineers, to get the car in a great position this weekend.”During the Sochi race, after Hamilton had made a fabulous climb up the pack to second place, his engineers told him that his car had a water-pressure problem. They said he would have to slow down so that he could finish the race, which he did, still ending up second to Rosberg.That was the pattern of the season’s first four races: Rosberg took the victory while Hamilton had a problem.It is not as if Hamilton has lost his speed. In Spain, he scored his third pole position of the season and the 52nd of his career, which is the third-most pole positions in history, behind only Michael Schumacher, with 68, and Ayrton Senna with 65.He started the Spain race just ahead of Rosberg. But then, on a track that is notoriously difficult for overtaking, Hamilton had yet another poor start, just as he had so often this season. By the first corner, he had lost his lead to Rosberg.At the third corner, Hamilton made a desperate lurch to retake the lead, but Rosberg did not open the path to let him through. The teammates collided, both skidding off the track and out of the race.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.Not since his first season, in 2007, when he clashed with Fernando Alonso at McLaren, has Hamilton had a challenge like this from a teammate. Another side to his character has emerged, with him looking emotional in the last few races.AdvertisementSome observers suggested that he was finally cracking, making mistakes and losing motivation and talent after he had won three world titles, equaling the total of his hero, Senna. But Rosberg disagreed.“Lewis is still the same Lewis as the last two years, just as quick and just as difficult to beat,” he said in Spain. “I’m the one who sees it internally, and he’s as focused and as determined as ever. So he will bounce back, as he has always done.”Hamilton had joined the series after a rise up the racing formulas as a protégé of the McLaren team, which had signed him to its driver-development program when he was 13.So began a career in which Hamilton generally would spend a year learning a series and then would win it the next year. It was no different when he arrived in Formula One in 2007. He almost won the title that year, finishing just one point behind the champion, Kimi Raikkonen. The next year, he won the title in the last race by a single point ahead of Felipe Massa. At the age of 23, he became the youngest world champion in history, and his career looked as if it had no limits.He was also a young man who had spent his entire life racing on four wheels and experiencing little else. The following five seasons he would have little chance to win the title: The series was dominated by the Brawn team in 2009 and then by Sebastian Vettel and Red Bull from 2010 to 2013.During that period, Hamilton matured and started to discover life away from racing. When he announced that he was leaving McLaren to join Mercedes in 2013, much of the media thought that would be the end of his career.With the arrival of the new hybrid engines, however, came a domination by the Mercedes team and suddenly Hamilton was back on top — at least for the first two seasons of that era.Since Hamilton won his third world title at the United States Grand Prix in October, Rosberg has won every Grand Prix except for the last one. But Hamilton has tried to remain positive.“I’ve got a hundred percent belief in this team and in those guys,” he said of his mechanics, who began working on his car this year after working on Rosberg’s in the previous seasons. “It’s a steep mountain to climb but I love a challenge, so I’m kind of excited about it.”A version of this special report appears in print on May 28, 2016, in The International New York Times.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.See More »