AdvertisementSupported byExtra BasesBy Tyler KepnerBALTIMORE — It is noon on a Wednesday, and Jim Palmer walks from his home to a favorite spot in Little Italy, Da Mimmo, where he has been dining for decades. The restaurant is empty, which means that you can hear the chefs pounding the veal in the back. There will be many more customers later.The first time Palmer came here, in 1984, it was also empty. He peeked in and backed away, but the owner impressed him. When she was younger and part of an Orioles fan club, she explained, she had always wanted his autograph. Palmer dutifully tried the restaurant, loved it, and when he learned it was struggling, he gave it a plug to a local columnist. Now here it is, all these years later, thriving.So is Palmer, who strikes you, in his adopted hometown, as a bit like Rocky Balboa in “Creed,” the last movie in the “Rocky” series. That character carried himself, in Philadelphia, with the easy confidence of a neighborhood legend who had starred in the 1970s, never had to prove himself again, and never abandoned his roots. That is Palmer in Baltimore — minus the loneliness that shrouded Rocky.Palmer, at 70, is anything but lonely. He is married with a stepson and two grown daughters, and still works road trips and home games in the Orioles’ broadcast booth. He is surrounded by baseball, and by fans who adore him.“I always tell people now, Tell them who I used to be,’” Palmer said. “Fathers will come up to me at card shows, or they see me at the ballpark and go, ‘He was one of the greatest pitchers ever.’ I never really thought of that. I mean, I was proud of what I was able to do, but everything we did was a collective thing.”The Orioles have played in six World Series, and Palmer is the only player who was there for them all. He won a game in each of their victorious series — in 1966, 1970 and 1983 — and was swiftly inducted to the Hall of Fame.Palmer had eight 20-victory seasons in a nine-year span and won three American League Cy Young Awards. He is a proud member of the last generation of pitchers who worked 300 innings in a season, having done so four times.“When I got into the Hall of Fame, I said my biggest fear about baseball is if you pay more for less, that’s probably what you’re going to get,” he said. “And I was kind of talking about pitching.”Palmer talks a lot about pitching, and his lifetime of doing it, in a new memoir written with Alan Maimon, “Nine Innings To Success” (Triumph). The book uses examples from Palmer’s life to illustrate broader points, and its author understands his good fortune in achieving it all.Palmer arrived in the majors in 1965 in relief of Robin Roberts, a future Hall of Famer who was also a roommate and mentor. He finished the next season by throwing a shutout in the World Series at Dodger Stadium, beating one of his heroes, Sandy Koufax, in the last game of Koufax’s career.“I go up there and Koufax throws me the first high fastball — shooooo,” Palmer said, mimicking the sound. “Now he throws me the curveball and it looks the same. The same! And John Roseboro catches it on the ground. And I’m going, this is Sandy Koufax.”Palmer was describing what turned out to be the last strikeout Koufax ever got. He retired after the World Series, his arm ruined. It is almost forgotten that Palmer was nearly gone, too. He pitched just nine games the next season and blew out his rotator cuff in the minors in 1968.“I heard everything pop,” he said. “It was like Rice Krispies.”That might have been the end. The Orioles were so stumped that they ordered Palmer to have his teeth pulled as a remedy for the shoulder. Palmer passed an exam to become a life-insurance salesman. He was such an afterthought that the Kansas City Royals and the Seattle Pilots passed on him in the expansion draft.“Mark Trumbo asked me, ‘How did guys deal with Tommy John surgery, ligament problems and all that?’ ” Palmer said, referring to the Orioles outfielder. “I said they had a sore elbow and nobody really knew why. Some got better, some didn’t.”Palmer was one of the lucky ones. One night in December 1968, at a Baltimore Bullets basketball game, a friend who worked for a drug company listened to Palmer describe his problems. The friend, Marv Foxman, left at halftime, went to his car and brought Palmer a brown paper bag filled with pills of Indocin, a nonsteroidal, anti-inflammatory pain reliever.Palmer took them as Foxman instructed, went to winter ball in Puerto Rico and found his 96-mile-an-hour fastball again. Just like that, he was on his way, a hard thrower with remarkable durability who would be baseball’s biggest winner (186 victories) in the 1970s.Pitchers then, Palmer said, were not necessarily better than those today. The difference is the standards. He loved pitching when he did, largely for the challenge of working deep into games, the way Roberts had before him.“That’s what you did, because you could do it,” Palmer said. “You really learn a lot about yourself. It takes guile, intelligence, conditioning, guts.”One pitcher, he said, stands out today — not only for his talent, but, it seems to Palmer, for his drive to go further than most: the Dodgers’ Clayton Kershaw, who pitches at the same park where Palmer beat Koufax nearly 50 years ago. The game he analyzes has changed from the one he played, but Palmer is eager to see the modern master in July.“I’ve never met him, but I’m going to meet him this year,” he said, smiling. “We’re playing out at Dodger Stadium.”One of the more impressive parts of Kris Bryant’s early career has been his willingness to play multiple positions. Last season, when he was the National League rookie of the year for the Chicago Cubs, Bryant played mostly at third base, appearing in the outfield only 19 times. Now, he rarely stays in one spot very long.Bryant has gone more than a month since he played more than three games in a row at one — and only one — position. From April 15 through 19, he played just third base. Since then, Bryant has bounced among third, left field, right field and even first base (for one out). He has played multiple positions in about a third of his games.“There’s so many guys in this clubhouse that might play a certain area, and I might need to make a sacrifice and move somewhere else for them if they’re swinging the bat hot,” Bryant said at Wrigley Field recently. “At first, it’s a little hard to prepare yourself each day, because it’s a change of scenery. You’re in left field, right field, third base — it’s different. Now I’m a little more used to it.”Bryant’s versatility has allowed Manager Joe Maddon to rotate Javier Baez and Tommy La Stella into the lineup at third base. Without a designated hitter spot in the N.L., Maddon said, outfield days give Bryant “almost like a day off” compared to the physical demands of third base. Staying sharp mentally in the outfield can be a challenge.“Playing the outfield is a little different in terms of my offensive side, because you have more time to think about it out there, which can be a good thing or a bad thing,” Bryant said. “I think this year, so far, I’ve made it a good thing, because last year, when I was playing the outfield, I was thinking a lot about my at-bats. This year, I’m a little more focused on the whole defensive side of things.”Bryant’s statistics are essentially the same at third base or the outfield, and he has worked at the plate to improve one offensive trait in particular.“Making more contact,” Bryant said. “I know that I’m going to be above average in terms of my strikeout numbers, but if I could just cut down on that a couple of percentage points, it can only help me.”After leading the N.L. in strikeouts last season, with 199, Bryant had just 40 coming into the weekend. He struck out in 30.6 of his plate appearances last season and had cut that rate to 19.6, helping the Cubs to the majors’ best record.A regrettable fashion trend in baseball, going back more than 20 years, is the way most players wear their pants: pulled down to their shoe tops, with no stirrups or socks showing.“It’s been like that for a while,” said Jon Jay, an outfielder for the San Diego Padres. “But guys wear different stuff underneath.”For Jay — for every game — that means socks depicting Tony Gwynn, the Hall of Famer who spent 20 seasons with the Padres through 2001. The socks are in the classic Padres colors — yellow, brown and orange — that Gwynn wore early in his career.“Growing up, he was the best hitter around,” said Jay, like Gwynn a left-handed hitter. “I’ve always had a swing that went to left field, and he always hit that 6-hole — that was his patented move. I remember just always admiring his swing and the way he could hit the ball to all parts of the ballpark.”Jay chose No. 19 with his previous team, the St. Louis Cardinals, partly because of Gwynn. Since coming to the Padres, he said, he has learned more about Gwynn, including his reliance on video to prepare for games.“Mike Tompkins, our video guy, was around him, and I asked him a ton of questions about Tony,” Jay said. “He revolutionized it.”Jay has met Tony Gwynn Jr., but he never met Gwynn, who died of salivary gland cancer in 2014. Gwynn’s family filed a wrongful-death lawsuit Monday against Altria Group, Inc., the tobacco giant formerly known as Philip Morris, and several other defendants involved in inducing Gwynn to begin using smokeless tobacco, or dip, at San Diego State in the 1970s.Advertisement