AdvertisementSupported byBy Seth BerkmanIn a game teeming with an amalgam of nostalgia, good and bad, Chase Utley wrote another horror tale in his library of Mets miseries Friday night, but a walk-off home run by Curtis Granderson saved an atypical ninth inning by Jeurys Familia, granting the Mets a 6-5 win over the Los Angeles Dodgers.“A mixture of emotions, obviously,” Granderson said. “A great game of baseball there.”Leading by 5-1, Mets Manager Terry Collins tempted fate, challenging an unwritten rule of baseball: bringing in a closer with a four-run lead. Familia gave up three singles to the first four batters he faced, loading the bases with one out. He then walked Yasmani Grandal, forcing in one run, before striking out pinch-hitter Trayce Thompson.With two outs and the bases loaded, Utley, who has 36 career home runs against the Mets — the most he has hit against any team — crushed the first pitch he saw from Familia for a bases-clearing double that tied the game, 5-5.From the opening pitch, Mets fans booed Utley, who broke Ruben Tejada’s right leg on a hard slide in last year’s National League Championship Series, just as vociferously as they had when they first acquired a distaste for the hard-nosed Utley a decade ago when he was a second baseman with the Philadelphia Phillies.It was one of many throwback moments.The year 1986 was painted along the baselines, and the Mets wore their racing-stripe jerseys from that season, when they won the World Series. Adding to the aura were the Mets’ opponents — the Dodgers, their New York National League predecessors, whom they defeated in last year’s playoffs.Even David Wright turned back the clock and crushed a solo home run over the center-field wall, his third homer in three games. As he crossed home plate, the stadium audio system played the 1980s hit by Simple Minds, “Don’t You (Forget About Me).”Entering the series between bicoastal rivals, fans of the Dodgers also had a reason to feel sentimental.Julio Urias, a 19-year-old left-handed phenom from Mexico (sound familiar?), made his major league debut. Urias became the youngest Dodger to appear in a game since the Mexican-born southpaw Fernando Valenzuela was called up at 19 toward the end of the 1980 season from the Dodgers’ Class AA affiliate in San Antonio. The Mets battered Urias for three first-inning runs and he exited in the third, having given up five hits and four walks.Fragments of his special talent were visible at times; several publications rank Urias as the Dodgers’ top prospect and among the best in baseball. As the ace Clayton Kershaw intently watched each pitch with his arms draped over the dugout rail, Urias, with his high leg kick, started the game by striking out Granderson. He also beat Wright with a 95-mile-per-hour fastball for another first-inning strikeout.Mets infielder Matt Reynolds, who had faced Urias in the minors, said he had a fastball around 96 or 97 m.p.h., with a good changeup, curveball and slider.“He got some swing-and-misses out of the zone with it, so that tells me he’s got good deception,” Reynolds said.Within a year, Valenzuela and his lethal screwball became the toast of Hollywood and Fernandomania was born. He eventually became a six-time All-Star and so influential that the former Dodgers pitcher Jim Brewer would travel to the club’s minor league affiliates and teach the screwball, Mets Manager Terry Collins said. Urias, of Culiacan, Sinaloa, does not throw one.While Urias had a difficult night, Utley, who returned to Citi Field for the first time since last year’s N.L.C.S., was the lone Dodger to be productive against Jacob deGrom, who struck out seven in seven innings of work. Utley worked two walks and drove in one of his four R.B.I. off deGrom.DeGrom said that his arm slot on his off-speed pitches was better but that he did not yet feel he was at the level he reached last season when he won 14 games, made the All-Star team and was possibly the best Mets pitcher in the postseason.Aside from Wright’s home run, deGrom was helped by Juan Lagares, who hit a solo homer in the fifth and drove in three runs.DeGrom left the game ahead, 5-1, and Jerry Blevins and Addison Reed combined to throw a scoreless eighth inning.Collins, when asked his logic for choosing Familia to close the game, said: “You guys always ask that. If the leadoff hitter gets on, who comes in? Because it becomes a save situation. In a game like that, you know what, you can’t worry about tomorrow. You got to win tonight. So you bring him in.”Familia did not speak to reporters after the game. Despite a Mets win, it was a game he apparently would rather forget.Advertisement