AdvertisementSupported byBy The Associated PressTORONTO — LeBron James scored 33 points as the Cleveland Cavaliers advanced to their second straight N.B.A. finals on Friday by beating the Toronto Raptors, 113-87, in Game 6 of the Eastern Conference finals.It is the third overall finals appearance for the Cavaliers. Cleveland lost to the Golden State Warriors in six games last year and was swept by the San Antonio Spurs in 2007.It is James’s sixth straight trip to the finals, after four with the Miami Heat, and his seventh over all. He broke the 30-point barrier for the first time this postseason and finished with 11 rebounds and 6 assists.“I had to bring my game,” James said. “I had to be in attack mode from the beginning.”Kevin Love had 20 points and 12 rebounds, and Kyrie Irving had 30 points for the Cavaliers, who will face the winner of the Golden State-Oklahoma City series on Thursday. Cleveland would open at home against the Thunder but would be on the road against the 73-win Warriors, who trail Oklahoma City, three games to two, heading into Saturday’s Game 6.The Cavaliers are seeking to end Cleveland’s 52-year championship drought, the longest by any city with at least three professional teams. No Cleveland team has won it all since the Browns blanked the Baltimore Colts, 27-0, to win the N.F.L. championship in 1964.Kyle Lowry scored 35 points and DeMar DeRozan had 20 as the deepest playoff run in Raptors history ended, much to the disappointment of a sellout crowd. Fans dressed in red and white T-shirts formed a maple leaf pattern on either side of the court, standing and cheering “Let’s go, Raptors! Let’s go, Raptors!” throughout most of the final three minutes.Toronto prolonged the series with back-to-back home wins in Games 3 and 4 but never mounted much of a challenge in Game 6, falling behind by 21 in the third quarter.The Cavaliers entered the game 0-4 at Air Canada Centre counting the regular season and playoffs, but looked much more like the team that handed the Raptors three lopsided losses in Cleveland this series.The Raptors trailed, 88-78, after a jumper by DeRozan with 10 minutes 23 seconds remaining, but James scored 6 points in a 14-3 run that gave the Cavs a 102-81 lead with about six minutes left.James scored 14 in the first quarter, and five of Cleveland’s nine field goals were from long range as the Cavaliers built a 31-25 lead.After a video review, the officials waved off a basket by Bismack Biyombo with 3:18 left in the period and gave him a flagrant foul for knocking down Love.Tempers flared again early in the second quarter when Cleveland’s Richard Jefferson reacted angrily to catching an elbow from Toronto’s Jonas Valanciunas as the two battled for a rebound. Patrick Patterson came over and shoved Jefferson out of the way, and both Patterson and Jefferson were given technical fouls.Cleveland made five more 3-pointers in the second quarter and led, 55-41, at halftime. The Cavaliers made 10 of 15 3-point attempts in the first half, while Toronto was 2 of 12.Lowry scored 18 points in the third quarter as Toronto closed it with a 17-8 run, but the Cavaliers pulled away again in the fourth quarter.Advertisement