AdvertisementSupported bySpecial Report: Monaco Grand PrixBy Brad SpurgeonAs Formula One prepares for its most spectacular race location, Monaco, this weekend, it is still digesting one of the most spectacular race results in its history: the victory of the Red Bull driver Max Verstappen at the Spanish Grand Prix in Barcelona on May 15.Not only was Verstappen, 18, the youngest winner in Formula One history. He also joined an elite group of drivers who won their first races at their new teams: Verstappen had arrived at Red Bull the previous week from Toro Rosso.It was, in any case, a feat generally accomplished only by future or past champions.Not counting the first winner of a Formula One race, Giuseppe Farina, who won the first race in the series’s history in 1950, the only driver to win his first race both in the series itself — and therefore also his first at his new team — was Giancarlo Baghetti, at the French Grand Prix of 1961. Baghetti had qualified his privately entered Ferrari — it was a Ferrari car, but he was not driving for the Ferrari team — in only 12th position, though his climb up the pack was aided by breakdowns of several competing cars. But Baghetti would not go on to become a Formula One world champion.Juan Manuel Fangio, like Verstappen, scored inaugural victories when he joined teams in mid-season. In 1954, at the French Grand Prix, he moved to Mercedes from the Maserati team, and won the race. In 1956, joining Ferrari before the Argentine Grand Prix, he again won. At that race, however, he would not have won had his teammate, Luigi Musso, not handed Fangio his car when Fangio’s broke down (a strategy that was allowed at the time). Fangio was world champion five times, in 1951 and from 1954 to 1957.Mario Andretti had been racing on and off in Formula One when, in 1971, he took his first drive at the Ferrari team at the South African Grand Prix, qualifying fourth and winning the race. Andretti went on to win the world title in 1978.In 1977, at the Argentine Grand Prix, Jody Scheckter not only won his first race with his new team, Walter Wolf, but it was also the first race for the team. Scheckter went on to win the drivers’ title in 1979 for Ferrari. Ferrari, the most successful team in the series and the only one to have raced in every season since Formula One began, is also the team that has the most new drivers winning their first races with their new team. But at the Brazilian Grand Prix in 1989, when Nigel Mansell of Britain drove his first race at Ferrari, it seemed unlikely he would win. He qualified in only sixth position and among the drivers in front of him was the Brazilian Ayrton Senna, competing at his home race in the fastest car. But Senna and Mansell’s teammate, Gerhard Berger, had a battle at the start that helped Mansell, and eventually the British driver — and future 1992 world champion — won the race. At the South African Grand Prix in 1993, Alain Prost, then a three-time world champion, triumphed with his new Williams team on his return to racing after a year off. He would go on to capture his fourth world title before retiring. Joining Ferrari in 2007, Kimi Raikkonen won the season-opening Australian Grand Prix, starting from pole. Still, the season was far from simple, and Raikkonen eventually won the title by just a single point over the two McLaren drivers, Lewis Hamilton and Fernando Alonso. By 2010, Alonso had replaced Raikkonen at Ferrari. At the opening race of that season, in Bahrain, the two-time world champion started third on the grid, passed his new teammate, Felipe Massa, and then later passed the race leader, Sebastian Vettel, and won the race for his new team. It’s worth noting that part of the reason Verstappen was promoted to Red Bull in the middle of the season is because other teams, including Ferrari, were interested in hiring him. So it might well have been at Ferrari where he would have had the honor of his first victory. Advertisement