

 Marc Tracy
 

ON COLLEGE FOOTBALL
JAN. 12, 2016
GLENDALE, Ariz. — The biggest play of the national championship game was a surprise in the moment because it was a surprise in the much greater sweep of Alabama’s history and Coach Nick Saban’s career.Marlon Humphrey of Alabama was on the sideline in the fourth quarter. The 24-24 score had resulted from several defensive lapses on Clemson’s part, and did not reflect that the undefeated Tigers had been dominating.Then Humphrey heard his name called. He knew what it meant: a play called Pop Kick. A surprise onside kick.He lined up on the far right of Alabama’s kickoff formation, parallel with Clemson’s widest returner. As the play began he sprinted forward, subtly flaring toward the sideline, taking a slightly harder angle with each step. The kick, disguised until nearly the end, bounced up into the flat, past the required 10 yards, to a space where Humphrey and only Humphrey could make a play on it. He hauled it in over his back; it looked like Willie Mays’s famous World Series catch. Alabama ball.AdvertisementSaban, whose reputation is of someone who would be dour at his daughter’s wedding, smiled and all but skipped down the sideline.Advertisement“Obviously, the couple of special teams plays were huge momentum plays,” said Clemson Coach Dabo Swinney, referring also to a later 95-yard kick return by Alabama’s Kenyan Drake.The onside kick was a classic underdog maneuver, a high-stakes gamble from a program that is seemingly always favored and from a coach that never used to make such moves. Alabama went on to beat Clemson, 45-40. It was Saban’s fifth national championship, and fourth with the Crimson Tide. It held the promise of yet more.To be sure, the play succeeded because it worked technically. Saban and Bobby Williams, Alabama’s special teams coordinator, had noticed watching tape that Clemson tended to leave “a lot of field,” in Williams’s words, between the sideline and its leftmost returner, who on the fateful play was lined up on the hash mark. They discussed the play, Williams said, before every kickoff. They had practiced it all season.“It works almost every time, except I usually drop the ball,” said Humphrey, adding, “We practiced it this past Thursday — we hadn’t practiced it in a while, and I actually dropped it.”The surprise was heightened by the incongruity. Here was Saban, a former defensive back, N.F.L. defensive coordinator and steadfastly defense-first coach, voluntarily putting the ball into the hands of his offense rather than trusting his defense.“I made the decision,” Saban said after the game, because “we were tired on defense and weren’t doing a great job of getting them stopped.”Saban’s old philosophy, of outsize defenses smothering opponents and then letting a humble offense take care of the rest, was good for three national titles in four seasons. The apotheosis was 2011’s campaign: Alabama lost just once, to Louisiana State, in a 9-6 kickers’ duel, and then shut out the same L.S.U. team in the championship game, 21-0.AdvertisementBut cracks appeared. In 2012, Johnny Manziel marched into Tuscaloosa, Ala., as a redshirt freshman and scrambled his way to a Texas A&M victory. Between 2010 and 2013, Auburn took two Iron Bowls with a spread offense run under the offensive coordinator and then head coach Gus Malzahn.In response, Saban brought in the offensive coordinator Lane Kiffin before last season to jolt his attack. Alabama beat Auburn, 26-21, in 2009, but it beat Auburn, 55-44, last season. It scored 21 against L.S.U. in January 2012, but scored 38 against Michigan State and then 45 against Clemson’s highly ranked defense in this postseason.Get the big sports news, highlights and analysis from Times journalists, with distinctive takes on games and some behind-the-scenes surprises, delivered to your inbox every week.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.If not quite “if you can’t beat ’em, join ’em,” it was some sort of concession, and it paid off Monday night against an explosive Clemson offense led by quarterback Deshaun Watson, a Heisman Trophy finalist who will be a junior next year on a team that will probably be the preseason No. 1.There is precedent for an all-time-great college coach realizing that his previous methods were no longer optimal, altering them, and securing a national championship. In fact, it was his fifth title, too.It happened last year. Duke Coach Mike Krzyzewski — the Nick Saban of men’s basketball (unless Saban is the Krzyzewski of football) — secured his fifth title in April with a relatively young team built around the country’s highest-ranked recruiting class. It was the fruit of a deliberate change in strategy for the coach who back in the old days won two titles with veterans like Christian Laettner and Grant Hill and as recently as 2010 won another title with a roster distinguished mostly by its experience.This is no coincidence; Saban’s and Krzyzewski’s are similar responses to the same trends in big-time college sports. Earlier specialization has made recruiting more important than ever. Wider exposure and broader distribution of revenue have created a more level competitive playing field. It all means that staying with one’s old, preferred ways is no longer sufficient.“I don’t know how you do what he’s doing,” Kiffin, who has been the head coach at Southern California and Tennessee, said of his boss. “It’s too hard now. Nobody does it. I know people did similar stuff years ago. But the scholarship numbers are lower now, players leave early for the draft, and there’s so many good coaches.”Although football does not work quite like basketball — players typically may not turn professional after one year, and at many positions even the most talented compete for four — the new reality has compelled Saban to retrofit his always top-notch strategy.AdvertisementThe pitch: Come to Alabama, play if you are the best, receive a distinct job so that you can always contribute, win national championships and continue in your football career.Geno Matias-Smith, a cornerback-turned-safety whose 11 tackles led Alabama on Monday night, said recently that he was coaxed to Alabama by being told “that I’d have to compete — come out every day and compete in practice, just work hard. Nothing is guaranteed.”In recruiting’s winner-takes-all economy — in which victories beget more victories — the old Alabama cheer of “Roll Tide,” with its assertion of perennial churn, can be taken literally. (After the game, a five-star nose tackle sent a tweet  on how excited he was to visit Tuscaloosa this coming weekend.)“We try to sub and play a lot of players,” said Kirby Smart, Saban’s longtime defensive coordinator, who as of game’s end was exclusively Georgia’s new head coach. “So we create team morale by playing players.”He added, “The best players end up playing at Alabama.”Asked if this philosophy helped with recruiting, he said, “Absolutely.”The result was apparent Monday night. Over the course of the season, Alabama’s biggest contributors — the Heisman Trophy-winning running back Derrick Henry, quarterback Jake Coker, center Ryan Kelly, defensive lineman A’Shawn Robinson, linebacker Reggie Ragland — were upperclassmen. So were Monday night’s offensive and defensive players of the game, tight end O. J. Howard and safety Eddie Jackson.But Alabama’s best receiver this season was Calvin Ridley, another freshman. Humphrey was a redshirt freshman. Two freshman cornerbacks, Minkah Fitzpatrick and Ronnie Harrison, were perhaps the game’s unsung heroes: each made terrific plays denying touchdowns to Clemson receivers in one-on-one coverage; failure on either play would have erased Alabama’s margin of victory.Reflecting on his play after the game, Fitzpatrick was sanguine in both senses — stoic, and bloodthirsty.“I played all right,” he said. “It wasn’t my best game. I’m going to try to make up for it the next couple of seasons.”A version of this article appears in print on January 13, 2016, on Page B8 of the New York edition with the headline: An Enduring Coach Pulls a Timely Trick .  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.See More »