AdvertisementSupported byBy David WaldsteinPARIS — The racket dropped to the ground, the hands went high into the air, and soon after, the teardrops rolled. Shelby Rogers, 23, had just achieved the biggest victory of her career in one of the greatest moments of her young life.She had defeated 10th-seeded Petra Kvitova, 6-0, 6-7 (3), 6-0, at the French Open and advanced to the fourth round of a Grand Slam tournament for the first time.After securing the winning point and shaking hands with the devastated Kvitova, Rogers put her face in her hands to temporarily mask her tears and then ran to hug her parents, her agent, her coach and her boyfriend.“It’s a little bit blurry, for sure,” Rogers said of the final point. “There was a lot of noise and a lot of applause and a lot of emotions taking over.”Ranked 108th in the world, Rogers was the second-to-last player accepted into the main draw. But with impressive wins over Karolina Pliskova, Elena Vesnina and Kvitova, Rogers, a South Carolinian, is negotiating the red clay as well as any of the Europeans she has vanquished. There is another one coming up in the Romanian Irina-Camelia Begu, but Rogers was uninterested in discussing that match.“Can I enjoy this one for a little bit?” she asked reporters.Kvitova, a two-time Wimbledon champion, acknowledged that Rogers had controlled the match, pounding away from the baseline and forcing her into impossible corners. But Kvitova said a bad night of sleep had been another obstacle to her winning.“I felt just weird,” she said. “I didn’t really sleep tonight, and it’s just difficult day today for sure. It’s one of the worst, definitely, to lose in a Grand Slam.”Some of Rogers’s earliest tennis moments — including as a ball girl at the Charleston, S.C., tournament — came on clay. She was born in Mount Pleasant, S.C., where tennis is big and the clay is mostly green. But her skills have clearly translated well here.“I have been feeling really confident,” she said. “I have had a couple of good wins here already. I was just trying to focus on my game and do the things that have been working for me in my first rounds.”Rogers’s older sister Sabra (pronounced Saybra) played tennis at Emory University, and the two are close. Shelby Rogers said her older sister was unable to attend the tournament because of her work as a psychologist.But her presence was felt. Rogers said Sabra had helped her sharpen her focus both on and off the court through journal writing. Rogers said it helped her keep self-doubt from intruding on her mission.Last year was a slog for Rogers, whose play was limited by back and knee injuries. She qualified for the United States Open and reached the third round before Simona Halep knocked her out.Halep was back on court Friday and withstood a challenge from Naomi Osaka, an 18-year-old Japanese-Haitian player who grew up mostly in Florida. Halep regrouped to win, 4-6, 6-2, 6-3.Osaka possesses a wicked forehand that forced Halep back on her heels, especially in the first set. The flow of the match shifted, which did not surprise Osaka, who acknowledged that she can be immature, like any teenager.“I sort of blanked out,” she said. “I stepped out of playing mode, and then I realized I’m playing in this stadium against Halep. I should have focused more.”Advertisement