By BEN ROTHENBERGJULY 24, 2016
In a year of increased scrutiny of match fixing and the perceived inadequacy of the Tennis Integrity Unit, the sport’s designated watchdog, the highest profile conviction was brought by another governing body.The Federation of Italian Tennis last week barred Marco Cecchinato for 18 months and fined him 40,000 euros ($43,900) after he was accused of fixing two of his matches and using confidential information for gambling.Cecchinato, 23, of Palermo, Italy, is ranked 143rd in the world and is the youngest Italian man in the ATP top 250, making him easily the highest-profile player charged with such a violation in recent memory. He played in the main draws of the most recent United States Open, the Australian Open and the French Open, and he was part of the Italian Davis Cup team that lost to Argentina, 3-1, this month, although he did not play.Cecchinato has been seen as one of his country’s few bright spots in a disappointing generation of men’s players. He has denied any wrongdoing, and his lawyer, Antonino Reina, indicated to the Italian site Tennis Best that Cecchinato would appeal the decision in a federal court. If he loses the appeal, he cannot play again until January 2018.AdvertisementTwo other Italians, unranked Riccardo Accardi and 842nd-ranked Antonio Campo, were also barred and fined in connection with the case. Accardi was barred for one year and fined 20,000 euros ($21,950), and Campo was given a ban of four months and a fine of 10,000 euros ($10,975).AdvertisementMany countries do not devote significant resources to policing match fixing in tennis, but Italian authorities have been among the most effective in the world at exposing improprieties. Last year, two other Italian players, Daniele Bracciali and Potito Starace, were barred for life by the federation for match fixing, but the federation’s appeals court cleared Starace and reduced Bracciali’s punishment to one year.The Tennis Integrity Unit rarely reveals any details of its work, but the Italian federation released a 47-page report on the Cecchinato case.The focus of the investigation was a quarterfinal match in October at an ATP Challenger Tour event in Mohammedia, Morocco. Cecchinato, who was at a career-best ATP ranking of 82nd that week, had won his previous two matches against higher-ranked opponents easily, but he lost to a qualifier, 338th-ranked Kamil Majchrzak of Poland, 6-1, 6-4, in 66 minutes.The upset loss did not raise suspicions, but the Autonomous Administration of State Monopolies, which regulates gambling in Italy, spotted unexpectedly large bets for Majchrzak to win the match in straight sets. Majchrzak, a clear underdog to win at 4 to 1, was an even longer shot, 7 to 1, to win in straight sets. Accardi and his father, Fabrizio, were the only people in Italy to place the straight-set bets, according to the administration. The Accardis used dozens of accounts across various sites to place bets of 800 euros, far more than the previous average of 50 to 100 euros.The investigation revealed that the younger Accardi and Cecchinato had become friends while playing as adolescents at the same tennis club in Palermo. They remained in close contact despite, as the federation’s report noted, that “the paths of the two had divided since Cecchinato had become a good world-class player while Accardi was sailing between the slums of the third category.”Get the big sports news, highlights and analysis from Times journalists, with distinctive takes on games and some behind-the-scenes surprises, delivered to your inbox every week.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.Cecchinato deleted his messages with Accardi, but investigators were able to recover their WhatsApp conversations from Accardi’s cellphone — which Cecchinato’s lawyer planned to cite in his appeal, saying it was a violation of privacy.In a conversation weeks before the match against Majchrzak, Cecchinato lamented to Accardi that he could have won 1,770 euros if an Italian league soccer match between Carpi and Napoli had gone his way, and he vaguely suggested that he could recoup the money in Morocco, noting that a poor Moroccan opponent might yield an opportunity.AdvertisementAccardi responded: “What Moroccans?”And Cecchinato replied: “Nothing … you did not understand? no … leave it alone.”As further corroboration of Cecchinato’s intention to fix the Majchrzak match, the federation pointed to the fact that he had purchased his plane ticket home before the match.The federation said Cecchinato had additionally altered the results of a doubles contest in a Challenger event in Prostejov, Czech Republic, months earlier.“I have the urge to go home,” Cecchinato wrote to the younger Accardi before that match. Cecchinato’s doubles partner, Luca Vanni, was fined 300 euros ($329) for his role in the match.The federation also said that, in addition to fixing the two matches, Cecchinato had given confidential information about a first-round match at last year’s French Open between Andreas Seppi, with whom Cecchinato shares a coach, and John Isner. Following Cecchinato’s recommendation, Accardi bet on Isner to win in straight sets because Seppi was injured.Cecchinato has said that the information was not confidential, because reports about Seppi’s health issues had been reported in the Italian news media.Cecchinato also received confidential information from Campo on a match involving Lorenzo Frigerio, the federation said.The Italian federation’s ban may not extend to countries outside Italy, but Reina said that Cecchinato did not plan to play during his ban. This would give the Tennis Integrity Unit, which has requested evidence from the Italian federation, time to catch up.A decision will be made about whether to charge the three players with “a corruption offense under the Tennis Anti-Corruption Programme,” the I.T.F. told the Associated Press last week.AdvertisementThe integrity unit did release its quarterly briefing of alerts it had received of potentially suspicious betting activity earlier this month, citing 73 alerts. Separately, the European Sports Security Agency said tennis accounted for 83 percent of the dubious betting activity it had monitored in the second quarter of the year.Gaia Pianigiani contributed reporting from Rome.A version of this article appears in print on July 25, 2016, on Page D8 of the New York edition with the headline: Three Players Barred for Match Fixing Amid Criticism of Sport’s Integrity Unit.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.