By KEN BELSONJULY 20, 2016
For years, the N.F.L. relied on, and endorsed the medical expertise of, a rheumatologist with no formal training in neurology or brain science who denied a link between head trauma and certain brain diseases even as scientific evidence of a strong connection mounted.As team doctor for the Jets, the leader of a committee on brain injuries and later a medical adviser to the league, the doctor, Elliot J. Pellman, was accused by independent researchers of promoting “junk science” and routinely putting N.F.L. players in harm’s way by minimizing the effect of concussions.Still, although the league had lowered his profile in recent years, he kept a job with it until Wednesday, when the N.F.L. — almost as a footnote to an announcement about its search to fill a new position, chief medical officer — noted that he would leave the league.“We thank Dr. Pellman for his dedicated service to the game and for his many contributions to the N.F.L. and our clubs and appreciate his willingness to aid in this transition over the next few months,” Commissioner Roger Goodell said in a memo to league executives Wednesday.AdvertisementDr. Pellman’s sudden departure comes as the N.F.L. tries to repair the damage done by him and other medical professionals hired by the league who ultimately tried to explain away the dangers of concussions and head trauma.AdvertisementNearly a hundred former players, including major stars like Ken Stabler and Junior Seau, have been found to have had chronic traumatic encephalopathy, a degenerative brain disease linked to repeated head hits.The work of Dr. Pellman and his colleagues eroded trust in the N.F.L., which has spent hundreds of millions of dollars to settle a class-action lawsuit brought by retired players and which has been repeatedly grilled by lawmakers who have accused the league of not doing enough to protect its players.Reached by telephone, Dr. Pellman, 62, declined to comment.Robert Boland, the director of the Sports Administration Program at Ohio University, said: “The N.F.L. has been in a highly defensive posture after the Pellman period, which strained its credibility. It’s bigger than just the concussion issue, but the concussion issue started it.”Dr. Pellman led the influential Mild Traumatic Brain Injury Committee, which was established in 1994 by Paul Tagliabue, then the commissioner. Dr. Pellman was the Jets’ team doctor, and it later came out that he had repeatedly sent players back onto the field despite signs of concussions. But Dr. Pellman had close ties to Mr. Tagliabue as his personal physician.As the chairman of the committee, Dr. Pellman was instrumental in shaping the N.F.L.’s response to the growing awareness of the dangers of concussions and repeated head blows.That response was mainly publishing research, starting in the mid-1990s, that played down or denied the dangers of concussions and head hits. Dr. Pellman was the primary author of many of the 13 papers the league published in the journal Neurosurgery from 2003 to 2006 that made statements or recommended policies at odds with outside research findings and medical opinion.Several of the league studies focused on head injuries to N.F.L. players and purported to analyze every concussion that teams had handled from 1996 to 2011.AdvertisementBut research conducted by The New York Times this year revealed that at least 100 concussions were omitted from that analysis, including some that were career-ending injuries to star players.Over the past decade, when much of the N.F.L.-sponsored research was discredited and Tagliabue’s successor, Mr. Goodell, was forced to testify on Capitol Hill about the league’s handling of brain trauma, the N.F.L. introduced stricter protocols for identifying and treating players with concussions.The league also began donating millions of dollars to research institutes that were studying the long-term effects of repeated head trauma.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.Dr. Pellman resigned as chairman of the committee in 2007 but remained a powerful member of the group until 2010, when he and other members of the committee were replaced, under congressional pressure.The league tried to turn a page by appointing two brain science specialists, Dr. H. Hunt Batjer, the chairman of neurological surgery at Northwestern Memorial Hospital in Evanston, Ill., and Dr. Richard G. Ellenbogen, the chief of neurological surgery at Harborview Medical Center in Seattle, to lead the newly rechristened N.F.L. Head, Neck and Spine Medical Committee.Unlike Dr. Pellman, Dr. Batjer and Dr. Ellenbogen had direct experience dealing with the types of head injuries that football players can sustain while playing. Dr. Ellenbogen also conducted research on head injuries in the military.Yet Dr. Pellman remained at the N.F.L. even as other members of the committee left, and even after he was found to have distorted his medical record on his résumé, omitting that his medical degree was from a university in Mexico.Dr. Pellman in recent years worked in the league’s headquarters, primarily as an administrator, and appeared at owners’ meetings and other events.He will remain with the N.F.L. for another couple of months. At the same time, the league has begun a search for a full-time chief medical officer who will work with teams, the N.F.L. Players Association and medical committees. The search will be led by Dr. Elizabeth G. Nabel, the league’s chief medical adviser.AdvertisementThe league continues to be criticized by lawmakers for not doing enough to protect players. Citing safety concerns, the players’ union has resisted efforts by team owners to add two regular-season games to the league schedule.More than 5,000 retired players sued the N.F.L. because they said it deliberately hid from them the dangers of concussions. As part of a broader settlement, the league in 2013 agreed to spend hundreds of millions of dollars to pay players with severe neurological disorders.The N.F.L.’s reluctance to acknowledge the seriousness of head injuries had a wide impact. The N.H.L. and other professional leagues have been sued. More broadly, participation rates in youth football leagues have declined as parents have steered their children into soccer and other sports with less contact.The N.F.L. has taken steps to address concerns over head trauma. It curtailed the number of full-contact practices and made 42 rule changes in the last decade to reduce the chance that players would be involved in some of the most dangerous kinds of collisions. Professionals trained in treating head injuries now roam the sidelines during games.The league has donated more than $60 million to institutes studying the long-term impact of repeated head blows and to companies trying to develop safer equipment and better diagnostic tools.Despite these efforts, books continue to be written about how the league has dealt with head trauma, drawing parallels to how tobacco companies denied any link between cigarette smoking and lung cancer. Last year, Hollywood took on the topic in the movie “Concussion,” which told the story of Bennet Omalu, the first doctor to diagnose chronic traumatic encephalopathy in N.F.L. players. (Paul Reiser portrayed Dr. Pellman in the film.)That concussions and C.T.E. are now part of the popular lexicon is a testament to the visibility of the N.F.L. but also to the degree to which, in many observers’ eyes, the league mishandled the issue. And even though Dr. Pellman will no longer work for the N.F.L., the impact of his work will continue to be felt.“The N.F.L. could have addressed this head-on given what they knew, but instead they ran a disinformation campaign,” said Chris Nowinski, the president of the Concussion Legacy Foundation and a frequent critic of the league. “I hope this represents the end of a very dark era, but the reality is the people now in charge think less of C.T.E. than he did.”A version of this article appears in print on July 21, 2016, on Page B10 of the New York edition with the headline: Doctor Faulted on C.T.E. Will Retire.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.