By THE ASSOCIATED PRESSJULY 14, 2016
KNOXVILLE, Tenn. — Pat Summitt was remembered as a loving mother, a loyal friend and a tireless fighter as well as a champion coach Thursday in a public ceremony honoring the woman who built the Tennessee women’s basketball dynasty.“She was the epitome of what being great is all about,” said Indiana Fever forward Tamika Catchings, one of the dozens of former Lady Volunteers who paid respects to Summitt at a “Celebration of Life” ceremony at Thompson-Boling Arena.Catchings later added, “This is not a goodbye, but until we meet again.”The ceremony gave the public a chance to honor Summitt, who won eight national titles and a Division I record 1,098 games in her 38-year tenure. A private funeral was held June 30, two days after Summitt died at 64.The list of speakers included the retired quarterback Peyton Manning, a former Tennessee football star who called Summitt “someone who literally changed history.” Manning said the only pieces of sports memorabilia he keeps in his office are two basketballs Summitt signed for his children.Get the big sports news, highlights and analysis from Times journalists, with distinctive takes on games and some behind-the-scenes surprises, delivered to your inbox every week.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.Manning discussed visiting Summitt late in her fight against Alzheimer’s disease, when she could not remember his name. He talked about attending Summitt’s private funeral and hearing from the former Lady Vols star Chamique Holdsclaw, who told him that even as Summitt’s memory faded, she would still point to the television screen when one of Manning’s games or commercials aired and would say: “That’s my friend who comes to visit me. There goes my friend.”Advertisement“Pat Summitt didn’t just change the history of Tennessee basketball or made this arena known well beyond the borders of this state,” Manning said. “She changed the history of the sport she loved — and of sports in general. She almost single-handedly made women’s sports relevant well beyond mothers, daughters, sisters and grandmothers.”The event attracted Gov. Bill Haslam of Tennessee; the state’s two senators, Lamar Alexander and Bob Corker; and a star-studded list of women’s basketball coaches that included Connecticut’s Geno Auriemma, Summitt’s greatest rival. They were among several thousand spectators who honored Summitt in an arena where she orchestrated some of her greatest victories.The stage for the event included each of the Lady Vols’ eight national championship trophies plus a stool and a whistle used by Summitt, who coached Tennessee from 1974-2012.Speakers included the “Good Morning America” anchor Robin Roberts; the current Tennessee coach, Holly Warlick; the former Lady Volunteers assistant Mickie DeMoss; and Summitt’s son, Tyler.AdvertisementThe ceremony had plenty of somber moments. A videotape at the event showed Warlick and the former Lady Vols guard Michelle Brooke-Marciniak in tears as they described what Summitt had meant to them. The event opened with a bagpipe rendition of “Amazing Grace.”But it also included some laughter. Shelley Sexton-Collier, who played on Tennessee’s 1987 national championship team, joked that she thought she was playing for Tennessee’s cross country team because Summitt had made them run so often.“The real accomplishment of Pat’s life is this: You won 1,098 games and eight national championships, and what people talk about in the end is it’s not about how much you win but how much you did for others,” said DeMoss, now a Louisiana State assistant.A version of this article appears in print on July 15, 2016, on Page B11 of the New York edition with the headline: Celebrating a Coach Who Built a Dynasty.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.