

 Marc Tracy
 

ON COLLEGE FOOTBALL
JULY 20, 2016
Paul D. Ryan, the House speaker, turned to college football this week in persuading Texas delegates at the Republican National Convention to unify behind the presidential candidate Donald J. Trump.Noting the antipathy between the state’s two biggest teams, Texas and Texas A&M, Ryan argued, according to one report, “When one of the teams advances to a big bowl game or a national championship, don’t you root for the Aggies if you are a Longhorn?”Ryan, of course, was booed. Under no circumstances does a Longhorns fan root for the Aggies, or vice versa.But earlier in his analogy, Ryan said something about the rivals that was nearly as tone-deaf, wistfully recalling the days “when the Big 12 was the Big 12.”AdvertisementNostalgia for the Big 12 can strike a seasoned college football fan as inapposite. The conference, an arranged marriage of two dying leagues, has existed for only two decades. And as the Big 12 confirmed Tuesday, when it announced that it was open to expanding beyond its current stable of 10 teams, no league better exemplifies the reality that big-time college sports are now driven less by generations-old animosity than by cable cords and subscriber fees.AdvertisementAfter digesting the reports of two outside consultants, the 10 Big 12 members unanimously asked their commissioner, Bob Bowlsby, to vet several suitors for membership. That means that in the near future, the Big 12 could again feature 12 teams; it might even grow to 14.The justifications revolved around money and football championships. Most immediately, Monday brought reports of a 20-year broadcast-rights extension between the Atlantic Coast Conference and ESPN to 2036, along with a digital network starting this year and a full-fledged, linear cable network by the 2019 season. (The A.C.C. and ESPN are expected to announce that deal Thursday morning.)The Big 12 felt it needed to keep up.“We are continuing to operate in an environment that is filled with change, even over the period of a few days,” the University of Oklahoma’s president, David Boren, said, making sure to note that the annual media-rights payouts for Big 12 members would not be affected by any proposed expansion.It was less rah-rah, more green eyeshade.But such is life in the so-called Power 5 conferences, whose football and men’s basketball deals add up to billions of dollars for their 65 member colleges. As an example: The 12-year College Football Playoff contract with ESPN, entering its third season, is worth $7.3 billion, with the vast majority of that money paid to those Power 5 leagues.Get the big sports news, highlights and analysis from Times journalists, with distinctive takes on games and some behind-the-scenes surprises, delivered to your inbox every week.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.That financial focus is especially the reality for the Big 12, which was born as a merger of two defunct conferences (the Southwest and the Big Eight); which lost members to three other leagues during the past several years of realignment; which suffered in 2014 when its lack of a conference championship game cost it a spot in the inaugural four-team national playoff (it will have a title game starting in 2017); and which is now the only Power 5 league without its own cable network, or plans for one.“I believe schools added to our league will raise our national profile,” John Currie, Kansas State’s athletic director, said in an interview Wednesday.To take a cue from Ryan (and Trump), then, expansion will not make the Big 12 the Big 12 again. Nor will it restore longstanding annual rivalries that were obliterated by realignment — Kansas-Missouri or Texas-Texas A&M — or even bring about new ones. (There are teams in the Big 12 that Cincinnati, maybe the likeliest candidate for expansion, has never once played.)AdvertisementBut expansion will spell greater stability and, eventually, more cash.The Big 12 is staring at an economically driven, zero-sum landscape in which other conferences’ gains are frequently its losses. It is also looking at a media environment that seems rather resilient, despite the increased prevalence of so-called cord-cutters and cord-nevers — fancy words for people who no longer pay, or never paid, the monthly cable bills that finance billion-dollar rights deals.The most important data point in favor of Big 12 expansion, said Neal Pilson, a media consultant and former CBS Sports president, is the massive rights extensions the Big Ten reportedly struck with Fox, ESPN and CBS, which would nearly triple that conference’s annual rights revenue (not including the Big Ten Network), to nearly a quarter of a billion dollars.“A digital network the A.C.C. is talking about with ESPN — it’s a no-brainer, but it’s not a big revenue generator,” Pilson said Wednesday. “It’s added exposure. It looks good. It sounds good. But in terms of the real driver, which is revenue generation, I think the Big Ten is much more relevant.”For that reason, Pilson advised the Big 12 to take a page from the Big Ten’s playbook. Much as the Big Ten, a traditionally Midwestern league, recently added Rutgers and Maryland to plant its flag near several East Coast population centers, the Big 12, whose members reside in Great Plains states and Texas (and West Virginia), ought to invite Connecticut to join, Pilson said.“Having Texas and Oklahoma and the other major Big 12 schools playing in the Northeast would create additional revenue opportunities and make it a more attractive conference in terms of new sponsors and a better linear television deal,” Pilson said.Cincinnati and Connecticut — or Memphis, Brigham Young, Colorado State or Houston, to name a few other probable suitors — would find loveless marriages in the Big 12 compared with the passionate hatred that the Longhorns and the Aggies once consummated annually. But bringing them aboard would produce dollars and make sense.“You remember what Wayne Gretzky said,” Kansas State’s Currie said, paraphrasing the hockey star. “‘I skate to where the puck will be, not where the puck is.’”A version of this article appears in print on July 21, 2016, on Page B10 of the New York edition with the headline: Goal of Revenue Growth May Lead Big 12 to Grow, Too.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.See More »