By IAN AUSTENJULY 20, 2016
FINHAUT-EMOSSON, Switzerland — On Wednesday, the front-page headline in L’Équipe, the French sports newspaper, read in French, “Finally, the Alps.”It could have been read two ways. In one version, it could mean that the final four stages of real racing in the Tour de France were just a formality before Chris Froome of Britain, the leader of Team Sky, claimed his third overall win in Paris on Sunday.Or, more optimistically, the headline expressed hope that Froome’s rivals would use the remaining days in the mountains to test and challenge him, something not seen in the preceding two and a half weeks.What happened confirmed the weary outlook of the first interpretation. Not only did Froome’s rivals fail to cause him any grief on Wednesday, many also ended the day looking weak.AdvertisementAs has been the case throughout this Tour, Nairo Quintana, the Colombian with Movistar, played the role of Froome’s shadow for most of the day. But when Froome launched an attack on the final climb to the site of a remote hydroelectric dam with striking views of Mont Blanc, Quintana soon became detached.AdvertisementOnly Richie Porte, an Australian with the American team BMC, remained with Froome, his former teammate, finishing immediately ahead of him. But that appeared more than anything else to be a result of Froome’s choosing not to drop Porte.Get the big sports news, highlights and analysis from Times journalists, with distinctive takes on games and some behind-the-scenes surprises, delivered to your inbox every week.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.“He was just putting me under pressure, so I was just staying on his wheel and staying with him to the finish,” Froome said.Adam Yates, a young British rider on the Orica-BikeExchange team who is third over all, seemed resigned to a victory by Froome.“Obviously, Froome is pretty strong,” Yates said. “In my opinion, he’ll be on the top spot of the podium in Paris.”The stage was won by Ilnur Zakarin, who finished alone. Zakarin was part of a large breakaway group that formed early in the 115-mile 17th stage from Bern, Switzerland.The first Russian stage winner at the Tour since 2009, Zakarin had dropped out of the Giro d’Italia in May after breaking his collarbone.On Sunday in the Jura mountains, a more unusual circumstance seemed to cost Zakarin a Tour stage win. He had looked like the strongest member of a similar breakaway group that day. But one of his contact lenses dislodged on the final, and very dangerous, descent of the stage. His vision compromised, he had to slow down for safety.AdvertisementSix feet two inches, long-legged and lean by even cycling’s skeletal standards, Zakarin, a 26-year-old member of the Russia-based Katusha team, has sometimes been promoted as having the potential to be the first Russian winner of the Tour.Zakarin also has a doping record. When he was 19, he was suspended for two years after testing positive for an anabolic steroid.Asked about the possibility that all Russian athletes could be banned from the Rio Olympics because of new revelations confirming the existence of an elaborate Russian doping scheme at the 2014 Winter Olympics, Zakarin pleaded ignorance.“I’m not following the news,” he said. “I’m reading. I’m watching movies to be away from all the stress that does not concern me.”Froome said that he, too, had been unaware of the findings, which were released this week in a report by the World Anti-Doping Agency.Searing heat, even at the tops of the day’s four mountain climbs, eventually seemed to make the main body of riders around Froome content to let the breakaway group continue on its way. Both groups fragmented amid the heat in the final climb to the finish.Among the favorites, Froome had the distinct advantage of still being in the company of three teammates during the closing stretch. He finished 11th for the day and now holds a comfortable 2-minute-27-second lead in the overall standings over the second-place Bauke Mollema, another rider who did not fare well on the final climb.Thursday’s stage is a time trial but with a slightly unusual twist: It will go up a mountain for the first nine miles. It will be the first mountain time trial at the Tour in 12 years. The last one went up the famous climb to L’Alpe d’Huez ski resort, and Lance Armstrong won it by a commanding margin. Like all of his Tour records, it has been expunged.Froome said he expected Tom Dumoulin, a Dutch rider, to follow on his success in the first time trial of this Tour, which also had some severe climbs, with a second win. If that happens, Dumoulin, who rides for a team sponsored by the bike maker Giant and by Alpecin, a shampoo, will still not be a threat to Froome’s hold on the overall lead.A version of this article appears in print on July 21, 2016, on Page B11 of the New York edition with the headline: On Challenging Climbs in Searing Heat, Froome Continues to Pull Away.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.