AdvertisementSupported byOn Pro FootballBy Ken BelsonThe long national farce known as Deflategate has ended.Tom Brady on Friday threw the legal case to the sideline, saying in a Facebook post that he would no longer appeal the four-game suspension Commissioner Roger Goodell of the N.F.L. gave him for his role in a scheme to deflate footballs during the A.F.C. championship game in 2015.The saga started 18 months ago as a dispute over whether the game balls had been underinflated, which would make them easier to grip and provide an advantage in passing. In the game in question, the New England Patriots romped over the Indianapolis Colts, 45-7, though most of the scoring came after the questionable footballs were replaced.The game, however, has almost become an afterthought in all that followed: A showdown between the country’s most powerful sports executive and football’s most decorated quarterback; a power play between the league and the players’ union; courtroom drama; red-hot arguments by talking heads on television.The case went one step below the Supreme Court, to a federal appeals court, which cleared the way for the suspension to go forward and this week declined to reconsider its decision.Years from now, only legal historians will remember that at its core, Brady’s case was a serious matter about the powers and independence of an arbitrator, an issue that has broad ramifications for employees everywhere.A vast majority of fans will instead recall how the fight devolved into a giant, head-scratching spitting match between a button-down league and a team widely reviled for its exceptional success on the field as well as suspicious behavior off it.Or maybe they’ll just remember the scandal as absurdist performance art.How else do you explain the Patriots’ head coach, Bill Belichick, perhaps the grumpiest and most tight-lipped man in the league, taking time out from planning for the Super Bowl to lecture the news media at length on the Ideal Gas Law? (Trust us, it seemed to matter then.) Or that in said lecture he let slip that one of his favorite movies was “My Cousin Vinny”? (Trust him, it seemed to matter then.)Like any good scandal, there were also nicknames and suspicious pieces of evidence that blossomed into full-blown conspiracies. Thanks to a multimillion-dollar investigation by the N.F.L., we learned that one Patriots employee, Jim McNally, was called the deflator. And if the O. J. Simpson murder trial had the glove, Deflategate had the cellphone that Brady destroyed after the N.F.L. asked to see it.The intersection between sports and pop culture in America has existed at least since Babe Ruth’s famous bellyache in 1925. But social media, 24-hour sports networks and the collection of outsize personalities managed to turn Deflategate into an all-consuming circus that hit its apex when a courtroom sketch artist made Brady look like Lurch from “The Addams Family.”It went viral, of course. But that was not the fascinating part. Done in haste, Brady looked so comically bad that people lined up to buy the sketch.The fact that Brady spared the highest court in the land from considering handling his case should be applauded. Brady taking his road show to Washington during a presidential election campaign might have short-circuited the internet.But the presumptive Republican presidential nominee, Donald J. Trump, has already made clear what he thinks of Brady and Goodell. On the stump in April, Trump called Brady a “great guy” and told the league to “leave Tom Brady alone.” Imagine the smackdown if the Deflategate scandal dragged past November and Trump won the White House.Then again, the N.F.L. already staged its own smackdown between Goodell and Robert Kraft, the Patriots’ owner, whose mild-mannered demeanor went out the window a week before the Super Bowl last year.Fresh off a cross-country flight to Arizona, Kraft broke the clubby protocol of the league and lambasted it and his good pal Goodell at the team’s welcome news conference. For good measure, Kraft wandered into the players’ media circus the next day, drawing a stampede of television cameramen.Kraft was cheered in Patriots Nation for seeming to stare down the commissioner, who continues to be pilloried on talk radio from Foxborough, Mass., to the Canadian border. (Last summer, the police were dispatched to stand guard over Goodell’s house in Maine.) But those same fans turned on Kraft when he agreed to pay the N.F.L. the $1 million fine it had imposed for Deflategate. Kraft took a hit again this year when he failed to persuade Goodell to return the two draft picks the Patriots were forced to give up.Over the past year and a half, more urgent matters came up, making the scandal increasingly look like an insignificant sideshow.All it took was to watch a game and see another player carted off the field, their career in jeopardy; or to read about another player arrested for domestic violence or filing for bankruptcy; or when scientists would discover that yet another deceased N.F.L. player was found to have chronic traumatic encephalopathy, a disease linked to repeated head trauma.Sure, sports matter in America. If nothing else, they provide temporary relief from society’s troubles. But our collective consumption with the physics of slightly-too-soft footballs always felt a little, well, flimsy.Advertisement