AdvertisementSupported byBy Zach SchonbrunIf this were another team, in another season, Monday’s news that a starting quarterback had sustained a torn anterior cruciate ligament might be considered an unfortunate setback.But this is the Jets, whose magnetism for calamity seems to know no bounds.That injury news — the surprising results of a magnetic resonance imaging examination on the right knee of quarterback Geno Smith — is particularly distressing for the Jets because their hopes once again reside in the hands of Ryan Fitzpatrick, who on Sunday criticized the team’s coaching staff and front office for losing faith in him.“The biggest thing in this game, in order to last, is to have belief in yourself,” Fitzpatrick said Sunday after rallying the Jets to a win over the Baltimore Ravens. “Because when the owner stops believing in you, the G.M. stops believing in you and the coaches stop believing in you, sometimes all you have is yourself.”This is the Jets’ situation as they approach the midway point of a season that has spun out of whack. Coach Todd Bowles tried to play down the suggestion that there was a schism between the team and Fitzpatrick, but he also said Fitzpatrick needed to back up his candid words with better play.“This is a show-me game,” Bowles said in a teleconference Monday. “It’s nothing about belief or nonbelief. People get assigned to do jobs, and they do them.”If Fitzpatrick’s anger means he “is going to stop the turnovers, I’m more than happy to have him” upset all the time, Bowles said.“Whatever fuels the fire for a person to be competitive,” Bowles added. “I know Fitz, and I know what he means. I have no problem with him venting his frustration.”Smith’s reign as the starter lasted just 24 plays before he was injured on a sack by Matt Judon late in the second quarter against the Ravens. He returned to the sideline in street clothes in the second half to watch Fitzpatrick lead the offense again.Fitzpatrick completed 9 of 14 passes for 120 yards and a touchdown — and did not add to his 11 interceptions this season.Smith handled himself gracefully after Sunday’s game, deflecting attention and pointing to the Jets’ 24-16 victory. But now his season is almost surely over.After the game, Smith said of his injury: “I don’t feel like it hurts a ton. Honestly, I was begging to go back out there.”But tests revealed a more significant injury than expected. The team will seek a second opinion, but Bowles did not seem optimistic that a second test would show anything different.“From what I hear, it’s pretty much it,” Bowles said.Some of Smith’s teammates were just learning of the news from reporters on a teleconference Monday afternoon. Others were still processing it.“It’s terrible,” receiver Quincy Enunwa said. “For a guy to get his opportunity to only get a chance to play half the game, I feel bad for him. Hopefully something positive can come out from that.”Smith was named the starting quarterback a day after he replaced Fitzpatrick in the fourth quarter of the Jets’ Oct. 17 loss to the Arizona Cardinals. He completed 4 of 8 passes for 95 yards and a touchdown on Sunday before the injury knocked him out of the game.Last season, Smith battled for the starting spot with Fitzpatrick throughout training camp only to have his hopes dissolve when a teammate, Ikemefuna Enemkpali, punched him in the locker room, breaking his jaw before the preseason opener.“He caught a bad break two years in a row,” Bowles said of Smith, who is in the final year of his contract. “I’m sure he’ll bounce back from it, but it’s a tough part of the business.”Bowles said he wanted to observe the week of practice before determining whether Bryce Petty or Christian Hackenberg would be active as Fitzpatrick’s backup for Sunday’s game against the Cleveland Browns.Wide receiver Brandon Marshall said the back-and-forth at quarterback should not have a big effect on the locker room.“This year has been filled with adversity, and one of the things we’re learning is how to respond to it,” Marshall said. “This is another lesson right here for us.”Advertisement