By ZACH SCHONBRUNAPRIL 1, 2017
GLENDALE, Ariz. — It had been 78 years since Oregon last played in the Final Four. And North Carolina Coach Roy Williams wanted to be clear: He did not remember the game.“Before I was born,” Williams, 66, said.“Really?” forward Theo Pinson chimed in.They laughed. There was a lot of laughter from the Tar Heels last week. They were loose, confident, and having fun.They were back.The Tar Heels had returned, bless their hearts, to Final Four, where a national championship game slipped through their fingers last season. A year after they were denied a title at the buzzer against Villanova, North Carolina withstood another — and refreshingly different — heart-wrenching finish in a national semifinal Saturday night to beat Oregon, 77-76, at University of Phoenix Stadium.It was not with a buzzer-beating shot, but instead with four last-second misses that the Tar Heels somehow moved on to the final. And they will once again attempt to win a sixth national title in a matchup with Gonzaga, a fellow No. 1 seed, on Monday night.Advertisement“It’s an amazing thing,” Williams said after the game, “351 teams start playing and this is the second year in a row we were one of two left.”AdvertisementNorth Carolina got here on its interior might and outstanding rebounding ability and those were also what won Saturday’s game in the final, breathless moments.With the Tar Heels leading by a point and five seconds remaining, Kennedy Meeks missed two free throws. But Pinson swooped in for the offensive rebound, which he kicked out to guard Joel Berry II.The Ducks quickly fouled Berry — an 80 percent free-throw shooter — and he went to the line with four seconds left. He, too, missed both of his shots. But Meeks outmuscled Oregon forward Jordan Bell for the ball, securing his 14th rebound and North Carolina’s victory.“Jordan Bell kind of went in a little more than I thought he would, so I just got behind him and the ball fell in my hand,” Meeks said.Bell was inconsolable in the locker room after the game. Tears streamed down his face.“If I would have just boxed out,” he said. “I had two opportunities to do it. I missed both of them. We lost the game because of it.”Oregon Coach Dana Altman did his best to comfort him.“I told him, ‘Buddy, you got 16 rebounds. We wouldn’t have been in this position if it hadn’t been for you,’” Altman said.Altman was right. After all, few expected Oregon (33-6) to advance this far after an injury left a 6-foot 10-inch hole in their frontcourt.AdvertisementThe Ducks entered the tournament still aching from the loss of Chris Boucher, a long-limbed interior presence who led the Pacific-12 in blocks before tearing a knee ligament in the conference tournament. There was reason to doubt the Ducks’ ability to recover.But from such depths of despair, a kernel of optimism began to bud. A loss to Arizona in the championship of the conference tournament had hurt. But it was a tight loss — a silver lining the Ducks leaned on to demonstrate that they could reshuffle and still compete in the N.C.A.A. tournament. An upset of Kansas in the regional final, clinching the program’s first Final Four trip since it claimed the title in 1939, lifted their confidence even more.Get the big sports news, highlights and analysis from Times journalists, with distinctive takes on games and some behind-the-scenes surprises, delivered to your inbox every week.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.Without Boucher, they would have their hands full on the glass against North Carolina. The Tar Heels, by almost any metric, were the nation’s top rebounding team, and they bullied the Ducks inside for four offensive rebounds in the first four minutes Saturday.But Oregon was undaunted. The Ducks’s defense made the Tar Heels look about as uncomfortable as they have all season, as they missed 14 of their first 17 shots from the field. Oregon built an 8-point advantage with four minutes left in the half, even though Tyler Dorsey — the sophomore guard whose scintillating performances had earned him the nickname Mr. March — missed his first four shots.It was then that North Carolina asserted itself inside. The Tar Heels kept feeding the ball to Meeks and ended the half on a 7-0 run to lead at the intermission, 39-36.Meeks, who finished with 25 points, continued his dominating play in the second half, and Jackson caught a hot hand, scoring 13 of his 22 points after halftime. Carolina’s offense began to look more like its usual self — spreading the floor, running the break, using its length and athleticism.And yet the Tar Heels could not seem to pull away. They had a double-digit lead with eight minutes left, but Dorsey (21 points) and Bell (13 points) kept Oregon in it as North Carolina’s offense went cold. A 3-pointer by Berry made the score 71-62 with 5 minutes 53 seconds remaining — but it would be North Carolina’s last field goal of the game.Oregon slowly closed the gap. After a 3-pointer by Dorsey cut the deficit to 3 with 42 seconds left, Pinson missed a wild runner, and the Duck responded with a fast break and a layup by Keith Smith to make it a 1-point game with seven seconds left.The Ducks needed to foul quickly and hope that North Carolina would miss its free throws. The Tar Heels did. Then they did it again.AdvertisementBut in the two crucial moments when they needed it most, the Tar Heels counted first on guile and then on brute strength to seize possession of the ball. It will allow them to play one more game — and perhaps secure the championship that eluded their grasp a year ago.A version of this article appears in print on April 2, 2017, on Page SP5 of the New York edition with the headline: Ferocious Rebounding Gives North Carolina Another Shot at a Title.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.