By STEPHANIE MYLESAPRIL 1, 2017
KEY BISCAYNE, Fla. — The WTA Tour is an endless sea of opportunity at the moment. And as each new tournament begins without Serena Williams, the same question arises.Which player is ready to break away from the field?Williams, who has a knee injury, has not played since winning the Australian Open in late January, and it is unclear when she will return. But so far this year, with even recent Grand Slam champions faltering, no player has been able to seize the opportunity created by Williams’s absence.It is against that backdrop that Johanna Konta of Britain stepped up Saturday and defeated the former world No. 1 Caroline Wozniacki, 6-4, 6-3, at the Miami Open, winning the biggest title of her career.Konta joined the Russian veteran Elena Vesnina — the surprise winner of the BNP Paribas Open in Indian Wells, Calif., two weeks ago — in having triumphed this season on the North American hardcourt circuit.AdvertisementNeither Konta, 25, nor Vesnina, 30, has won a Grand Slam event, and neither is considered a young and promising star. But their success speaks to their perseverance — and an evolving tennis landscape in which a player is not necessarily considered washed up if she did not attain superstardom as a teenager.AdvertisementThis was only the second time that Konta had been ranked high enough to even play at Miami, a premier mandatory event one step below the Grand Slams. She secured her second WTA Tour title of the season — after a victory in January in her birthplace, Sydney, Australia — and her third over all, in just her fourth appearance in a final.With the victory, Konta will rise to No. 7 — the highest she has ever been — in the tour rankings on Monday.“I think for me, it was just about time and patience and also determination to really stick with the process, my process of focusing on my work,” Konta said.Konta said her recent success had much to do with her maturation as a player and a person.“I needed to go through certain life experiences — not just on court; off court as well — to make me into the competitor that I am, and also the person off court,” she said. “I think a lot of things go very hand in hand when it comes to sport. It’s not just a job. It’s your life. It’s your lifestyle. I think you have to grow up in a lot of different areas for it to transfer on court.”Get the big sports news, highlights and analysis from Times journalists, with distinctive takes on games and some behind-the-scenes surprises, delivered to your inbox every week.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.Konta moved from Australia to Britain in 2005 and began officially representing that country in 2012. In December 2014, her funding from the British Lawn Tennis Association was cut significantly because of a lack of success.She relocated her training base from London to Gijón, Spain, and worked with the coaches Esteban Carril and Jose-Manuel Garcia, along with a mental coach, Juan Coto.The results came quickly. Konta was ranked No. 147 just before Wimbledon in 2015. She finished the 2016 season ranked in the top 10.AdvertisementWith Coto’s help, Konta largely overcame her tendency to falter in crucial moments. But he died suddenly in November, and a few weeks later, Konta parted ways with Carril.In stepped Wim Fissette, an experienced coach on the women’s tour whose charges have included Simona Halep and two former No. 1s, Victoria Azarenka and Kim Clijsters.There are many paths to the top in tennis, and Saturday’s final featured two contrasting trajectories. Konta, a mere 10 months younger than Wozniacki, is still in the first act of her tennis life. Wozniacki, 26, has already completed two acts and is beginning a third.The first stage of Wozniacki’s career was as a precocious teenager whose determined, defensive game helped her rise quickly in the rankings. The second featured a stint as the No. 1 female player in the world, a crown she wore comfortably and well amid questions about the legitimacy of her reign, coming as it did without a Grand Slam title.Now, after a midcareer lull, Wozniacki appears energized and well aware of the currently available opportunities. Those openings were much harder to come by when she was atop the women’s tennis pyramid, perennially challenged by Williams, Azarenka and Maria Sharapova.When those three proven champions, absent for various reasons — Sharapova’s suspension for a positive doping test ends April 26; Azarenka gave birth to a son in December — return to the mix over the summer, the landscape may look vastly different.So the time is now for unheralded players to seize the moment. At the Miami Open, the moment belonged to Konta.A version of this article appears in print on April 2, 2017, on Page SP4 of the New York edition with the headline: Konta’s Perseverance (and Timing) Pays Off.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.