By BILLY WITZAPRIL 1, 2017
TAMPA, Fla. — Confetti rained and fans packed the downtown streets here on Saturday night, as the procession rolled slowly forward. Brett Gardner sat behind the wheel of a flatbed truck that carried Greg Bird and his hairless cat, Mr. Delicious. Aroldis Chapman cruised past in the white Lamborghini he once bought to race his fastball. Dellin Betances poked his head through the sunroof of a stretch limousine that was chauffeured by the team president, Randy Levine. And bringing up the rear, Ronald Torreyes paraded past, waving to the crowd from atop the shoulders of Aaron Judge.The Yankees pulled out all the stops in celebrating their best spring-training record ever — and the best in all of baseball, for that matter — as if there were no tomorrow. Even if there actually was on Sunday, in the form of the regular-season opener.O.K., so maybe the previous three paragraphs constituted a bit of fake news, but the Yankees’ outstanding exhibition season surely deserves some sort of recognition. For it certainly is in keeping with the new Yankee way.In finding that nostalgia no longer sells, the Yankees have taken a new tack in the post-Jeter, post-Rivera, post-A-Rod days now that they have all but run out of jerseys to retire.AdvertisementThey are, instead, peddling tomorrow.So, Gary Sanchez — whose Ruthian introduction to New York last season, when he hit 20 home runs faster than anyone in major league history, bought the youth movement some credibility — is trotted in front of the cameras during the winter while he slaps together sandwiches at a Bronx deli.AdvertisementThen there is the farm system that Baseball America rated as the sport’s second best.And last week, the Yankees feted some of those promising players when they celebrated the 2016 championship of their Class AAA affiliate, Scranton/Wilkes-Barre, in style, with General Manager Brian Cashman handing out rings during a pregame ceremony.When the Yankees shellacked Philadelphia, 14-1, on Thursday before heading up to Atlanta for their final exhibition game on Friday night, the team reminded everyone that its 24-8 record this spring (now 24-9) equaled the team’s most exhibition victories since it began keeping track of Grapefruit League games in 1962. Actually, the Yankees’ spring win total tied the mark they set in 2009 — which happens to be the last time they won the World Series.That team was a paean to the Yankees’ previous way of doing business: After missing the playoffs in 2008, they opened the coffers, spent extravagantly on free agents and bought themselves a winner.Now the Yankees are following the path carved out by the World Series champion Chicago Cubs, counting on the young, cheap, homegrown talent that is becoming increasingly essential to win under baseball’s revenue-sharing system.So when the Yankees open their season on the road Sunday against the Tampa Bay Rays, they will start three players they hope are future cornerstones: Sanchez at catcher, Bird at first base and Judge in right field — all of them 24 years old.Meanwhile, pitcher Luis Severino, 23, will join the rotation.There has also been no tamping down the possibility that shortstop Gleyber Torres, who is just 20, and pitcher James Kaprielian, 23, could join the Yankees later this season, although, to date, neither has played above Class A.The Yankees, who two years ago trotted out the oldest opening-day lineup in baseball, will now have one of the youngest. The average age of their current 25-man roster is 27.32 years old, which would make it the team’s youngest for a season since 1969.AdvertisementBut while rebuilding can be intriguing, even to fans, the contracts of Manager Joe Girardi and Cashman expire at the end of the 2017 season. That inevitably will create some urgency for the Yankees to compete this season, either by reaching the playoffs for just the second time since 2012 or at least demonstrating that their youth movement is headed somewhere.“There’s a lot of clubs pounding their chests, but you can say all you want,” Cashman said last month. “What they do on the field reinforcing what you believe, that’s the key. You need talent to win.”He added, “You can’t fake it.”Girardi said the Yankees’ outstanding record this spring was a reflection of the team’s depth because minor leaguers often play the final four innings of exhibition games. He called the current farm system the most talented in his 10 years as the Yankees’ manager.“What it tells me is we have internal options,” said Girardi, who has not forgotten having to cycle through the likes of Jayson Nix, Luis Cruz, David Adams and a washed-up Kevin Youkilis when he needed a third baseman to replace an injured Alex Rodriguez in 2013.He added, “If there are injuries, if guys aren’t performing up to snuff, there are internal options that are really good options for us now.”This means that if the Yankees miss shortstop Didi Gregorius, who is out until May with a shoulder injury, they can look past the current replacements — Torreyes and Pete Kozma — and have appealing options: Tyler Wade at Scranton/Wilkes-Barre and Torres at Class AA Trenton, both of whom might be ready to help, even if they technically need more seasoning.Get the big sports news, highlights and analysis from Times journalists, with distinctive takes on games and some behind-the-scenes surprises, delivered to your inbox every week.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.And if the Yankees need a model on how contend while integrating young players, they have one in the St. Louis Cardinals.The Cardinals, while they were reaching the playoffs for five consecutive seasons and winning the 2011 World Series, seemed to perpetually be calling on young, untested players in big moments, be they Michael Wacha, Matt Adams, Jaime Garcia, Stephen Piscotty or Kolten Wong. Rarely did they fail.Advertisement“Most teams, you’re going through a long season, you’re going to need your farm system to help, some more than others,” said the new Yankees designated hitter Matt Holliday, a former Cardinal who, at 37, is now the Yankees’ oldest player. “Every time we seemed to need a young player to come up and contribute, they were ready to do so.”That might also explain why the Yankees embarked on a publicity tour with so many of their prospects in January. Or why they do not so easily dismiss the significance of a record-setting spring.Or even why they made such a show in handing rings to last year’s minor leaguers.It got many of the young players thinking. Sanchez, who was called up by the Yankees last August, may have left the minors behind, but the Class AAA ring still carries meaning. He admired its design and said the ring represented the hard work everyone put in.It also symbolizes something else for the players who have moved on to New York — that the Yankees, before too long, are counting on them to win one again. With a real parade to follow.A version of this article appears in print on April 2, 2017, on Page SP12 of the New York edition with the headline: Acquiring a Taste for the Fountain of Youth.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.