By THE ASSOCIATED PRESSAPRIL 1, 2017
ATLANTA — Widespread warnings about the effect of the collapse of a section of an interstate in Atlanta persuaded many fans to arrive early for the Braves’ first game at SunTrust Park.Many also followed the advice to avoid congested highways and to take the back roads.Tim Knowles, who lives in Fairburn, an Atlanta suburb, said his drive to Friday night’s exhibition against the Yankees took 30 to 40 minutes.Knowles said he drove less-traveled roads “because I knew how the interstate was going to be.”Atlanta drivers are accustomed to horrible rush-hour drives, especially on Friday. The start of spring break for many students, including those in Cobb County, the new home of the Braves, was expected to add more congestion even before an elevated section of Interstate 85 collapsed on Thursday because of a fire underneath.The Georgia Department of Transportation said the affected area of I-85 would be closed in both directions “for the foreseeable future” while it was repaired.AdvertisementVicky Artelli, who lives near I-85 in Lawrenceville, accepted the new traffic woes with a shrug as she waited for the start of the game.Advertisement“It’s just more traffic, that’s all,” Artelli said. “It’s going to affect us.”The new stadium is near the interchange of I-75 and I-285 in the northern Atlanta suburbs. Traffic from the closed area of I-85 will be directed away from that highway to other interstates, including those flanking the new stadium.Only season-ticket holders were invited to Friday night’s game. Braves officials were expecting a turnout of about 20,000 at the stadium, which holds 41,000.Even before the collapse of the interstate, the Braves expected traffic congestion on Friday as fans traveled to the ballpark for the first time and found their way to parking lots.In a statement, the Braves encouraged fans to alter their plans before leaving for the game. “Traffic patterns in Atlanta will be adjusted for everyone, so please listen to local authorities as they direct you around the metro area,” the team said. “Also, we encourage all fans to purchase their parking before they leave today.”Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.Josh Battles said he drove from south Georgia in three and a half hours by avoiding interstates altogether. “We took back roads,” said Battles, who is from Bainbridge. “It wasn’t bad at all.”Paul Pagnato, wearing a Yankees cap, flew to Atlanta from Virginia for the game and said the drive from the airport south of Atlanta “wasn’t bad.” “We had no issues,” Pagnato said.Traffic also was no concern for Teri Hogan, who said she “specifically moved to walk to the stadium.”The Braves’ first regular-season home game is April 14 against the San Diego Padres. They open the regular season on Monday against the Mets at Citi Field.A version of this article appears in print on April 2, 2017, on Page SP4 of the New York edition with the headline: Snarled Roads Lead to Braves’ New Stadium.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.