By ANDREW KEHMARCH 14, 2016
LOS ANGELES —  Carmelo Anthony said he felt positive about his one-on-one meeting with the Knicks’ president, Phil Jackson, last week in which the two discussed the direction of their struggling team.Anthony, 31, has three more seasons left on his contract, and he has, at times, expressed frustration and disappointment about losing this season as the Knicks, who seem assured of missing the playoffs, have once again stumbled into irrelevance.“The only thing I’m going to say about it, I thought it was a good conversation,” Anthony said late Sunday after the Knicks’ last-second victory over the Los Angeles Lakers. “I thought it was good timing for us to sit down and talk.”Jackson revealed last week that the two had met. He told reporters that Anthony had seemed committed to the team, that he told Anthony he remained the cornerstone of the team, and that Anthony was engaged in the discussion, asking direct questions.AdvertisementAnthony agreed that it was more of a two-way talk than other conversations they have had in the past. He said he had specific questions and got certain answers that he had sought.“It was more of just an open dialogue, just questions that I had,” Anthony said. “I won’t go into the detail of those questions. It was just good for me to get it out there, talk about it, get his response, get his feedback. That was that.”Anthony, who signed a five-year, $124 million contract two years ago, emphasized that it was important to have a running conversation with Jackson.Get the big sports news, highlights and analysis from Times journalists, with distinctive takes on games and some behind-the-scenes surprises, delivered to your inbox every week.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.“I think you should want that as a player, and as whoever the top decision maker is,” he said. “If you don’t have that connection, a lot of things can get misconstrued, miscommunication. I think you have to have that conversation or that relationship with whoever is making the decisions.”Anthony acknowledged he had reached a point this season in which “things start to get to you, and things are not as clear as you would like them to be, and there’s no answers.”He said it was good for him to take a step back and speak with Jackson to get certain reassurances.Anthony called for the Knicks to be purposeful when they start to pursue free agents this off-season, when the league’s salary cap is expected to rise significantly.Advertisement“It’s in their court,” Anthony said of the Knicks’ front office and ownership. “The ball is in their court. If they have an opportunity, if we have an opportunity, to do something this off-season, we’ve got to do something. It’s there. Everybody has money this summer, so it’s kind of an even playing field. You just got to hit the ground running.”A version of this article appears in print on March 15, 2016, on Page B10 of the New York edition with the headline: Anthony Heartened by Speaking to Jackson.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.