AdvertisementSupported byBy Ken BelsonJUPITER, Fla. — The Mets played the first of four games in eight days against the Miami Marlins on Sunday, a stretch against a perennial doormat that they might normally welcome.But in spring training, where pitchers and batters try to size up opponents they do not regularly see, facing a divisional rival they will play 19 times in the regular season can be a handicap.The spring training schedule, though, is a function of time and geography. Unlike the 15 teams of the Phoenix area, all within an hour’s drive of one another, and the eight teams on the west coast of Florida, the Mets and Marlins are two of just four teams located along the Atlantic Coast.“It gets old, but it’s all we got over on this side,” Mets Manager Terry Collins said. “It’s not like there are secrets. They know us and we know them. But we know when the bright lights come on, it’s a different game.”The Mets will have more neighbors next year when the Houston Astros and the Washington Nationals move to a new stadium in West Palm Beach, Fla., about 45 minutes from the Mets’ camp in Port St. Lucie. That will save the Mets a long ride to Kissimmee, in Central Florida, where the Astros play now. Viera, the Nationals’ current home, is an hour north of Port St. Lucie.The Atlanta Braves, who play in Lake Buena Vista, near Walt Disney World, have also shown interest in moving back to West Palm Beach, where the team played until 1997.This year, the Mets play 17 of their 30 spring training games against the Marlins and the St. Louis Cardinals, who share a stadium here, and the Nationals. Their remaining away games require long bus rides to Central Florida to play the Astros and Braves, and the west coast of Florida to face the Toronto Blue Jays, the Boston Red Sox, the Detroit Tigers and the Yankees.Though the Mets might prefer to play against a greater variety of teams, they made the most of their 11-0 win over the Marlins on Sunday, especially Matt Harvey, who pitched four scoreless innings, gave up one hit, walked two and struck out four. His fastball reached 97 miles per hour, and his slider hit 91 m.p.h. when he struck out Christian Yelich. He threw 32 of his 50 pitches for strikes.Harvey said he was pleased with his performance, particularly because he has struggled at times against the Marlins. In his career, he is 2-2 with a 3.48 E.R.A. against Miami.“In the past, my track record against them hasn’t been that great, so it’s nice to figure them out a little bit and hopefully continue that during the season,” Harvey said.It was Harvey’s second solid start in spring training, and it followed impressive spring debuts by Jacob deGrom, who will most likely pitch on Monday, and Noah Syndergaard. So far, the Mets’ starting rotation appears intact.Harvey did not need much run support, but he got it anyway. Ruben Tejada had a double, a triple and three R.B.I., while right fielder Travis Taijeron knocked in two more runs with a double. The Marlins were limited to three hits.Late in the game, Mets second baseman Dilson Herrera fouled a ball off his left kneecap. Despite the scare, he will fly to Panama on Monday to represent his native Colombia in the qualifying round of the World Baseball Classic.Advertisement