AdvertisementSupported byBy Marc TracyKansas, the Big 12 tournament champion, was the top-ranked team over all in the N.C.A.A. men’s basketball tournament field announced Sunday night. The other three top seeds in the 68-team bracket were the Atlantic Coast Conference tournament winner, North Carolina; the Pacific-12 tournament champion, Oregon; and the A.C.C. runner-up, Virginia.Kansas (30-4) is in the tournament for the 27th consecutive year, tying the record set by North Carolina from 1975 to 2001. Kentucky, the Southeastern Conference champion, made the field for a record 55th time, while C.S.U. Bakersfield, the Western Athletic Conference tournament winner, and Stony Brook, which captured the America East, will make their first appearances in the N.C.A.A. tournament.Many observers were surprised to see Michigan State, which won the Big Ten tournament, drop to a No. 2 seed in favor of Virginia and Oregon, the champion of the lower-profile Pacific-12, which nonetheless had several strong teams, including Utah and California. Michigan State was the highest-rated No. 2 seed, according to the committee. Despite Kentucky’s win over Texas A&M in the SEC championship game Sunday, the Aggies received a No. 3 seed, while the Wildcats were seeded fourth. Kentucky could play the regular-season Big Ten champion, Indiana, in the round of 32 and the No. 2 overall seed, North Carolina, in the round of 16.“U.K. is mis-seeded,” the ESPN college basketball analyst Jay Bilas said Sunday night. He suggested that Coach John Calipari’s typically young squad, which has won its last five and is ranked eighth over all by KenPom.com, merited a No. 2 or No. 3 slot.The Big 12, the Big Ten, the A.C.C. and the Pac-12 each placed seven teams in the bracket. The Big East fielded the two lowest-ranked No. 2 seeds, Villanova and Xavier.There was a general sense among observers that when it came down to doling out the final at-large bids, some deserving midmajors were snubbed in favor of brand-name teams from the richest and most prominent conferences.Kansas, North Carolina, Virginia and Oregon are the top seeds in the N.C.A.A. men’s basketball tournament.Three of the “first four out” — which receive No. 1 seeds in the National Invitation Tournament — meet such a description: Monmouth, St. Bonaventure and Valparaiso. (South Carolina, which plays in the SEC, is the other.)Monmouth, whose team finished 27-7 and first in the regular season of the Metro Atlantic Athletic Conference, and which boasted nonconference wins over U.C.L.A. and Notre Dame, said in a statement, “We were disappointed we were not selected” and canceled a teleconference with Coach King Rice.Oklahoma Athletic Director Joe Castiglione, the men’s basketball selection committee chairman, said in a conference call about Monmouth, “They did some things that the committee values: trying to strengthen their nonconference schedule.” In a reference partly to Monmouth’s weaker conference schedule, he added, “Teams like Monmouth only have a few opportunities to get top-100 wins.”Atlantic 10 Commissioner Bernadette V. McGlade had even stronger words over the exclusion of the Bonnies, who finished 22-8. She said she was “shocked” and added, “It is a tremendous disservice and disappointment.”Eyebrows were raised at the inclusion of Syracuse as a No. 10 seed despite a 19-13 record. Castiglione confirmed that Coach Jim Boeheim’s missing part of the season because of N.C.A.A. sanctions was a factor. He also pointed out that the Orange beat St. Bonaventure near the beginning of the season.The bracket held the promise of enticing subplots. No love is lost between Kentucky and Indiana’s neighboring basketball programs. Texas and Texas A&M — conference foes turned nonconference enemies — could also face each other in the round of 32. Should Michigan win its play-in game Tuesday against Tulsa, it would face Notre Dame in a basketball iteration of one of football’s most storied rivalries.In contrast with past seasons, when a few teams clearly stood above and apart from the field — or even last season, when undefeated Kentucky entered the tournament as an overwhelming favorite — there are several teams seen as capable of winning it all this year, and even they are not as widely separated from the pack as usual.In the regular season, 74 teams ranked in the top 10 of the Associated Press top 25 lost, setting a record, according to ESPN Stats & Info.“Even in a year when everyone knows who the best team is, they’re only about 25 percent likely to win the tournament,” said Joel Sokol, a Georgia Tech engineering professor whose statistics formula is influential in seeding.This year’s top team will be “less likely” to win it all than that, he said.Additionally, a high number of midmajor conference tournaments were won in upsets, with many teams taking places that had been expected to go to better-regarded rivals from their leagues. For instance, the automatic bids from the Patriot League (Holy Cross) and the Ohio Valley Conference (Austin Peay) were claimed by teams that entered their conference tournaments as No. 8 and No. 9 seeds.While ordinarily top midmajor teams are ideal agents of upsets, the wacky conference tournament outcomes of the past week could complicate that trend.Two teams ranked in the latest A.P. poll, Louisville and Southern Methodist, are not competing in the N.C.A.A. tournament because of accusations of N.C.A.A. rules violations.Fans of explosive N.B.A. offenses like that of Stephen Curry’s Golden State Warriors will be heartened by trends in the college game, which has witnessed a rise in small, shooting-heavy lineups and unprecedented attempts and accuracy from behind the 3-point line.Thanks to several preseason rules changes, including a shot clock shortened from 35 to 30 seconds and foul rules intended to free up offenses, this season produced a significant rise in both scoring and possessions. As the regular season wound to a close, team scoring in Division I was up to 73.1 points per game from 67.6, and per-team possessions were up to 70 from 65.8, according to the N.C.A.A.The quickened pace of play did not extend to CBS’s two-hour selection show, in which the full bracket was not revealed for nearly 90 minutes. Less than an hour in, with CBS having filled in only two of the quadrants, the full bracket was leaked online. The N.C.A.A. called it unfortunate and regrettable in a statement. Through a spokesman, CBS declined to comment.Advertisement