AdvertisementSupported byBlue Jays 3, Yankees 1By Seth BerkmanA few minutes before the first pitch of Thursday’s game between the Yankees and the Toronto Blue Jays, Alex Rodriguez was introduced as the designated hitter for the first time since May 4, when a strained right hamstring sent him to the disabled list.Rodriguez, 40, paced around in right field, tucking the brim of his hat down over his eyes, almost seeming to shield himself, though the home crowd was cheering louder for him than it had for any other Yankee.A literary scholar might have interpreted this as a Chekhovian act of foreshadowing. Rodriguez went incognito at the plate, striking out in the ninth inning and going hitless in four at-bats, as the Yankees lost to the Blue Jays, 3-1, at Yankee Stadium.C. C. Sabathia pitched exceptionally, striking out seven, which brought him to 2,610 strikeouts and tied him with Chuck Finley for 23rd on the career list. Sabathia allowed only two hits in seven innings, but an error by shortstop Didi Gregorius in the third led to two unearned runs.“Definitely a missed opportunity at home any time that our big guy gives us seven strong, two runs,” Rodriguez said. “We should win those games.”Earlier this week, Rodriguez went 3 for 6 with a home run and three R.B.I. in two rehab games with the Class AA Trenton Thunder. He even punctuated his homer with a showy bat flip, seemingly demonstrating that his confidence was high and that he was ready to return to the majors.Rodriguez swung on the first pitch he saw against Blue Jays starter J. A. Happ, grounding out to shortstop Darwin Barney. Happ overwhelmed Rodriguez with a slider to strike him out in the fourth, and Rodriguez casually flied out to right in the seventh.Asked to evaluate Rodriguez’s four plate appearances, Manager Joe Girardi said: “They seemed O.K. I know he didn’t get any hits, but we had a lot of guys that didn’t get any hits today.”Among them was Carlos Beltran, who struck out four times.With Rodriguez once again claiming the D.H. spot, Beltran moved back to right field. In Rodriguez’s absence, Beltran had thrived offensively as the D.H., a role that kept his 39-year-old legs fresh.After the game, Girardi became defensive when asked about the possibility that moving out of the D.H. role had led to Beltran’s strikeouts.“I’m sure it all had to do with him being in right field, I’m sure,” Girardi said, hitting a table. “He was 0 for 4 yesterday, too. Let’s not keep stirring this and stirring this and everything. We over-evaluate. Carlos had a rough day. A lot of our right-handers had a rough day today off of Happ.”Although they had Rodriguez back, the Yankees were without first baseman Mark Teixeira for a second straight game because of his neck spasms. Teixeira had a magnetic resonance imaging scan that showed joint inflammation.“I just can’t move it,” he said. “It’s painful.”Girardi said he hoped that Teixeira would be able to play by Sunday. Teixeira, who also received a cortisone shot Thursday, said his neck had not fully healed since his return May 12 after missing two games with similar pains.“It never got 100 percent, but it was feeling pretty good,” said Teixeira, who has battled neck and upper back tightness throughout his 14-year career. “It just kind of flared up a little bit more on me.”He added, “This just got to be too much.”With Teixeira sidelined, the backup catcher Austin Romine started at first base. Since 2014, Romine had played 23 games at first base for Class AAA Scranton/Wilkes-Barre, in addition to making two appearances there for the Yankees.With two runners on in the fifth, Romine grounded into an inning-ending double play. It was the Yankees’ best scoring opportunity against Happ after the first inning, when Starlin Castro belted a solo home run into the Yankees’ bullpen in right-center.The Yankees’ lone run almost held up as enough support for Sabathia, who threw only 83 pitches. In the third, Devon Travis hit a grounder to Gregorius, who tried to backhand the ball. It hit off his wrist for his eighth error this season. Gregorius later said the ball had taken a bad hop.With two outs, Jose Bautista, who was booed and taunted with chants of “Odor” throughout the series — a reference to Texas Rangers second baseman Rougned Odor, who punched Bautista in the face in a game on May 15 — singled and moved Travis to third. Josh Donaldson walked to load the bases, and Edwin Encarnacion singled in two runs.“We missed an opportunity today,” Girardi said. “C. C. pitched great. He pitched extremely well, and we weren’t able to get him any runs.”INSIDE PITCHCHASEN SHREVE was placed on the 15-day disabled list with a joint sprain in his left shoulder. He received a cortisone injection and will not pick up a baseball for seven days. To replace Shreve, the Yankees called up RICHARD BLEIER from Class AAA Scranton/Wilkes-Barre. … With the return of ALEX RODRIGUEZ, the reserve ROB REFSNYDER was optioned to Scranton/Wilkes-Barre. … To make room on the 40-man roster for Bleier, the Yankees unconditionally released outfielder SLADE HEATHCOTT.Advertisement