By DAVID POLLAKMAY 26, 2016
SAN JOSE, Calif. — Patrick Marleau and Joe Thornton sat side by side, waiting to field questions shortly after the San Jose Sharks had advanced to the Stanley Cup finals for the first time in their 25-year history with a 5-2 victory over the St. Louis Blues.That made sense. Marleau and Thornton, both 36 and sporting some gray in their playoff beards, have much in common, starting with the fact that they were the first two players taken in the 1997 N.H.L. draft.Marleau went to the Sharks after the Boston Bruins made Thornton the top overall pick.They have been teammates since 2005. For years, they have been recognized as two of the league’s high-end talents, past All-Stars who have also won gold medals representing Canada in the Olympics. Thornton’s 964 career regular-season assists are the second most among active players; Marleau’s 481 goals rank him fifth.Yet they have borne the stigma of leading a team that, until now, has failed to meet Stanley Cup expectations. Marleau and Thornton have each served as captain of the Sharks, and each has lost the job, paying the price after a particularly troubling playoff exit. There were indications two years ago, denied by General Manager Doug Wilson, that the front office was looking to move one of the players.AdvertisementAll of which explains why Sharks Coach Peter DeBoer acknowledged that he could not imagine what Wednesday night’s victory in Game 6 of the Western Conference finals meant to Marleau and Thornton.DeBoer has spent only one year with them, seeing how hard they work, how badly they want to win.“I don’t think that’s changed over the last 10 years,” he said. “I just think, for whatever reason, it hasn’t come together. So I can’t imagine the stuff written about them and said about them that they’ve had to deal with. It’s a great night for those guys.”AdvertisementMarleau and Thornton prefer to deal with the present rather than the past.Asked about the hockey platitude that sometimes a team needs to lose before it can learn to win, Marleau said: “I think you try to take what you learned in the past and apply it. I think there’s a big part just staying in the moment, knowing what we have, the opportunity we have right now. For me, that’s the biggest thing. You don’t make it this far all the time, obviously. Just trying to seize the moment.”If Thornton is asked the difference between this year’s team and those that preceded it, he has a stock answer: depth. Like the rest of the Sharks’ organization, he chooses to look forward, not back.Looking forward, the Sharks will face the Pittsburgh Penguins, who defeated the Tampa Bay Lightning on Thursday night in Game 7 of the Eastern Conference finals. The Stanley Cup finals are scheduled to begin Monday.The Sharks said after their victory over the Blues that they had been determined not to fly back to St. Louis for a Game 7. San Jose got an early goal from its current captain, Joe Pavelski, in the first period, then built a 4-0 lead with two goals by forward Joel Ward and one by the rookie Joonas Donskoi. Two late goals by St. Louis forward Vladimir Tarasenko closed the gap before an empty-net shot by Sharks forward Logan Couture with 19.7 seconds left wrapped up the scoring.Get the big sports news, highlights and analysis from Times journalists, with distinctive takes on games and some behind-the-scenes surprises, delivered to your inbox every week.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.In that 5-2 victory, Thornton had one assist, his 18th point in 18 playoff games this spring; Marleau had two assists, including one on the decisive goal by Ward. That gives Marleau 12 points in the postseason.Their teammates say there is something special about helping Thornton and Marleau advance to the Stanley Cup finals.Advertisement“Obviously, I’m very happy for them,” said Ward, who was signed by the Sharks as a free agent last summer. “For me to get a chance to be beside them day to day is an unbelievable experience. I just want to try to help them achieve the big goal and win.”The Sharks know that eliminating St. Louis was just one step toward something bigger. San Jose has earned a reputation as the best N.H.L. team in the last decade not to have won the Stanley Cup. That, players say, needs to change.“This is not the end goal,” Thornton said. “I can tell you that right now.”Pavelski, who was sitting alongside Thornton and Marleau, picked up the same thread.“It was fun out there tonight,” Pavelski said. “It was exciting. The building was great. The fans were great. But we realize there’s more out there. That’s what we’re going to turn our attention to.”A version of this article appears in print on May 27, 2016, on Page B11 of the New York edition with the headline: Veteran Sharks Earn Shot at the Cup.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.