By DAVID WALDSTEINMAY 26, 2016
PARIS — Moments after dispatching Teliana Pereira in the second round of the French Open, Serena Williams ducked into the tunnel below Suzanne Lenglen Court and came upon her doubles partner, her friend — her sister — approaching her. Their visit was brief; Serena was still processing her victory, and Venus Williams had work to do.About six minutes later Venus walked onto the same patch of red clay that her sister had just vacated, giving fans at Roland Garros the rare opportunity to watch the sisters play consecutive matches on the same court.Venus is about to turn 36 in June; Serena will be 35 in September. As brilliant as their careers have been, and as dominant as Serena continues to be, days such as Thursday, with one sister following the other at a major tournament, will soon be relegated to memory.“I think we’re unfortunately really focused on our match,” Serena said of their back-to-back matches, “and I say, ‘Unfortunately,’ because in a few years we’ll be like, ‘Wow, that’s a great moment.’”AdvertisementThe sisters commemorated the moment by pounding their respective opponents by identical score lines: 6-2, 6-1. Serena took down Pereira, and Venus defeated the American Louisa Chirico. After some running to and fro, Serena did her job in 66 minutes. Venus required only 54.Advertisement“We focus less on the significance of us playing and more of like, ‘Can you win this match?’” Venus said.But the sibling showcase did not seem to be lost on the fans in the 10,000-seat arena, which was packed for the top-seeded Serena, and thinned out a bit by the time the ninth-seeded Venus arrived.Even their vanquished opponents seemed to relish their roles.“It was amazing to be there on Suzanne Lenglen,” Pereira said. “I love this tournament, and to be playing against her, she is No. 1 for a long time. To me, she is the best, so it was an amazing opportunity to try and enjoy it.”That air of graciousness was not so apparent on Court 2, where Alizé Cornet defeated the German Tatjana Maria, 6-3, 6-7 (5), 6-4, only to receive an accusatory finger in her face afterward.Get the big sports news, highlights and analysis from Times journalists, with distinctive takes on games and some behind-the-scenes surprises, delivered to your inbox every week.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.Maria was upset that Cornet, a French player, sought lengthy medical timeouts to receive treatment but then appeared to move without much difficulty later in the match.After the final point, Cornet fell on her back and thrust her hands to the air in celebration while Maria veered away from the net and to her chair. When Cornet finally arose, they met near the umpire’s chair. With a loud celebration going on in the stands, Maria pointed her finger at Cornet as if to say, you know what you did.On the men’s side, another popular French player, Jo-Wilfried Tsonga, rallied from two sets down to beat Marcos Baghdatis, 6-7 (6), 3-6, 6-3, 6-2, 6-2 in 3 hours 26 minutes.Advertisement“In my head I was thinking, ‘Oh, oh, that’s really a bad start,’” Tsonga said. “But then I thought, I have to remain calm, serene, because a tennis match could be very long and very tough.”For No. 4 Rafael Nadal, it was not so tough. He defeated Facundo Bagnis, 6-3, 6-0, 6-3, to become the eighth player to record 200 wins at major tournaments. Nadal is seeking to extend his record number of French Open titles to 10.Novak Djokovic, the No. 1 seed and strong favorite, defeated Steve Darcis, a qualifier from Belgium, 7-5, 6-3, 6-4, and No. 7 Tomas Berdych beat Malek Jaziri of Tunisia, 6-1, 2-6, 6-2, 6-4. Those matches unfolded on the grand Suzanne Lenglen Court before the Williams sisters made their appearance.“It’s huge,” Serena said of the court. “It’s bigger than stadiums in other tournaments. It’s like a double stadium. So, even though it’s not the center court, it’s still a huge court.”Serena, the defending champion, is making her 15th appearance at the French Open. It is the 19th for Venus. Together, they have won 28 grand slam tournaments, and could face each other in this year’s semifinals. That would mark their 28th meeting, and first since last year’s United States Open (Serena leads head-to-head, 16-11).Serena, who is seeking her 22nd major tournament title to tie Steffi Graf, won here last year for the third time. Venus has never won the French Open, and as her career appears to wane, she can take enjoyment from being in the third round for the first time since 2010.“At this stage in my life, in my career, it’s like you don’t want to lose early,” Venus said. “But if it’s not the win, it’s still a loss.”A version of this article appears in print on May 27, 2016, on Page B13 of the New York edition with the headline: Williams Sisters Offer an Act That Was, for Once, Easy to Follow.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.