AdvertisementSupported byOn TennisBy Christopher ClareyPARIS — A little more than half his opponent’s age on Thursday, Alexander Zverev did not play as if he still had a lot to learn.His second-round victim at the French Open was Stéphane Robert, a 36-year-old tour survivor with a thick beard that the 19-year-old Zverev has no chance of matching for the moment.Robert’s game is unconventional, short on spin and long on abrupt shifts in pace. He uses an abbreviated service motion and clipped backswing on his backhand. But there is a meditative quality to his tennis and very little wasted energy. He does not pound the ball; he places it. And he had enough tricks up his short sleeves to cause even Novak Djokovic some discomfort in the second round in Rome earlier this month before Djokovic prevailed, 7-5, 7-5.“Robert played very awkward, and that was the challenge, and it was a tough match,” said Boris Becker, the longtime German star who is now Djokovic’s coach.But Germany has a new star on the rise in Zverev, a global villager known as Sascha who speaks Russian with his family and English with an American accent after training and studying at the Saddlebrook tennis academy in Florida.At 6 feet 6 inches, he is all skin and bones and talent (and, in Paris, zebra stripes, because that is what his clothing sponsor is making him — and too many of its other contractees — wear in public).“Honestly, there is nothing about him that does not impress me,” Patrick McEnroe, the ESPN analyst and former head of player development at the United States Tennis Association, said of Zverev. “He’s dangerous off both wings, with tremendous wingspan, a big serve and on-court presence. And he’s an excellent mover. His technique is second to none. Maybe he needs to get more comfortable in and around the front of the court and at net. He is as close to a lock as there can be to win multiple majors.”That is quite a statement from someone who has spent much of the last decade evaluating young talent, and there is a rich vein of it at last in the men’s game.The proof is in the French Open draw, where Zverev; Borna Coric, 19; Nick Kyrgios, 21; Dominic Thiem, 22; and Jack Sock, 23, have all reached the third round.Zverev and Thiem will face each other for the third time in a month. Thiem, who is particularly dangerous on clay, had a 4-6, 6-2, 6-3 victory in the semifinals in Munich and a 6-4, 3-6, 6-0 triumph in the final in Nice, France.As for the prospect of an intragenerational rivalry, “probably it already started,” the 13th-seeded Thiem said on Thursday after defeating the 32-year-old Guillermo Garcia-Lopez, 7-5, 6-4, 7-6 (3).But what could really be fun in the short term are the clashes between generations, with the new wave taking on an old guard that is showing unprecedented staying power. (Even without Roger Federer, a record 51 men age 30 or over were entered in the French Open singles main draw.)Tennis is often at its most compelling when the youngsters rise up to take on the establishment — see Monica Seles going after Steffi Graf, or Pete Sampras and Andre Agassi going after Becker and Stefan Edberg.Although Djokovic continues to reign quite supreme, the jostling is beginning in earnest underneath, and the winner of the match between Thiem and Zverev is likely to take on Rafael Nadal in the fourth round.Nadal had to save a match point to beat Zverev in the fourth round on a hardcourt in Indian Wells, Calif., this year, and he called Zverev “a future No. 1.” Pushing Nadal, the nine-time French Open champion, to the brink on clay would be a greater achievement.Thiem is coached by Gunter Bresnik, a thoughtful Austrian who once worked with Becker. Although elite coaches and former stars, including Ivan Lendl, have expressed interest in helping the 41st-ranked Zverev, he continues to be coached by his father, Alexander, with plenty of counsel from his older brother, Mischa.Alexander Zverev Sr., a former tour player who emigrated from Russia to Germany with his family, was once ranked in the top 200 in singles. Mischa Zverev, now 28, peaked at No. 45 in the rankings in 2009.Younger siblings have often been the more successful siblings in tennis, as if they had benefited from absorbing the lessons their elders had to learn the harder (and slower) way. Consider Sampras, Agassi, Michael Chang, Andy Roddick and Andy Murray — younger brothers all.“When Mischa started playing and got a wild card in Hamburg, Sascha went backstage,” said Zverev’s agent, Patricio Apey. “Mischa started playing 18, 19, 20. Sascha was 8, 9, 10. He got to know the confines of the Hamburg tournament like the back of his hand. And so that experience is something you just can’t buy. He’s there in the locker room looking at Gastón Gaudio and all these other guys, and suddenly you are 17 and you know exactly which locker you want and why. So that to me helps explains how he got to be 17 going on 26, because he was living it with his brother.”Apey, Murray’s former agent, was instrumental in Zverev’s hiring Jez Green, Murray’s former fitness coach, who will need to do his job particularly well to keep the slightly built Zverev healthy.But the tools are clearly there. McEnroe said he believed that Zverev had the biggest upside of the new wave, just ahead of Kyrgios, followed by Thiem, Coric, the Americans Frances Tiafoe and Taylor Fritz, and the Australian Thanasi Kokkinakis.“I think Zverev’s upside is bigger than Kyrgios for a few reasons,” McEnroe said. “Better overall technique. He’s more committed to the long term regarding mind-set and conditioning. But that being said, I love the way Kyrgios is playing and acting. Much more composure being exhibited.”Zverev and Kyrgios played doubles together at the French Open, too. Despite all their moxie and firepower, they lost, 6-3, 6-4, in the first round on Thursday evening to Pablo Carreño Busta and David Marrero.But it had already been a long day of solving tennis riddles for Zverev.“What’s impressive is his maturity,” Robert said after he had lost, 6-1, 3-6, 6-1, 6-4. “Ultimately, that’s what makes the big difference. There are lots of young players who play well, but he beat me in four sets. I posed some real challenges for him, because my game is really not simple to handle. But he did not get flustered.”Advertisement