By BRAD SPURGEONJUNE 16, 2016
Earl Bamber grew up on a hunting-safari farm in New Zealand, where he was home-schooled by his mother until he was 8. He liked to entertain himself by driving around the farm with anything that had a steering wheel — sitting on his father’s knees as he drove the family car, then advancing to motorcycles and a go-kart, which he received on his seventh birthday.Little did he know that a family friend who had a farm nearby, Chris Amon, had won the 24 Hours of Le Mans in 1966 driving a Ford, along with another New Zealander, Bruce McLaren.Now 25, Bamber, who said Amon’s victory was still ‘a cool thing for Kiwis,” has a growing reputation of his own as a driver.Last year, in his first participation at Le Mans, Bamber won the race in the highest category, the LMP1, driving a Porsche along with two other rookies, Nico Hülkenberg and Nick Tandy. It was Porsche’s record 17th overall victory at the race, in only the second year of the manufacturer’s return after a 16-year absence from the prototype category.Advertisement“It was incredible to come to Le Mans for the first year as a rookie,” Bamber said. “On the race weekend, we didn’t really know what to expect, all three of us, but we just decided that what we needed to do was to drive the best that we can, drive as fast as we can, and not hit anything for 24 hours. And then maybe we can end up somewhere pretty good. That’s exactly what we did, and we ended up leading by one lap and winning the race.”AdvertisementIt was in some ways perhaps not so surprising. Extraordinary things tend to happen to Bamber, who has had at once a typical and an atypical career as a racing driver.Growing up in New Zealand, he had some important figures to look up to, with Amon, McLaren and Denny Hulme at the top of the list. All three figured in Ford’s historic sweep of the top three places in 1966 — Amon and McLaren in the first car and Hulme in the second.McLaren went on to found the Formula One racing team that bears his name and is the second-most successful team in the series history, trailing only Ferrari (for which Amon also raced).After winning go-kart titles at the ages of 12 and 14, Bamber moved on to single-seat racing at 15. His future looked bright, as he won the Formula BMW Asia series in 2006, finished second in a Toyota series in 2007, 2008 and 2010 and in the V6 Formula Asia series in 2008. He also finished second in the A1 series in 2008.But suddenly, in 2011, when he was just 20 years old, he abruptly ended his racing career.“I stopped because I didn’t have any money,” he said. “I didn’t drive for maybe two years.”But he was a good speaker, so became a racing car teacher and began working as a commentator for Eurosport television.At a Superleague Formula race that he was covering in Ordos, Inner Mongolia, a driver at one of the teams could not get a visa. So the team asked Bamber to drive — in a car he had never driven before.Advertisement“They swapped me as a commentator and got me to race, and then I won,” he said.“I didn’t have any race gear with me, and I had to borrow other competitors’ stuff, including a helmet,” he added. “Then the next weekend, in Beijing on the street track, we won again.”Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.His career might suddenly have been revived, but as is common in motor racing, he still was without funds. It wasn’t until 2013 that he decided to try the Porsche Carrera Cup Asia and eventually compete for a scholarship offered by the Porsche pyramid system in a series of shootout races. He won the scholarship, joined the Porsche Carrera Cup series and won the Porsche Carrera Cup Asia series in 2013 and 2014, as well as the Porsche Carrera Supercup series in 2014.Shortly before Christmas in 2014 he received a phone call from Frank-Steffen Walliser, the head of the Porsche racing program.“He said: ‘I have an early Christmas present for you: As your first year as a factory driver, we will give you a test in the LMP1 car in January,”’ Bamber recalled.After the test he was selected to drive at the 24 Hours of Le Mans, going on to win the race in his first year.“He’s a great guy, very quick, very intelligent, fun and cool,” Hülkenberg, who also races in Formula One, said of Bamber. “The beauty of it was that we came there, we were the third car and there wasn’t very many expectations for us. But how it panned out, we worked together very well and we were by far the quickest guys on the track. And we were just pushing like hell and enjoying ourselves. And I think the three of us and Porsche did an amazing job and that’s why we won.”With drivers like Mark Webber and the experienced Frenchman Romain Dumas in the other Porsche cars, it was indeed an exploit.“In the end of the day, it doesn’t matter if it is the LMP1 or the Cup car, it’s the same thing,” Bamber said. “You still have the steering wheel, brake-throttle and you’ve still got four tires. So you need to get in and drive and do the best that you can, and I always say, the only difference is the show around it.”“You’ve got your race car and you’ve got your mechanics and your engineer and you need to work together as a team and get the most from it,” he added. “The only difference between something like Cup and this over here is there’s a hundred more people running around and there’s more TVs and boards and things like that. But the principle is the same, and if you think of it like that it is easier to just jump in and do what we did.”AdvertisementThis year, he is not driving in the highest category of the series. Porsche, which made some reductions to its racing program after the emissions scandal at the parent company, Volkswagen, cut one of the cars from the race and is running only two cars.But Bamber is excited about the GTE category in which he will race.“Here this weekend there are 13 GTE-Pro cars,” he said. “As a driver you want to have the closest and the hardest racing possible.”So would the next step be Formula One?“People ask, do I have any interest in it? No, not at all,” Bamber said. “I don’t think it’s really racing. The best word that I have ever been told: It’s a display of engineering. It’s not really racing.”A version of this special report appears in print on June 17, 2016, in The International New York Times.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.See More »