AdvertisementSupported byBy Andrew DasLawyers representing the United States Soccer Federation and the union for the women’s national team faced off in federal court in Chicago on Thursday, moving their dispute over the validity of the team’s collective bargaining agreement closer to a resolution.Judge Sharon Johnson Coleman reserved ruling in the case at the hearing, increasing the chances that the federation and the players’ union could go to trial, perhaps about the time the team is set to defend its Olympic gold medal at the Summer Games in Rio de Janeiro.In February, U.S. Soccer sued the union representing the women’s team, which won the World Cup in Canada last summer, in an effort to hold the players to their contracts. At the time, U.S. Soccer said that it had brought the action “reluctantly” and only after the executive director of the union, Richard Nichols, threatened to repudiate the agreement — which includes a no-strike clause — during a negotiating session over a new one.Nichols, who took over as executive director of the players’ union in 2014 and has pushed aggressively in contract negotiations for better pay for the women’s team, said he had made no threats, though he and the union contend that the agreement expired in 2012.In its lawsuit, U.S. Soccer acknowledged that the collective bargaining agreement had expired, but it argued that the deal lived on in a memorandum of understanding that was signed in March 2013. That memorandum was scheduled to expire at the end of 2016.To support its position, U.S. Soccer has entered into evidence emails from John B. Langel, a former lawyer for the players’ union, including one in which he wrote that “the general principle we are working under is that items we have not specifically covered in the M.O.U. would remain the same as under the prior C.B.A.” But there was no evidence that the players themselves agreed with or disputed that understanding, or that Langel had the authority to approve a collective bargaining agreement on their behalf.On Dec. 24, Nichols informed U.S. Soccer that the players’ union considered the memorandum of understanding invalid as a collective bargaining agreement. Nichols said that if a new agreement was not in place in 60 days — by Feb. 24 — the players would no longer be bound by its terms. U.S. Soccer, fearing a walkout that would affect scheduled national team games, the start of the National Women’s Soccer League season and possibly even the players’ participation in the Summer Games, went to court seeking clarification on the agreement’s validity.The dispute intensified in March when five of the top players on the women’s team, saying they were acting on behalf of the entire team, filed a wage discrimination complaint with the Equal Employment Opportunity Commission. In that complaint, the women contended that they were being shortchanged by U.S. Soccer — in violation of federal law — on matters including pay, bonuses and per diem expenses in relation to the men’s national team, which operates on a different salary structure.Thursday’s arguments will have no bearing on that complaint, which may not be resolved until 2017.While Coleman’s decision on the collective bargaining agreement dispute is not expected until next month, negotiations toward a new agreement have continued. Representatives of U.S. Soccer and the players’ union met twice recently in New York, on May 9 and 16.Preparations for the Olympics also continue unabated. The United States will play Japan in two warm-up games, on June 2 and 5, and on Thursday the federation announced that the team would face South Africa on July 9 in Chicago in the first of two pre-Olympic send-off games.Advertisement