By BRAD SPURGEONMAY 27, 2016
At the Monaco Grand Prix this weekend, it’s not only in the team garages that spectators can get a close-up look at a Formula One car.At the Monte-Carlo Casino, a historic Ligier JS 43 Mugen-Honda is on display. In 1996, it was one of only three cars to cross the finish line in one of the craziest races in the history of the series.It is also the car that crossed the finish line first, handing the French driver Olivier Panis his only Grand Prix victory in 10 seasons in the series. No Frenchman has won a Formula One race since.But the story of that strangest of races is only partly about the superb drive by the Frenchman. Panis took advantage of every opportunity available on a wet track, moving up from 14th position on the grid to victory. No previous winner in Monaco had started farther back than ninth position, and since 1985 none had started farther back than third.AdvertisementBut the story in 1996 was also that so many drivers made so many errors.Monaco is Formula One’s most unforgiving circuit. The track is a narrow obstacle course winding through ancient streets. It has always had the reputation of resulting in processional races. But it also has the reputation of creating chaos. Until that 1996 race, it had already set the record for the least number of cars to finish a race, with six finishers five times, five finishers in 1968 and only four cars finishing in 1966, when Jackie Stewart won after new technical regulations had wreaked havoc.AdvertisementIn 1996, Panis had a strong car and was expected to do well. It was only because of a problem with his engine during qualifying that he started on the 14th grid position. During the warm-up, he scored the fastest time.Although the Williams cars of Damon Hill and Jacques Villeneuve had won all of the five races up to Monaco that year, the pole position in Monaco went to the German Michael Schumacher, his first for his new Ferrari team. Schumacher, of course, would go on to become one of the best racers in Monaco, winning the race five times, equaling the number of victories by Graham Hill and just one victory behind Ayrton Senna’s record of six.Villeneuve, who was a rookie but had already won a race, could only qualify 10th, while Hill started second.The weekend had been dry until not long before the race. Then the rain was so severe that the Porsche support race was cancelled. For the Grand Prix, because there had been no running on a wet track all weekend, officials decided to allow a 15-minute warm-up in the wet just before the race.During that period, several drivers crashed and two of them destroyed their cars: Andrea Montermini in a Forti and Mika Hakkinen in a McLaren. Montermini was unable to take part in the race; Hakkinen used the spare McLaren car.So the race started with 21 of the 22 cars. On the first lap, Hill shot into the lead ahead of Schumacher. The German, who had a reputation as an expert in wet conditions, not only had a bad start, but halfway through the first lap he made a rare error and spun out of the race. Conditions were so bad that by the end of the first lap, five cars were out of the race, bringing the field down to 16.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.Hill took a huge 4.3-second lead after the first lap and expanded that to nearly 30 seconds ahead of the second-placed driver, Jean Alesi in a Benetton. The Benettons of Alesi and Gerhard Berger had started from the second row of the grid, but moved into second and third, with Eddie Irvine in the other Ferrari in fourth. Irvine was slow, and he had a line of eight cars bunched up behind him.Accidents continued further back, and other cars dropped out in various incidents. But Panis had been showing that he was at home on the Monaco circuit, passing several drivers, including Martin Brundle in a Jordan, Hakkinen, and Johnny Herbert in a Sauber, to find himself behind Irvine.AdvertisementHe leapt on the inside at the Loews hairpin and passed Irvine, who hit the barriers, stopped and undid his seatbelts, only to get push started and resume the race. Now it was Panis’s Ligier team’s turn to do its part. Panis was called in for a pit stop and put on dry-weather tires at just the right moment.That allowed him to race at five seconds a lap faster than anyone else. He finally caught Irvine again on lap 35.Then, on lap 40, while Hill was leading Alesi by 30 seconds, the oil pump in his car’s Renault engine failed as he exited the tunnel. It was the first engine failure for Renault since 1993.Alesi took the lead. But after 20 more laps, his suspension failed and Panis took over.Meanwhile, Luca Badoer, in the other Forti, collided with Villeneuve at the Mirabeau corner, knocking both of them out of the race.To the end, Panis kept David Coulthard, driving the other McLaren, safely behind him in second. Herbert, who started 13th and had not passed a single car, finished third.“When I was handed the French flag, I couldn’t resist taking it,” recalled Panis, referring to how he drove the wind-down lap holding the banner. “Ever since seeing Alain Prost do it, I’ve always wanted to see it happen again.”“But,” he added, “who could imagine it would be my turn next?”A version of this special report appears in print on May 28, 2016, in The International New York Times.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.See More »