By DAVID WALDSTEINMAY 26, 2016
PARIS — Eugenie Bouchard’s slog across the continents to regain her best form took a significant hit at the French Open on Thursday. In a battle of former Roland Garros semifinalists, Bouchard was leading by 4-1 in the first set and appeared to be on a path to an important victory over No. 8 Timea Bacsinszky.But in an abrupt swing that mirrored Bouchard’s recent career downturn, her focus blurred, and she lost 10 games in a row. Bacsinszky, who reached the French Open semifinals last year, advanced to the third round with a 6-4, 6-4 win.After her loss, Bouchard chastised herself for her mental lapses, something she had emphasized avoiding in recent months as a way to reverse her misfortune.“It’s unacceptable, really, to lose 10 games in a row in a match,” she said. “I think that my focus, a little bit, was the part that let me down, the mental part.”AdvertisementBouchard added that the loss was particularly disappointing because she felt she had begun to steer her career onto a more successful track after months of frustration and pain.The past year has been nightmarish for Bouchard, a 22-year-old Canadian. Her lack of success in the wake of immense expectations generated by a breakthrough 2014 season was compounded by a frightening locker room accident at the United States Open in September.Bouchard started 2015 in the top 10 and reached the quarterfinals in the Australian Open but was then eliminated in her first matches at 10 of 15 tournaments leading up to New York. There, things began to look positive. She won three matches, enhancing her confidence.Get the big sports news, highlights and analysis from Times journalists, with distinctive takes on games and some behind-the-scenes surprises, delivered to your inbox every week.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.But after her third match, Bouchard fell in a training room and sustained a concussion, which caused her to withdraw from the tournament. (She later filed a lawsuit against the United States Tennis Association.)She played one more match in October, but that was it for the year. Her ranking plummeted to 48th. The year before, she was No. 7, the numerical reward for reaching the Wimbledon final, where she lost to Petra Kvitova, and the semifinals of the Australian Open and the French Open.AdvertisementAsked on Thursday what advice she might give a younger version of herself, she gave a brief but perhaps revealing answer.“For me, it would be to not worry about what people say about you,” she said, “and not listen to all the noise around you.”Bouchard’s record this year is 19-11. She said that she felt fine physically and that reuniting with Coach Nick Saviano two months ago had been beneficial.She took solace in the idea that the work they were doing together was geared toward sustaining success well into the future. Perhaps that could allow her to take some of the sting out of a loss that was less than an hour old.“My game actually feels good,” she said. “My shots feel good. My movement feels good. So I think it hurts a bit more knowing I can play really well right now. But I know it’s a long process and a long journey.“When I restarted working with Nick, we talked about a long-term plan. Of course, immediate results would be great, but it’s trying to improve over the long run, to become the best player I can be. So, that’s talking months, a year, or more.”Bouchard said that she intended to get going again soon after overcoming the sour taste of this loss. Her plan includes playing every week of the grass-court season leading up to Wimbledon, which begins June 27.As she prepares for that tournament, where she achieved her greatest success at a major, Bouchard was asked if she could take any comfort in the mettle she had showed by battling back in the second set against Bacsinszky.“She was down, 5-0,” Bacsinszky noted, “and she managed to play lights-out.”Appearing more relaxed in the face of seeming defeat, Bouchard began to hit the ball with greater authority. She won the next four games before ultimately falling in a deuce game.Advertisement“I saved face a little bit,” Bouchard said. “It was kind of too little, too late.”We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.