By THE ASSOCIATED PRESSJULY 20, 2016
INDIANAPOLIS — Dale Earnhardt Jr. will miss two more races as he recovers from concussion-like symptoms, and Jeff Gordon will come out of retirement to drive the No. 88 car in Earnhardt’s place for at least the next two weekends.Hendrick Motorsports announced Wednesday that Earnhardt, who drives for the team, would not compete in the Brickyard 400 at Indianapolis this weekend or in the next race, at Pocono, as he continued to recover from balance problems and nausea.Earnhardt sat out the race last weekend in New Hampshire and was replaced by Alex Bowman. The team said that he had been evaluated Tuesday by doctors in Pittsburgh but that he had not been cleared to drive.“Our focus is giving Dale all the time he needs to recover,” said Rick Hendrick, the team owner. “There’s nothing we want more than to see him back in the racecar, but we’ll continue to listen to the doctors and follow their lead. What’s best for Dale is what’s best for Hendrick Motorsports and everyone involved with the team. We’re all proud of him and looking forward to having him racing soon.”AdvertisementAlthough talk of retirement for Earnhardt, 41, might be premature, his history of concussions is a concern. He sustained two concussions in a six-week span in 2012 and missed two races, and this season he was involved in a 22-car wreck at Daytona and another crash at Michigan International Speedway. He felt progressively worse, and his head injury was confirmed after he met with a neurological specialist.AdvertisementGordon, a four-time series champion and a five-time winner of the Brickyard 400, will make his season debut just a short drive from his childhood home in Pittsboro, Ind. He has not competed since his retirement after last year’s season finale. This season, he has been featured on Fox Sports’ Nascar coverage.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.Last year’s race at Indianapolis was billed as Gordon’s “last ride” on his home track.Now Gordon, 44, will get another chance to become the first driver to reach victory lane six times at Indianapolis Motor Speedway. He is also the only Cup driver to win six times at Pocono. He has made all of his 797 career starts with Hendrick Motorsports.“Jeff’s a team player,” Hendrick said. “I know he’ll be ready, and I know Dale has incredible trust in him. It’s going to be an emotional weekend with Dale not being there and seeing Jeff back behind the wheel.”The race this weekend is expected to be the final Brickyard appearance for another Indiana driver, the three-time Cup champion Tony Stewart, who will retire after this season.“We wish the circumstances were different, but we’re thrilled anytime we see Jeff Gordon on the Indianapolis Motor Speedway oval and know our fans will love seeing him race again,” said Doug Boles, the speedway president. “Between Jeff making a return visit and Tony Stewart making his final Brickyard start, this will be a legendary weekend for Hoosier race fans at I.M.S.”A version of this article appears in print on July 21, 2016, on Page B14 of the New York edition with the headline: Gordon to Ride Again, This Time in Relief.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.