By BILL PENNINGTONJULY 20, 2016
CLINTON TOWNSHIP, Mich. — Karen Dimitrie was the library clerk at a local elementary school, the longtime treasurer of her town’s Little League and active at her neighborhood church. She volunteered for charities and was known as the person who always brought coffee for others at community meetings.“Karen was like everyone’s grandma in town,” said Frank Pizzo, the recreation director here in Clinton Township, a suburb 25 miles northeast of Detroit.Karen’s husband, Frank, with whom she had raised three children in town, was president of the Little League and coach of the freshman high school baseball team, which made him the gatekeeper to a prized spot on the varsity squad.Both in their mid-60s, they stood at the nexus of three powerful institutions in town: school, church and Little League.AdvertisementAll that came crashing down when the Clinton Valley Little League board of directors met one night in early 2014. Just after the meeting was called to order, Ms. Dimitrie was accused of stealing $50,000 from the league. Within months, the police concluded that the total amount missing from the league’s bank account was closer to $300,000.AdvertisementRobert Czech, a board member who helped uncover the theft, said Ms. Dimitrie immediately admitted to “messing up” and kept repeating at the meeting that her husband knew nothing about the fraud.Czech added: “And Frank said: ‘Shut up, Karen. Don’t say anything.’”The Dimitries’ case is hardly rare in the increasingly prosperous world of American youth sports, from which millions of dollars have been stolen in what public officials and nonprofit watchdogs say is a mounting swarm of corruption cases.But the Clinton Valley Little League situation is an especially illustrative example of the way a typical case of youth sports fraud can jolt and divide a community and leave a town bound by trust feeling betrayed.The case also draws in many of the characteristic elements: theft by a trusted volunteer, rifts in a scandalized community, lasting consequences, lingering suspicion and, ultimately, a plucky, stirring recovery by the league.“The whole township was broken up by it,” Mr. Pizzo said. “It was a nightmare.”It all started in the basement of the home of the board member Dennis McKay, a certified public accountant who lives a few houses down from the Dimitries near the western edge of town.Mr. McKay’s children routinely rode their bikes in the neighborhood of tightly spaced houses, waving and smiling at the Dimitries, who always seemed to be outside working on their home. Mr. McKay was friendly with the Dimitries too, but he still had a hunch something was amiss with the league’s finances. Why, he wondered, were his sons wearing the same old uniforms year to year?It took months, but Mr. McKay finally got access to the league’s bank statements in early 2014, when he and other new board members staged a coup and deposed Ms. Dimitrie as the treasurer. Mr. McKay immediately saw hundreds of checks, some for as much as $5,000, that were made out to the Dimitries — checks signed by both of them — that did not align with any league expenditures or costs.Advertisement“It would be 3 a.m.,” Mr. McKay said, “and I’d be by myself in the basement just getting really upset that someone who lived five houses down from me had stolen the money I paid to the league — my kids’ money.”The digging led to the confrontation at the board meeting.“Frank was really upset and swearing about the whole thing,” said Mike Schneider, a board member who has since ascended to league president. “He did not go easily.”Efforts to contact Karen and Frank Dimitrie, who was not charged in the crime, in person at their home and by phone and email were unsuccessful.Ms. Dimitrie, through her lawyer, Dan Garon, declined to be interviewed for this article.“She wishes to be quietly left alone,” Mr. Garon said.Detective Jeffrey Barbera of the Clinton Township Police took over the investigation and discovered that the Dimitries did not keep any books for the league finances during the six-year period that Ms. Dimitrie was treasurer.The couple’s personal money and the league’s money were commingled, Detective Barbera said in an interview.The police investigation revealed a total of 380 Clinton Valley Little League checks made payable to the Dimitries for roughly $300,000.Over the same period, the police tracked the Dimitries’ A.T.M. cash withdrawals made at casinos and checks written to casinos from the couple’s bank account. There were 899 such transactions totaling $318,000.On Aug. 5, 2014, Detective Barbera called the Dimitries into the police station and spoke to them individually. The detective began showing Ms. Dimitrie discrepancies he had found: a $900 bill for an annual league expense but a check to her personal account for $9,000, for example.Get the big sports news, highlights and analysis from Times journalists, with distinctive takes on games and some behind-the-scenes surprises, delivered to your inbox every week.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.Advertisement“She’d make statements, ‘Oh, yeah, that looks wrong,’” Detective Barbera said. “Or she’d say, ‘Oh, yeah, that dollar amount is outrageous.’”She made no formal confession; that came in court months later. But according to Detective Barbera, Ms. Dimitrie said, “Well, it’s black and white,” before breaking down in tears.“She commented about how she was going to look in the community,” Detective Barbera said. “She helped with the kids at her church and did other things like that. And she kept saying over and over that Frank didn’t know any of this — it was all on her.”Many here still question why the police never charged Mr. Dimitrie, believing he, as the league president and husband of the treasurer, had a responsibility to know where the money was going.“But that’s more of an ethical thing than a criminal thing,” Detective Barbera said.When Ms. Dimitrie was charged with embezzlement on Sept. 12, 2014, there was shock throughout town and then a backlash against the new Little League board members, who were accused of conducting a spiteful witch hunt against two respected figures.Last year, Ms. Dimitrie pleaded guilty to embezzling from the Clinton Valley Little League in a county court. Though she faced up to 20 years in prison, Ms. Dimitrie received five years of probation and was ordered to refrain from visiting casinos.Advertisement“I’m really sorry,” she said at her sentencing.Mr. Garon, Ms. Dimitrie’s lawyer, in negotiations with prosecutors, insisted that she had made several repayments and that the total league shortfall was much less than $300,000.Restitution to the league was set at $175,000, with Ms. Dimitrie paying the league $10,000 at her sentencing last year, and another $3,000 shortly thereafter. She has made monthly payments of $750 since then and remains on probation.Mr. Dimitrie stepped down as the freshman coach last year. Ms. Dimitrie lost her library job with the school district in 2014.“There was never an issue of guilt or innocence,” said Mr. Garon, who has handled three cases of youth sports embezzlement in eastern Michigan in recent years. “The Dimitries are very good people, but they just got caught up in a situation.”League board members acknowledge that the day-to-day operation of the league was largely unaffected during Ms. Dimitrie’s term as treasurer. Most families were happy. They also point out that they had no additional money for field maintenance, so games were played on spotty grass and irregular infields. Plans for the league to buy land for its own ball fields were shelved because of a lack of funds.The T-shirts that served as uniforms were collected at the end of each season and reissued the next year. Short on cash, the league stopped traveling with various age-group teams to weekend tournaments in other towns, a favorite perk of the players in previous seasons.But in the last two years, by almost every measure, the Clinton Valley Little League has been reborn.“Once the bleeding stopped and money wasn’t being siphoned away, the financial situation turned around overnight,” said Linda McGrail Belau, a lawyer who represented the league during the court proceedings.Advertisement“Everybody is busy improving the fields, buying new equipment, and the players are going to outside tournaments again,” said Ms. Belau, who has children in the league. “Enrollment is up.”The board has also adopted a new set of stringent rules that mandate regular reviews of the league’s financial ledger by multiple parties.On April 30, the league hosted its 58th annual opening day extravaganza, with hundreds of players gathered for games and team pictures while wearing authentic-looking, high-quality baseball uniforms. A concession stand sold food, refreshments and league paraphernalia — a first, board members said, for a regular-season game.The town athletic complex was packed with parents, siblings, aunts, uncles and grandparents who set up their folding chairs to ring multiple fields. The parking lots were filled.Ryan McKay, the 11-year-old son of Mr. McKay, the board member who helped expose the theft, said he still rides his bike with friends around the corner from his house and down the Dimitries’ street.“But I tell my friends, ‘When we get to their house, let’s go on the other side of the street,’” Ryan said. “We always ride on the other side.”A version of this article appears in print on July 20, 2016, on Page B8 of the New York edition with the headline: ‘Grandma’: Little League Thief.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.