By RICHARD SANDOMIR and KEN BELSONJULY 16, 2016
The Ultimate Fighting Championship has made a name for itself by promoting fast-paced, hard-hitting mixed martial arts action in glitzy venues, a sport where extreme machismo meets Las Vegas.But the road to the group’s $4 billion sale on Monday was paved through less sexy state capitals like Albany and Montpelier, Vt., where the group’s top regulatory official, Marc Ratner, and other U.F.C. officials spent a decade trying to convince lawmakers that the sport was not the bloody form of human cockfighting that some of its critics called it.The legal slog, which ended in March when New York became the 50th and final state to allow mixed martial arts events, was critical to the sale of U.F.C., which was bought by the talent company WME-IMG. Without approval in New York, the organization and its rivals could not hold fights in the nation’s biggest city and media market even as bouts were staged in New Jersey, the first state to approve mixed martial arts.Officials of WME-IMG would not comment on whether it would have paid anything less than $4 billion for the U.F.C. — the dominant organization in mixed martial arts — without New York’s approval. But the new owners will benefit from being able to stage its shows at Madison Square Garden and Barclays Center, and at facilities around the state.AdvertisementPhil de Picciotto, president of Octagon, the sports marketing firm, said that the New York market was as important to the M.M.A. industry as Los Angeles, where the Rams recently returned from St. Louis, was to the National Football League. “The absence of the New York market, on a mid- or long-term basis,” he said, “would certainly have had a negative effect on the valuation” of the U.F.C.AdvertisementState approvals were not moving quickly enough for Frank and Lorenzo Fertitta, the owners of U.F.C., when they began to recruit Ratner in 2005 to ensure that the company could hold its events throughout the country. Ratner was known for his connection to boxing regulation as the executive director of the Nevada Athletic Commission and joined the company only after a bout in May 2006 between Oscar De La Hoya and Ricardo Mayorga. Ratner was recently inducted into the International Boxing Hall of Fame.Ratner and a team of U.F.C. executives, lawyers and lobbyists spent years trudging through statehouses to promote the money the sport would generate and the rules that would make it safer.Every time a state legalized the sport, Ratner colored it green on an oversized map of the United States that hung in his office in Las Vegas. By 2013, with Connecticut’s and South Dakota’s approval of mixed martial arts, only New York remained red on the map. But Ratner could not make headway because of an unusual alliance between several powerful unions opposed to the owners of the U.F.C. and Sheldon Silver, then the powerful speaker of the Assembly, who prevented bills from reaching a vote.U.F.C.’s frustration with its inability to win approval in New York bubbled over in 2013 when Dana White, the group’s fiery president, posted a photo of the map on Twitter and asked, “Who looks stupid on this map?”Opposition to the bill was expressed in various ways. Assemblyman Daniel O’Donnell, Democrat from Manhattan, called mixed martial arts “gay porn.” Assemblywoman Ellen Jaffee, Democrat from Rockland County, described her position in a phone conversation on Friday. “I don’t consider it a sport,” she said. “It encourages violence. The argument is that it’s in all the other states and on TV, but it’s one thing to see it on TV, another to see people beaten up from the front row.”But this past March, with Silver awaiting sentencing in a corruption scandal, the Assembly voted 114 to 26 to permit mixed martial arts fights in the state. The bill’s passage was an exultant moment for Ratner, who said that his group had not celebrated approval in any other states.“When it was over, for that moment, I sort of got teary-eyed,” he said, “because I realized it was done. That night in Albany, we had some Champagne.”Get the big sports news, highlights and analysis from Times journalists, with distinctive takes on games and some behind-the-scenes surprises, delivered to your inbox every week.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.Ratner and his team traveled to Albany almost 30 times in nearly eight years and spent an estimated $2 million. Their primary objective was to explain the sport to lawmakers who had not seen it before. At times, they took along well-known fighters like Ronda Rousey, Chris Weidman and Miesha Tate. The spectacle worked: Even lawmakers opposed to U.F.C. wanted their photographs taken with the fighters.Advertisement“I’m not going to kid you,” said Joseph D. Morelle, the Assembly majority leader. “When Ronda Rousey walks in, that’s a lot of star power.”David Weinraub, a lobbyist hired by U.F.C., said the battle to win approval had gone on so long, and had received so much publicity, that some of the younger legislators adopted a fighter’s pose whenever he walked toward them.“Talk about typecasting,” Weinraub said with a laugh. “We’d bring up the fighters, and the legislators would flock to them and call their children and get them to take pictures.”Weinraub credited Ratner not just for his perseverance but for his easygoing, yet authoritative demeanor. Ratner was little known when he arrived in Albany, so he let lawmakers know that he was with the Nevada Athletic Commission when it revoked Mike Tyson’s boxing license for biting off Evander Holyfield’s ear. That, Weinraub said, got people’s attention.Weinraub said that Ratner did not look like a prototypical boxing regulator.“He’s probably the last guy you’d expected to be involved with M.M.A., a nice Jewish guy, and that was disarming,” he said. “He’s like the western Jewish cowboy.”Weidman, who said he expected to fight in the U.F.C.’s first event at Madison Square Garden in November, added: “Marc’s a calm, cool, smart guy who’s easy to talk to. When you go into a room with these powerful people, he makes you feel comfortable.”Ratner said he visited about 15 states, and he also spoke to various state athletic commissions to help them adapt their regulations to add mixed martial arts to the combat sports they oversaw. The U.F.C. hired lobbyists in about a dozen states and received help from advocates like John Rallo, a fighter who owns three mixed martial arts gyms in Maryland and orchestrated much of the campaign that led to that state’s approval.Advertisement“Ratner is a great guy, and he appeared here for us, but we did all the lobbying,” Rallo said.Ratner, 71, was a high school and college sports official well before he turned to sports regulation. He also worked for his family’s beauty supply business, where he met his wife, Jody, on a sales call to the Caesars Palace beauty salon. He had jobs in radio and advertising, but he attended boxing matches so often that he was asked to consider being an inspector for the athletic commission, a post that eventually led him to replace Chuck Minker as the executive director. Ratner became the commission’s public face for 14 years.He was, at first, opposed to bringing mixed martial arts to Nevada. He recalled appearing on Larry King’s television show in the 1990s with Sen. John McCain, the Arizona Republican who was a staunch opponent, Bob Meyrowitz, the co-founder of the U.F.C., and the fighter Ken Shamrock. Ratner said at the time that there would be no mixed martial arts shows in the state without a set of rules that would save it from the excesses of its roots.“They were advertising no rules, no-holds barred,” he said. But in 2001, after the rules were codified, Nevada sanctioned mixed martial arts.Five years later, having regulated M.M.A. shows, he recognized the Fertittas’ offer as a chance to be a part of something big.“It could help my legacy,” he said, “to be in on the ground floor of a young, new sport.”A version of this article appears in print on July 17, 2016, on Page SP5 of the New York edition with the headline: U.F.C.’s Payday Comes at the End of an Odyssey Through Statehouses.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.