By PAT BORZIJUNE 17, 2016
MINNEAPOLIS — One pitch, one swing, prevented the Yankees from wasting another effective start from C. C. Sabathia.A three-run homer by Didi Gregorius in the seventh, on the first pitch from the Minnesota Twins’ left-handed reliever Fernando Abad, lifted the Yankees to a 4-1 victory on Thursday night at Target Field that ended a four-game losing streak. Winning the first of four games against the worst team in the American League provided the inconsistent Yankees a measure of relief and a mathematical chance of getting back to .500 by the end of this trip.That the big hit came from the left-handed-batting Gregorius, the club’s best hitter against left-handed pitching, did not surprise anyone in the Yankees’ clubhouse. Abad had been especially effective against lefties, allowing only three hits in 30 bats (a .100 batting average) before Gregorius stepped in and pulled a pitch into the right-field seats to break a 1-1 tie.“He threw me a fastball right down the middle,” Gregorius said. “I wasn’t looking to hit a home run, but it happened. You want to at least drive one run in. That’s what you always look for in that situation.”AdvertisementSabathia (5-4) did his best Andy Pettitte impression while extending the best stretch of his career. He threw a season-high 116 pitches in six innings, putting runners on in four of them, yet allowed only one run and struck out seven. So his E.R.A. over his last seven starts actually rose, to 0.86 from 0.71.Get the big sports news, highlights and analysis from Times journalists, with distinctive takes on games and some behind-the-scenes surprises, delivered to your inbox every week.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.“My command was off all over the place,” Sabathia said.It took Sabathia 46 pitches to get through the first two innings. He begged Manager Joe Girardi to let him go out for the sixth even though he had thrown 104 pitches.Advertisement“He had done the job, so I felt good about it,” Girardi said.“Baserunners are going to happen,” he added. “The pitches you make when baserunners are on are the most important pitches. And he made his most important pitches when runners were on tonight. He could have given up a lot of runs. Fifty pitches, almost, after two innings. He just kept fighting.”Until the Gregorius homer, the Yankees, in typical fashion, struggled offensively. Twins starter Kyle Gibson, winless in an injury-interrupted season, limited the Yankees to two hits through five scoreless innings. The Yankees loaded the bases with none out in the sixth but managed only one run, on Jacoby Ellsbury’s single.Gregorius began the night with the second-highest batting average in the majors by a left-handed batter against left-handed pitching. The homer, his 15th hit in 33 at-bats against lefties since May 7, raised that mark to .368. He batted .247 against lefties last year.“You’ve got to make adjustments to try to get better,” Gregorius said. “When I’m facing lefties, I try to keep my front shoulder in as long as I can so I don’t fly open. Second half of the season last year, that’s when I figured out everything hitting-wise. It’s still working for me, so I don’t see why I have to change it.”Carlos Beltran returned to the Yankees’ lineup two days after having fluid drained from his inflamed left knee. He went 0 for 3 playing right field, and Girardi took him out as a precaution in the seventh once the Yankees had taken the lead.“I didn’t feel any pain after they took me out of the game,” Beltran said. “I came inside, and the knee looked the same as it was when I showed up to the ballpark. I took it as a positive day.”We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.