By VICTOR MATHERJULY 15, 2016
Linebacker Von Miller of the Denver Broncos will be one of the N.F.L.’s richest players.The Associated Press reported on Friday that Miller agreed to a $114.5 million contract with the Broncos that includes $70 million in guarantees and makes him the highest-paid nonquarterback in N.F.L. history.On Twitter, Miller posted a photo of himself with a caption that read, “For Life.”
            FOR LIFE pic.twitter.com/ayvzpJ1WZh Miller had rejected an earlier proposal with less guaranteed money.The previous record for a defender was the $63 million guaranteed to defensive tackle Fletcher Cox of the Eagles last month. Quarterback Andrew Luck got $87 million in a recent extension with the Colts.Miller was silent about a possible deal earlier Friday, though on Twitter he posted a picture of himself being covered with slime at the Nickelodeon Kids’ Choice Sports Awards, which were taped Thursday.
pic.twitter.com/xT80cOkBrM Miller was taken second out of Texas A&M in the 2011 draft, behind Cam Newton of the Panthers.They met again in the Super Bowl this year, with Miller’s Broncos coming out on top. Miller forced two fumbles and won the game’s Most Valuable Player Award.AdvertisementA four-time Pro Bowl selection in his five-year career, Miller has averaged 12 sacks a season. He missed the first six games of the 2013 season because of a violation of the league’s substance-abuse policy, which reportedly had to do with trying to fake the results of a drug test. He then tore his anterior cruciate ligament and missed the playoffs.AdvertisementBut he bounced back to his previous level of greatness the next season, returning to the Pro Bowl and All-Pro teams.Get the big sports news, highlights and analysis from Times journalists, with distinctive takes on games and some behind-the-scenes surprises, delivered to your inbox every week.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.Nearly all of the top paid players in the N.F.L. are quarterbacks, but Miller’s fearsome pass rushing and defensive leadership make him an unusually valuable defender.The Broncos had endured an exodus since their Super Bowl win. Peyton Manning retired and his backup Brock Osweiler signed with the Texans. That leaves Mark Sanchez, acquired in a trade with the Eagles, as the presumed starter.The Broncos also lost defensive end Malik Jackson to the Jacksonville Jaguars and linebacker Danny Trevathan to the Chicago Bears in free agency.A version of this article appears in print on July 16, 2016, on Page D5 of the New York edition with the headline: Huge Pact for Broncos’ Miller.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.