AdvertisementSupported byBy Benjamin HoffmanThe Miami Dolphins got a big upset, the San Diego Chargers managed to get through a game without collapsing, and the Cleveland Browns trotted out a sixth quarterback. Those were just a few of the big stories in a week where the most anticipated matchups were not all that competitive but some of the lesser games provided plenty of entertainment.Here’s what we learned in Week 7:■ Nobody is perfect, and that is especially true for Sam Bradford and the Minnesota Vikings. The Vikings had just one turnover in the first five games of the season, but they had four in a loss to Philadelphia, becoming the last team in the N.F.L. to lose a game this season. In fairness to Bradford, he was on the Eagles less than two months ago, and may have just gotten confused.■ If you try too hard to shut down Rob Gronkowski and Martellus Bennett, the New England Patriots will just use their star tight ends as decoys and run-blockers while LeGarrette Blount runs you into submission. But if they catch you sleeping, Gronk is always happy to get another touchdown catch.■ It was a rough night for kickers. Arizona’s Chandler Catanzaro missed a chip shot in overtime, but his night was saved when his counterpart on Seattle’s sideline, Steven Hauschka, completely blew his own game-winner. Nobody likes a tie game.■ The quarterback controversy for the Jets may have only lasted eight passes. Geno Smith was forced out of the game with a knee injury and Ryan Fitzpatrick came on in relief to lead the team to victory, potentially willing his job back.■ You never know who will make history. Jay Ajayi of the Miami Dolphins joined O.J. Simpson, Earl Campbell and Ricky Williams as the only players to have 200 or more rushing yards in consecutive games as he followed up last week’s 204-yard game with 214 in a win over Buffalo. Prior to the streak, Ajayi’s career high was 48 yards.The New England Patriots have plenty of methods for beating teams, but when the going gets tough, the Patriots go to Gronk. That point was proven yet again, as Rob Gronkowski pulled a ball in for a touchdown that few other than him could even get to, and that was icing on the cake in an eventual 27-16 win over the Pittsburgh Steelers.It had been a quiet game for both Martellus Bennett and Gronkowski, as the dynamic duo of Patriots tight ends combined for just one catch in the first half as the Steelers seemed determined to take them out of the game. New England chose to settle for passes underneath to Julian Edelman and runs by LeGarrette Blount rather than forcing the issue.The same held true for much of the second half, but with Pittsburgh having closed what had been a 14-0 lead all the way to 14-13, it was time for the big guys to show up, and Gronkowski did just that by outracing the entire Steelers defense into the end zone, with Tom Brady finding him for a beautiful 36-yard touchdown.“I had a good look and Tom threw the ball perfectly for me to make the play,” Gronkowski said after the game. “I just had to make a little move.”Gronkowski finished the day with 4 catches for 93 yards, with the touchdown tying him with Stanley Morgan for the franchise record of 68. It did prove to be a tough game for Bennett who had just 1 catch for 5 yards.All of the attention paid to the tight ends led to a huge game for Blount who carried the ball 27 times for 127 yards and 2 touchdowns against his former team.There were, however, reasons for optimism in a loss for the Steelers. The team competed in the game despite Ben Roethlisberger being out with a knee injury, and Landry Jones was able to move the ball some against New England’s tough defense.If Sunday night prime time matchups are meant to showcase the most exciting games in the N.F.L., the league apparently chose poorly in a defensive grudge match between the Seattle Seahawks and Arizona Cardinals. After the teams struggled to a 3-3 tie at the end of regulation, they matched that in overtime. But in an unbelievable ending, the placekickers for both teams missed short field goal attempts and the game ended in a tie, 6-6.In an on-field interview after the game, Seahawks linebacker Bobby Wagner summed things up well.“It is what it is,” Wagner said. “We know what we need to get better at. It’s not a loss.”After struggling to do anything in the first four quarters, the teams traded field goals to start overtime. The Cardinals appeared to have the game won on the team’s second drive in overtime, when Carson Palmer led his offense all the way to Seattle’s 1-yard line. On 3rd-and-goal, Arizona sent Chandler Catanzaro out for the field goal attempt, but a delay of game penalty backed him up, and his 24-yard attempt hit the left upright, with the ball bouncing out, giving new life to Seattle.Russell Wilson suddenly regained his form, and led an 8-play 70-yard drive that again appeared to have the game settled before Steven Hauschka missed from 28 yards out.The Seahawks managed only 130 yards of offense and 90 yards of penalties prior to overtime. The Cardinals were more effective, with 302 yards in regulation, but they were not able to do anything with the yardage, settling for one first-half field goal.The two legitimate highlights came from Seattle’s special teams. In the first half, Wagner borrowed a move popularized by his teammate, Kam Chancellor, leaping over Arizona’s long-snapper to block a field goal. In terms of importance to the game, Tanner McEvoy had an even more impressive play in the second half, blocking a punt near the end of the fourth quarter that set up the Seahawks’ lone scoring play in regulation.Other than that, the story of the day was two typically-reliable kickers failing when their teams needed them most.The New England Patriots have plenty of methods for beating teams, but when the going gets tough, the Patriots go to Gronk. That point was proven yet again, as Rob Gronkowski pulled a ball in for a touchdown that few other than him could even get to, and that was icing on the cake in an eventual 27-16 win over the Pittsburgh Steelers.It had been a quiet game for both Martellus Bennett and Gronkowski, as the dynamic duo of Patriots tight ends combined for just one catch in the first half as the Steelers seemed determined to take them out of the game. New England chose to settle for passes underneath to Julian Edelman and runs by LeGarrette Blount rather than forcing the issue.The same held true for much of the second half, but with Pittsburgh having closed what had been a 14-0 lead all the way to 14-13, it was time for the big guys to show up, and Gronkowski did just that by outracing the entire Steelers defense into the end zone, with Tom Brady finding him for a beautiful 36-yard touchdown.“I had a good look and Tom threw the ball perfectly for me to make the play,” Gronkowski said after the game. “I just had to make a little move.”Gronkowski finished the day with 4 catches for 93 yards, with the touchdown tying him with Stanley Morgan for the franchise record of 68. It did prove to be a tough game for Bennett who had just 1 catch for 5 yards.All of the attention paid to the tight ends led to a huge game for Blount who carried the ball 27 times for 127 yards and 2 touchdowns against his former team.There were, however, reasons for optimism in a loss for the Steelers. The team competed in the game despite Ben Roethlisberger being out with a knee injury, and Landry Jones was able to move the ball some against New England’s tough defense.The undefeated start to the season by the Minnesota Vikings came to an ugly, confusing end on Sunday. A team known almost entirely for ball security suddenly could not hold onto the ball. In a brutal game of hot potato, Carson Wentz and the Philadelphia Eagles took advantage with a 21-10 victory.The loss spoiled the return to Philadelphia by Sam Bradford, who had been traded to Minnesota just before the season to help fill the void created when Teddy Bridgewater was lost for the season with a knee injury. In a win-win situation, Bradford had proven to be a perfect fit for Minnesota, and his former backup, the rookie Wentz, had made a case for himself as a franchise quarterback.The teams had combined for just three turnovers coming into the game, but that statistic was turned on its head in an ugly first quarter that saw a combined five turnovers in a span of just 11 plays.Wentz and the Eagles settled down, and after Josh Huff gave the team a lead with a 98-yard kickoff return for a touchdown, it was all Philadelphia.Wentz was hardly at his best, completing 16 of 28 passes for 138 yards, 1 touchdown and 2 interceptions. But Bradford had easily the worst game of his Vikings tenure, with just 224 passing yards to go with 4 fumbles and a costly interception in the end zone.Bradford and the Vikings have a good opportunity to get back on track next week with a home game against the struggling Chicago Bears.It looked like a sleepy affair in Detroit, with the Lions and Washington Redskins tied 3-3 at halftime. But the teams were apparently saving the drama for the end of the game, as Kirk Cousins ran in a 19-yard touchdown with just over a minute remaining in the game to give the Redskins a 17-13 lead, before Matthew Stafford answered quickly with a 6-play 75-yard drive that culminated in an 18-yard touchdown pass to Anquan Boldin that sealed a 20-17 victory for Detroit.It was the 24th time in his career that Stafford had engineered a game-winning drive in the fourth quarter.Chargers Shock Falcons: Josh Lambo said kicking his game-winning field goal — his fourth of the game — was no more difficult than an extra point. Lambo’s 42-yard field goal in overtime gave San Diego its first road victory of the year, as the Chargers rallied from a 17-point deficit to beat the Atlanta Falcons 33-30 on Sunday. Here’s how they upset the Falcons.Brees, Saints Come Up Short: Drew Brees and the New Orleans Saints are putting up the kind of ridiculous numbers at home that would be hard to believe even in the Madden video game. On the road has been another matter.Brees threw an interception that was returned 48-yard for a touchdown on Sunday, and generally had a tough time moving the Saints against a stout Kansas City defense, ultimately running out of time in a 24-21 loss to the Chiefs at boisterous Arrowhead Stadium. Read about the Chiefs’ victory here.Dolphins Ride Ajayi: The streaking Buffalo Bills had a 17-6 lead in the third quarter, but the Dolphins suddenly came alive, reeling off 22 consecutive points and then holding on to upset the Bills, 28-25, in easily the team’s brightest moment of the season.The Bills made the Dolphins work for the points, with the three touchdown drives going for 75, 64 and 70 yards, but Buffalo simply had no answer for Jay Ajayi, the Dolphins running back, who finished the game with 29 carries for 214 yards and 1 touchdown. Ajayi became just the fourth player in N.F.L. history to rush for 200 or more yards in two consecutive games, joining Ricky Williams (2002), Earl Campbell (1980), and O.J. Simpson (1973 and 1976). Read about Ajayi’s big day here.Colts Own Titans: Andrew Luck threw a 7-yard touchdown pass to Jack Doyle with 1:55 left to put Indianapolis ahead to stay, and the Colts rallied to beat the Tennessee Titans 34-26 Sunday for their 10th straight win against their AFC South rival. Here’s how they rallied.Bengals Top Browns: A.J. Green’s one-handed catch in the middle of an end zone scrum highlighted Cincinnati’s day full of big plays, and the Bengals pulled away to another lopsided victory over their intrastate rival, beating the winless Cleveland Browns 31-17 on Sunday. Read more here.The Jets had promised rebirth. Change was afoot — a new quarterback, a more aggressive defense, a lighter schedule — as the team tried to take advantage of an opportunity to change the trajectory of a season sinking into oblivion. It all seemed so well scripted, until the new quarterback left Sunday’s game with a leg injury. As the old quarterback jogged toward the huddle,the Jets’ cycle of misfortune appeared to spin right back to the beginning.Last week, Ryan Fitzpatrick had been forced to choke down the possibility that his time as an N.F.L. starter might be over. Instead, his inglorious return to the bench lasted less than 26 minutes, or eight passes by Geno Smith, before a right knee injury knocked Smith out of the game. It is some morbid testament to the absurdity of the Jets that all this confusion served to catalyze the team’s attack, helping the team snap a four-game losing streak with a 24-16 win over the Baltimore Ravens at MetLife Stadium.The New York Giants capitalized on four interceptions of Case Keenum to defeat the Los Angeles Rams 17-10 Sunday in the first NFL game played at London’s home of English rugby, a sold-out and raucous Twickenham Stadium.Keenum, coming off the best start of his career, had the Rams at the Giants’ 15-yard line with 50 seconds left when he lobbed a pass in the left corner of the end zone that Dominique Rodgers-Cromartie easily picked off. Keenum’s intended target, Brian Quick, failed to get the quarterback’s audible and cut off his route early.Keenum, who finished 32 of 53 for 291 yards and one touchdown, has thrown an interception on the Rams’ final offensive play of the last three games. That likely will fuel debate on a potential quarterback change to overall No. 1 draft pick Jared Goff. Read more from London.Advertisement