By STEPHANIE MYLESMARCH 31, 2017
KEY BISCAYNE, Fla. — Roger Federer cannot quite figure out why his longtime rival Rafael Nadal has never won the Miami Open.On Sunday, he will make it his personal business to ensure that streak of futility continues for at least another year.Federer’s 7-6 (9), 6-7 (9), 7-6 (5) victory over No. 12 seed Nick Kyrgios on Friday night electrified a full stadium intent on casting Kyrgios, a 21-year-old Australian, in the villain’s role. Federer, 35, who this year has already won the Australian Open and the BNP Paribas Open in Indian Wells, Calif., will vie for his third championship here, but his first since 2006.This is only the fourth tournament Federer has played in 2017, and he will have faced Nadal in three of them.Advertisement“Feels like old times,” Federer said. “We’re playing each other every week now. We can’t get enough of each other.”AdvertisementThe win over Kyrgios took 3 hours 11 minutes and was reminiscent of their only other meeting. Kyrgios won that third-round match in Madrid in 2015, surviving a 14-12 third-set tiebreaker after the first two sets also were decided in tiebreakers.Federer and Kyrgios were scheduled to play in the quarterfinals at Indian Wells two weeks ago, but a case of food poisoning forced Kyrgios out of the event.Kyrgios’s emotions were restrained by his standards. But no matter what he did, the Miami fans were prepared to let him hear about it.He served for the first set at 5-4 but missed a relatively routine backhand volley. His reaction was to bounce his racket, and the reaction from the crowd was quick and vociferous. Kyrgios grew frustrated during the third-set tiebreaker by fans making line calls before points were over.He then double-faulted at 5-5 to give Federer a match point, which he quickly converted. Before walking to the net to shake Federer’s hand, Kyrgios destroyed his racket with a series of whacks to the court.
            Probably Kyrgios's best racquet smash ever pic.twitter.com/D3XzJ177Bs “I showed a lot of fight,” he said. “I thought I competed for every point. Obviously I’m an emotional guy. I had some ups and downs, bit of a roller coaster. Ultimately I think I put in a good performance. I thought the crowd would have enjoyed watching it, people at home would have enjoyed watching it. As I said, I wouldn’t be surprised if they found something bad, though.”Get the big sports news, highlights and analysis from Times journalists, with distinctive takes on games and some behind-the-scenes surprises, delivered to your inbox every week.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.Nadal wrapped up his 6-1, 7-5 semifinal victory over Fognini in 1:30 with an effective serving day in windy conditions.AdvertisementHe lost nine total points on serve, including only three on his second serve, and never faced a break point against Fognini, the mercurial Italian.One inside-out forehand drop shot from Fognini, which could not have landed any more perfectly had he walked up and placed the ball there himself, brought Nadal out of his right shoe.Nadal said it was the second time in a month that he had lost a shoe while playing.That might mean he needs to tie his shoes “stronger, but I don’t know,” he said.
            Classy drop-shot by Fogna!And Nadal loses his shoe#Fognini #Nadal #RafaNadal #FabioFognini #ATPMiami #Miami #MiamiOpen #RafaelNadal pic.twitter.com/gNngxcMG0F Nadal did not get caught up in any hype about another possible encounter with Federer. He is simply eyeing the champion’s trophy, which he has not lifted in 12 appearances here, including four previous trips to the final.Even Federer, who beat Nadal in the 2005 final here, is surprised Nadal does not have a Miami title on his résumé.“I think the surface is good for him,” Federer said before the tournament began. “I think it plays slower here than in Australia and Indian Wells, which gives Rafa more time to defend and use his forehand. I would expect him in the heat, in the wind, with this kind of a surface, to be very tough to beat.”Nadal said it did not matter who his opponent was Sunday, adding, “I am excited to play another final of an important event.”“So if it’s Roger,” he said, it will just be “another one for both of us, and that’s it. Just another one.”AdvertisementAs it turns out, it will be No. 37 in their rivalry.Federer expected to wake up Friday morning feeling somewhat the worse for wear after his escape against No. 10 seeded Tomas Berdych in the quarterfinals Thursday, which also went to a third-set tiebreaker.“I don’t know if it’s a surprise or not, but I was expecting to be maybe more stiff or hurt or something, that I would feel something really,” Federer said. “I actually woke up and felt great, so that was good. Throughout the match I didn’t have any problems, and now actually feel pretty good.“Maybe not a bad thing that it’s not best-of-five sets anymore in the finals. Even though, knowing that I won’t play for a while, it’s easy now to just compress all the energy you have and give it one last push.”An article on Saturday about victories by Rafael Nadal and Roger Federer in the semifinals at the Miami Open misstated, in some editions, the round in which Federer defeated Nadal in their previous tournament, the BNP Paribas Open. It was the fourth round, not the third.A version of this article appears in print on April 1, 2017, on Page D7 of the New York edition with the headline: Nadal Welcomes Another Chance at a Miami Title.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.