AdvertisementSupported byKnicks 98, Heat 94By The Associated PressMIAMI — Kristaps Porzingis scored 22 points, Courtney Lee added 20, and the Knicks led nearly the entire way Friday night in defeating the Miami Heat, 98-94.Justin Holiday scored 12 points for the Knicks, who played without Carmelo Anthony (back), Derrick Rose (knee) and Lance Thomas (hip). It was only the fourth win in the past 15 games for the Knicks.Goran Dragic scored 22 points and Hassan Whiteside had 17 points and 16 rebounds for Miami, which missed 15 of its final 16 attempts from 3-point range. Tyler Johnson added 15 points for the Heat.Even with the loss, Miami (37-39) held onto the No. 7 spot in the Eastern Conference standings because the No. 8 Indiana Pacers (37-39) lost to the Raptors in Toronto. The Heat and the Pacers are just a half-game ahead of the No. 9 Chicago Bulls.The Heat had a chance to tie the game in the final seconds, but Dragic missed a layup and Whiteside was called for offensive basket interference as he tried to tip the rebound.Lee then sealed the win by hitting two free throws.“These guys have got to play like we want to win the game,” Knicks Coach Jeff Hornacek said. “We’re not just going out there to play. You’re not out there playing a pickup game — you’re out there to try to win. So no matter who you have on the court, that’s the way we should be approaching it.”It may prove to be a costly loss for Miami.This was possibly the final game the Heat will play this season against a team eliminated from playoff contention. Miami hosts Denver on Sunday, followed by a three-game, four-night trip next week to Charlotte, Toronto and Washington. After that, it is back home for games against Cleveland and Washington, who may still be jockeying for playoff seeds.The Knicks trailed for only 1 minute 48 seconds, and never by more than a point. The Knicks’ lead was 4 after one quarter, 4 at halftime and 2 after the third quarter.The Heat tied the game five times in the first six and a half minutes of the fourth quarter, and the Knicks answered with a basket to reclaim the lead every time.Advertisement