By ZACH SCHONBRUNMARCH 31, 2017
GLENDALE, Ariz. — The statuette positioned at the top of Oregon’s 1939 N.C.A.A. tournament championship trophy appears to be preparing to take a two-handed set shot. That is how long it has been since the Ducks last played in the Final Four.Part of the reason that Oregon, a No. 3 seed, has reached Saturday’s national semifinal game against North Carolina is outside shooting. And for that, the Ducks are unwittingly paying homage to the 1939 team.Oregon’s coach then, Howard Hobson, was a visionary who studied basketball as a biologist might examine slides under a microscope. Fed up by the lack of objective analysis by coaches and scouts in his day, he took a sabbatical to Columbia University to complete his doctorate in education, with a special focus on basketball. And on Feb. 7, 1945, Hobson organized a scrimmage between Columbia and Fordham that introduced a brand-new concept to the game: the 3-point line.As part of an experiment, Hobson painted an arc on the floor 21 feet from the basket and designated that shots made from beyond the circle would count for 3 points. Explaining his rationale in his 1949 book, “Scientific Basketball,” Hobson said the home run was the liveliest play in baseball, and that the same could be said of a long outside shot in basketball. The home run, however, was worth more than a single, while a shot in basketball counted the same whether it was made from two feet or 40 feet.Advertisement“Since the data indicate clearly that it is much more difficult to score from the longer areas,” Hobson wrote, “why should not goals from the longer areas be worth more than goals under the basket?”Get the big sports news, highlights and analysis from Times journalists, with distinctive takes on games and some behind-the-scenes surprises, delivered to your inbox every week.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.One problem in basketball at the time was that teams commonly played a zone defense that collapsed in the middle of the lane, limiting scoring inside. As a result, Hobson believed, the game had stagnated.Advertisement“There is not much of a basketball game after the defense is set,” he wrote.Not everyone was excited by Hobson’s experiment, though. Louis Effrat, reporting for The New York Times, wrote that the test game immediately became more individualized, as players stepped back beyond the line to heave shots. Often, they even forgot to dribble the ball and were whistled for traveling.“The experiment, therefore, was far from a howling success,” Effrat wrote, adding, “At this stage it seems safe to predict that the optional plan will be permitted to die a natural death.”For a while, Effrat was right. Hobson’s vision did not catch on, and it would take the short-lived American Basketball League, in 1961, to reintroduce the type of higher-value, long-distance shot that was attempted, on average, 21.1 times a game this season in Division I men’s basketball.Oregon has not gone a game without making at least one 3-pointer since 1997. The Ducks’ Tyler Dorsey is 20 of 34 from 3-point range since the team’s loss to Arizona in the Pacific-12 Conference championship game.As motivation for its Final Four trip, Oregon brought the 1939 trophy to University of Phoenix Stadium, where it sat on display in the team’s locker room on Thursday.“That was a long time,” Dorsey said of the Final Four drought. “But it’s motivation to bring that back to Eugene.”A version of this article appears in print on April 1, 2017, on Page D2 of the New York edition with the headline: Oregon’s 3-Point Past Colors the Present.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.