By BILLY WITZJUNE 15, 2016
DENVER — When the Colorado Rockies decided to swallow hard — $38 million must require quite a chaser — and designate Jose Reyes for assignment on Wednesday, it was hard to know exactly how much of a role his suspension in a domestic violence incident played in their decision.The Rockies had plenty of reasons to get rid of Reyes.First, they never really wanted him. His acquisition last July was the cost they had to bear for jettisoning the even more burdensome contract of their former franchise player, Troy Tulowitzki. And Reyes, as he professed last September, was not keen on remaining in Colorado.Then there was the emergence of Trevor Story, the rookie who took advantage of Reyes’s suspension to hit 17 home runs and drive in 45 runs entering Wednesday’s game.And finally, the economic theory of sunk costs — once money is committed, it should not affect a business’s best decision — has become more acceptable in baseball. The Los Angeles Dodgers recently ate the $35 million that remained on Carl Crawford’s contract and designated him for assignment.AdvertisementStill, Reyes, who just turned 33 and is diminished from his dynamic peak, was at least an asset — somebody the pitching-needy Rockies might have sent to a playoff contender.Advertisement“Would we be sitting here talking about this if the domestic violence thing hadn’t happened in Hawaii?” Rockies General Manager Jeff Bridich said as he sat in the dugout before Wednesday’s game against the Yankees. “So it’s obviously part of the overall decision.”The Rockies have some history with decisions involving off-the-field incidents. In 2004, they released pitcher Denny Neagle and negotiated a $16 million buyout of his contract after he was issued a summons in a prostitution case.When Reyes was arrested last Oct. 31 after his wife told police officers that he had grabbed her throat and shoved her into a sliding glass balcony door at a Maui resort, it was the first case under the new domestic violence policy the players’ union had negotiated with Major League Baseball.Get the big sports news, highlights and analysis from Times journalists, with distinctive takes on games and some behind-the-scenes surprises, delivered to your inbox every week.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.The policy gives Commissioner Rob Manfred broad powers to enforce discipline, even if the player is not arrested or convicted. Pitcher Aroldis Chapman, now with the Yankees, was given a 30-game suspension in a domestic incident, and Braves third baseman Hector Olivera was suspended for 82 games. Reyes was suspended from the start of the season through May 31.Thus far, baseball’s investigators have waited for the legal cases to unfold before handing the cases over to Manfred. This has made for a deliberate process that has taken discipline out of the hands of teams, something that Bridich said the Rockies welcomed.“The most important thing is that it gives weight to cases of domestic violence,” he said. “There is a firm national and international stance by Major League Baseball saying this is serious and we’re not going to leave it up to 30 different clubs to interpret things 30 different ways.”But there is plenty of room for interpretation in the aftermath, as teams have shown that they are balancing the costs and benefits of taking on players who have been involved in domestic violence cases.AdvertisementWhen the Boston Red Sox and the Los Angeles Dodgers became aware of Chapman’s case, it quashed their interest in acquiring him and forced the Cincinnati Reds to slash their price as they tried to trade him. The Yankees swooped in to get Chapman, an All-Star reliever, at a sharp discount. If the Yankees do not think they are contenders by the end of July, they could flip Chapman, an impending free agent, for future help.Now Reyes finds himself on the open market. Not long ago, he might have had many suitors. When he left the Mets after the 2011 season for a six-year, $106 million deal with the Miami Marlins, he was the reigning National League batting champion. But after one season, the Marlins shipped him to Toronto, where the artificial turf took a toll on a player whose game was defined by his legs. He is no longer the hitter, the base stealer or the fielder he once was.Reyes spent several weeks in extended spring training and has played nine games for Class AAA Albuquerque, hoping to show some team that he is worth taking a chance on. Reyes has hit .303 with two home runs, seven runs scored, seven walks, four strikeouts and three stolen bases.Bridich had nothing but praise for Reyes on Wednesday. He described him as being contrite and said he had behaved professionally while interacting with the Rockies’ minor leaguers during his rehabilitation assignment.“Wherever he lands,” Bridich said, “there’s no reason to wish him anything other than good luck.”A version of this article appears in print on June 16, 2016, on Page B11 of the New York edition with the headline: Abuse Case Casts Pall as Rockies Drop Reyes.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.