By NEAL E. BOUDETTEMARCH 31, 2017
PLYMOUTH, Mich. — Just two weeks ago, the American and Canadian women’s hockey teams almost seemed to be allies.As the United States women were fighting for increased financial assistance and support from their governing body, U.S.A. Hockey, some players from north of the border offered words of encouragement and solidarity.The Canadians knew what the Americans were going through. Two decades ago, they waged a similar battle.But Friday evening, the niceties were set aside as the teams clashed in their opening game of the women’s hockey world championship, and the Americans came away with a resonant 2-0 victory.AdvertisementPlaying in front of an energetic crowd chanting “U-S-A! U-S-A!,” the home team took over a scoreless game with two minutes left in the second period when defender Megan Bozek wheeled around the Canadian goal and slid the puck across the crease to Brianna Decker, who tapped it into an open net. Gigi Marvin scored in the third period on a wrist shot from the blue line.AdvertisementGoalie Nicole Hensley earned the shutout, stopping 20 shots. The Americans appeared to be the faster and more energetic team, controlling play with long stretches in the Canadian zone.Canada goalie Shannon Szabados, long a thorn in the side for the United States team, stopped 27 of 29 shots.Friday night’s clash almost did not happen. After negotiating fruitlessly with U.S.A. Hockey for 15 months, the American women threatened to boycott the tournament, which is being played 30 miles west of Detroit at U.S.A. Hockey Arena.On Tuesday, the sides reached an agreement on a new contract that gives the American players larger monthly stipends, greater performance bonuses for winning Olympic or world championship medals, and travel and insurance allotments similar to the men’s national team’s. Previously, many struggled to work full time or juggle multiple jobs while continuing to play hockey.Because of the dispute, the American players had to work out on their own and missed a planned training camp and exhibition games last weekend. They went into the game against Canada with only two on-ice practices as a team.Before the game, American forward Hilary Knight said the boycott was its own bonding experience that would help the team in the tournament. The United States won six of the last seven world championships.“If anything, I think we’re excited to get out there and unleash ourselves after what we’ve gone through,” she said. “I think we have a bond now that can never be broken.”Get the big sports news, highlights and analysis from Times journalists, with distinctive takes on games and some behind-the-scenes surprises, delivered to your inbox every week.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.Players on both teams went into the game expecting an intense battle.“We’re in the same circles whether at camps or youth programs,” Knight said. “But whenever we have our jersey on, we’re enemies. We have so much respect for each other that you literally want to throw them into the glass whenever you play them.”AdvertisementCanadian forward Laura Stacey also said the atmosphere shifts with a world title up for grabs.“When we’re away from tournaments, there’s definitely more of a friendly atmosphere, but when the tournament comes around, it’s definitely all business,” she said.The agreement reached with the American players brought relief to U.S.A. Hockey, which has been hoping the women’s tournament will lead to other major hockey events at its 3,500-seat arena, which it acquired in 2015. It primarily serves as a home for the National Team Development Program, which grooms elite 16- and 17-year-old boys.Scott Monaghan, director of operations at the arena, said the organization hoped to host future world championships for under-18 boys and girls, sled hockey for disabled players, and training camps for teams headed for international competitions.“It is a culmination of two years of work getting the building ready, but it’s also a beginning,” Monaghan said. “For those events, this building is the perfect size.”The arena had a family-friendly atmosphere as the eight-team tournament began Friday. When Switzerland faced the Czech Republic in the opening game, the stands were occupied mainly by parents of players on the ice.Adrian Altmann cheered on his daughter, Livia, the Swiss captain, by ringing a cantaloupe-size cowbell he brought from his home in Arosa in the Swiss Alps.“The facilities here are great,”’ he said while giving his bell-ringing arm a rest. Switzerland won, 2-1, in a shootout.AdvertisementBy the time Germany’s 3-1 victory over Sweden ended, the mood had turned serious for the evening’s marquee matchup. Some sections of the arena began filling with Canadian fans who had driven across the border.“We’re really excited to be so close to the border because we know we’ll have a lot of support here,” Canadian Coach Laura Schuler said. “Canada backs us up no matter who’s playing, whether it’s our men’s team or junior team or what.”Friday’s victory for the United States may mean little. All the teams in Group A, which consists of the United States, Canada, Finland and Russia, will advance to the knockout round. But the top two teams in the group will earn an automatic berth in the semifinals.In the parking lot, two dozen parents, family members and friends of American players set up a tent and huddled in the chilly air.Maura Bellamy, whose daughter Kacey is a veteran defender, said, “This is probably going to be, after everything that’s happened, the most emotional opening of any game that I’ve ever been to.”A version of this article appears in print on April 1, 2017, on Page D1 of the New York edition with the headline: U.S. Is Sturdy in a Matchup Once in Doubt.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.