By GARY SANTANIELLOMARCH 13, 2016
NEW HAVEN —  The big event here Sunday was the annual St. Patrick’s parade, and the Yale campus was unusually quiet after students had cleared out on Friday for their two-week spring break.But the roar that erupted inside the John J. Lee Amphitheater when Yale formally received its first N.C.A.A. men’s basketball tournament berth in 54 years very likely echoed through generations of alumni, fans and former players.Not since 1962, when only 25 teams made a tournament that was completed in 13 days, have the Elis been on this basketball stage.That the campus was nearly empty might have been a blessing for the team, which has spent the last month dealing with the fallout from the departure from the university of its captain, Jack Montague, in connection with a sexual misconduct accusation.AdvertisementShortly after 6 p.m., when 12th-seeded Yale was paired with fifth-seeded Baylor in a first-round West Region game on Thursday, the 200 or so in attendance leapt to their feet and roared with the Yale players and coaches at their good fortune of playing just up Interstate 95 in Providence, R.I. Soon after, the impact of what the 22-6 Ivy League champion Bulldogs had accomplished was shared among the Yale basketball family on hand.Advertisement“For us alums, it’s almost like we all feel we won the Ivy League title,” said Butch Graves, captain of the 1984 team and Yale’s career leading scorer with 2,090 points. “This takes a weight off all our shoulders.”Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.Graves was referring to Yale’s close calls in recent years. It lost in a playoff for the Ivy title in 2002, and last year was upset on a last-second shot at Dartmouth when a victory could have clinched an N.C.A.A. berth. Yale then lost the playoff game to Harvard, 53-51, at the Palestra in Philadelphia.“That’s what makes this year that much sweeter, to finish off what we came so close to accomplishing last year,” said the former player Sean Fitzgerald, who graduated in 1994 and was joined yesterday by his onetime teammate Tom Trimmer and a passel of their children.James Jones, in his 17th year as Yale’s coach, was born two years after the team lost in overtime to Wake Forest in its last N.C.A.A. tournament game.“It’s great that so many are energized by what we’ve done, so I’m happy for the many friends of this program,” he said. “They all feel like they’re a part of it, and they are.”We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.