By ROBERT WEINTRAUBMARCH 13, 2016
Ordinarily, 5-foot-9 guards would struggle to start for Trump University, much less the vaunted Kentucky Wildcats. But Tyler Ulis, the smallest man to be named the Southeastern Conference player of the year, is special.As a freshman last season, Ulis led Kentucky in assists per game and rode along on its Final Four trip. But Ulis, formerly a pass-first player, has expanded his offensive skill set. This season he is averaging almost 17 points a game to go with his conference-leading 7.2 assists, but it is his ability to control games on both ends of the floor that may give Kentucky, the fourth seed in the East Region, a real chance to reach its third straight Final Four.“He’s making shots that nobody could have anticipated at this level,” said Texas A&M Coach Billy Kennedy, whose Aggies fell to Ulis (who scored a career-high 30 points) and Kentucky in Sunday’s SEC tournament final.Ulis played at a high school in the Chicago area, which also produced Isiah Thomas, who, while taller than Ulis, at 6 feet 1 inch, played with a similar intensity and combativeness that offset his small stature.Advertisement“You look at how small he is and wonder how he does it,” Kennedy said of Ulis. “But it’s through sheer competitiveness.”AdvertisementThat shows up especially on defense, with Ulis averaging 1.4 steals a game. (He was also voted the SEC defensive player of the year this season.) Ulis excels at darting into passing lanes and has shown the stamina and positional sense to hound opponents, who almost always tower over him, into turnovers.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.Kentucky Coach John Calipari announced last week that Ulis would turn pro after the season. He is projected to be a late first-round or early second-round pick. The decision was surprising given his size, but not his university — many Kentucky players do not stay longer than a single season.Although Ulis will soon be on his way, Wildcats fans are hoping to watch him play six more games.Did you see Roy Williams dancing Saturday night? He is feeling good about his veteran Tar Heels, who lived up to their billing this season — so far. Top-seeded North Carolina does not rely on the 3-pointer, which could be helpful, and it is playing in Raleigh, which will surely help. But a potential matchup with Andy Enfield’s Southern California team looms in the second round, and maybe the Indiana-Kentucky winner after that.How much fun would a potential matchup between Indiana and Kentucky be? The teams’ storied regular-season rivalry went into storage in a dispute over neutral sites versus home sites, but the selection committee may have made it happen anyway. Get the popcorn ready.While No. 3 West Virginia is strong defensively, No. 14 Stephen F. Austin forces more turnovers per game than any other Division I team (18.6), and the Lumberjacks may also be a little bit better offensively (115.5 points per 100 possessions).ZACH SCHONBRUNA version of this article appears in print on March 14, 2016, on Page D7 of the New York edition with the headline: 5-9 Star Takes Charge.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.