By THE ASSOCIATED PRESSMARCH 13, 2016
INDIAN WELLS, Calif. —  Novak Djokovic opened his bid for a third consecutive BNP Paribas Open title Sunday night by surviving an unexpected challenge from the American qualifier Bjorn Fratangelo, 2-6, 6-1, 6-2.“All credit to Bjorn on playing a great match, but I wasn’t feeling comfortable at all on the court,” the top-ranked Djokovic said after extending his winning streak at the Indian Wells Tennis Garden to 12 matches. “I was just trying to find a way, trying to hang in there and make it through.”Fratangelo, 22, was the French Open boys’ champion in 2011, and he turned professional in 2012, but he has been playing almost exclusively on the satellite tours. He is ranked No. 149, and his first-round win Friday was his first in four matches on the ATP World Tour.He took a 4-0 lead in the opening set and kept the match interesting until Djokovic got back-to-back service breaks en route to winning the final five games.Advertisement“He deserved every point he got,” Djokovic said. “He played a great match, especially in the first set.”AdvertisementDjokovic, who has a 17-1 record this season, took the court after top-ranked Serena Williams moved into the women’s fourth round with a ragged 7-6 (2), 6-0 victory over Yulia Putintseva of Kazakhstan.In the opening set, Williams showed the effects of a six-week layoff since losing the Australian Open final. Williams, a two-time champion here, made 29 unforced errors against Putintseva, who played aggressively and challenged every close line call.“I was just trying to find my rhythm out there, trying my best to not get off to a slow start,” Williams said. “Then I got broken really early, and I couldn’t manage to break back. I was just trying to fight out there and do what I could.”Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.She said she found Putintseva’s style “good to play.”“I just wasn’t finding my rhythm,” Williams added. “I hadn’t played someone like her, so I was just trying to get my bearings there. I made a lot of errors in that first set. I went for a lot and I usually make those, but I kept missing. Even in the first game. Even though I won, I made some simple errors that just kept going for the first set.”Williams had to break Putintseva’s serve to force the tiebreaker, then finally began to impose herself on the 56th-ranked Putintseva, winning the final five points.“My intensity was higher and I started making my shots,” Williams said. “I was going for it. I just kept missing it either in the net or missing it out. Really, really close. I started making them, and then I started getting more confidence to continue to go for it, and that kind of helped me out.”The second set was over in 24 minutes, with Williams making just four errors and winning 24 of the 30 points. She will face Kateryna Bondarenko of Ukraine in the fourth round.Williams was joined in the fourth round by No. 3-seeded Agnieszka Radwanska of Poland, a 6-2, 6-1 winner over Monica Niculescu of Romania; eighth-seeded Petra Kvitova of the Czech Republic, who won the final four games of the match to beat Johanna Larsson of Sweden, 6-3, 4-6, 7-5; and 19th-seeded Jelena Jankovic of Serbia, who routed Coco Vandeweghe of the United States, 6-0, 6-1.On the men’s side, fifth-seeded Kei Nishikori of Japan got his tournament underway with a 6-3, 6-3 win over Mikhail Kukushkin of Kazakhstan; seventh-seeded Jo-Wilfried Tsonga of France beat his countryman Vincent Millot, 7-5, 6-1; and 31st-seeded Sam Querrey of the United States overcame Thiemo de Bakker of the Netherlands, 7-6 (5), 6-4.A version of this article appears in print on March 14, 2016, on Page D2 of the New York edition with the headline: Djokovic and Williams Rebuff Challenges .  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.