By JONAH BROMWICHMARCH 13, 2016
Every week, The New York Times chooses one essential game to watch, highlighting hot teams, winning and losing streaks and statistical intrigue in the N.B.A.Boston at Toronto, Friday, 7:30 p.m. Eastern, NBATVThe Toronto Raptors have the second-best record among Eastern Conference teams since the All-Star break, after the Charlotte Hornets, and for months they have sat just behind the first-place Cleveland Cavaliers in the conference standings.The Raptors, who host the Boston Celtics on Friday (7:30 p.m. Eastern, NBATV) in a key East matchup, field two All-Star guards in DeMar DeRozan and Kyle Lowry, whose skills complement each other’s perfectly in an inside-outside backcourt that has made Toronto’s offense the most efficient in the N.B.A. since the break.Why, then, is it difficult to imagine the Raptors getting very far in the playoffs?Partly, it is their history: Toronto’s only trip to the second round of the playoffs came in 2001. Last season, the Raptors recorded the highest regular-season win total in team history (49) yet were swept from the postseason by the Washington Wizards.AdvertisementPartly, it is the team’s imbalance. The Raptors’ best big man is center Jonas Valanciunas, an adequate player — averaging close to a double-double — but by no means a dominant one. Toronto’s big off-season acquisition, forward DeMarre Carroll, who gave the Atlanta Hawks a lift last postseason before a knee injury limited his effectiveness, has been out since early January with another knee injury and has played only 23 games.AdvertisementPartly, it is Toronto’s defense. The Raptors let teams stick with them late into games, and their defensive efficiency, ninth best in the league before the break, was 23rd since the break entering Sunday.And partly, it is that the Raptors’ backcourt, as good as it is, does not follow the current trend of shooting as many 3-pointers as possible. The 6-foot-7 DeRozan averages fewer than two 3-point attempts per game, and his unwillingness to shoot from long range has left some observers skeptical of whether he will be able to deliver consistently when it counts.Get the big sports news, highlights and analysis from Times journalists, with distinctive takes on games and some behind-the-scenes surprises, delivered to your inbox every week.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.Because of the Raptors’ flaws — and perhaps because the consistency of their success this season has made their impressive performance old news — Toronto is an unpopular choice to take down the Cavaliers in the postseason. N.B.A. watchers sensing unrest in Cleveland’s locker room, especially after recent social media posts by LeBron James, have speculated that other Eastern teams, like the Miami Heat and the Celtics, might have a better chance.The Raptors dented that argument Saturday with a 112-104 overtime victory over the Heat, who had been on a roll since signing Joe Johnson late last month. DeRozan had 7 assists and 10 rebounds and scored 38 points to match his season high, looking unstoppable from midrange.But Miami’s Dwyane Wade sat out that game with a bruised thigh, placing a big asterisk on the Raptors’ victory and leaving Toronto still seeking a way to prove that it is the top candidate to dethrone James’s Cavaliers. Toronto will quickly get another chance Friday against the Celtics.Boston’s offense has been nearly as good as Toronto’s, with the All-Star guard Isaiah Thomas anchoring an attack that has averaged 106.1 points per game, the fourth-best mark in the league entering Sunday. That figure is even higher than the Raptors’ because of the blistering pace at which the Celtics play: After Sacramento and Golden State, Boston had the league’s highest average in possessions per 48 minutes entering Sunday.The Celtics’ strong record at home has led some to speculate that if they can hold on to a high seed — they are third in the East at 39-27 — they will have a relatively easy time in the playoffs. The Celtics had been on a 14-game home winning streak before losing to the Houston Rockets on Friday and have beaten several good teams in the last few weeks, including the Los Angeles Clippers, the Heat and the Portland Trail Blazers.AdvertisementBut with a month and a half left in the regular season and the East still tightly contested, the Celtics cannot simply cruise to home-court advantage for the postseason.This week exemplifies the challenge they will have to weather to retain their position in the top half of the conference. Before playing the Raptors, they must face the seventh-place Pacers in Indiana and the Oklahoma City Thunder, a Western Conference contender, at home.Boston also has yet to beat Toronto this season, having lost at home by 113-103 on Oct. 30 and on the road by 115-109 on Jan. 20. All the buzz surrounding the Celtics could disappear quickly if they fail to beat the Raptors this week or next, with the teams set to play in Boston that Wednesday.A version of this article appears in print on March 14, 2016, on Page D10 of the New York edition with the headline: N.B.A. Game of the Week: Celtics at Raptors.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.