By BILL PENNINGTONJUNE 16, 2016
OAKMONT, Pa. — The first rain delay Thursday morning at the 116th United States Open was greeted like recess in grammar school, except in reverse. Golfers dashed from their playground to the nearest dwelling. Some impishly pilfered chocolate chip cookies from the media center as a gaggle of their European colleagues watched soccer broadcasts from their home continent. There were smiles and laughs, and selfies posted on social media.Play resumed after about 75 minutes only to be suspended 45 minutes later. When that delay dragged on for hours, the playful mood began to fizzle.Not only was Andrew Landry, a 28-year-old Texan ranked 624th in the world, leading the tournament; he was threatening to post the lowest score in any round at a major championship. Bryson DeChambeau, an amateur two months ago, was only two strokes behind Landry.But after the second delay ended, DeChambeau catapulted off the leaderboard with consecutive double bogeys, and Landry misfired on back-to-back birdie putts. The two players were emblematic of what was going on all over the golf course. The field looked wet and wilted.AdvertisementWhen thunderstorms caused a third, and final, interruption, it was almost welcomed, like a boxing referee stopping a lopsided fight. By late afternoon, when play at the Oakmont Country Club was suspended until Friday, there seemed to be a sigh of relief.AdvertisementWith only seven players under par and more than 30 at five over par or higher, a host of players looked as if they needed to cool off. Among them were the defending champion, Jordan Spieth, who was loudly muttering on the course, and the world No. 3 Rory McIlroy, who seemed exasperated as he bogeyed his final two holes to stumble to four over.Landry, however, was one player who probably wished he had had another five minutes on the course. He led the tournament at three under, but the air horn signaling the end of play blared as he was approaching a 10-foot birdie putt on his final hole.Get the big sports news, highlights and analysis from Times journalists, with distinctive takes on games and some behind-the-scenes surprises, delivered to your inbox every week.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.“I was trying to get that last hole in,” said Landry, who will have to return at 7:30 a.m. Friday. After he putts out, he will probably not begin his second round for many hours.But Landry knew what was coming.“I heard it thunder as we were coming up the last fairway,” he said.Rain was in the forecast, but Landry, a rookie on the PGA Tour, unquestionably sneaked up on the field. He has made the cut in only three of nine starts, with his best finish a tie for 41st. Landry, who was an all-American at Arkansas, is 5 feet 7 inches and 150 pounds but had an average driving distance of 303 yards on Thursday, which was nearly 20 yards farther than the field average.Landry hit nine of 13 fairways and 12 of 17 greens in regulation.“Because of the rain, the golf course was playing way easier today than it was earlier this week,” Landry said, a sentiment not shared by most of his competitors. “On the first hole, for instance, we could actually land the ball on the green and it stayed there,” he said. “Two days ago, we had to land it 30 or 40 yards short of the green and run it up there.”Not many other golfers felt that Oakmont was being generous. Bubba Watson, a two-time Masters champion, and Danny Lee, who has four top-20 finishes this year on the PGA Tour, were one stroke behind Landry. Watson had completed 14 holes and Lee 13. Tied for fourth at one under were Kevin Streelman, Harris English, Lee Westwood and Scottie Scheffler, a 19-year-old amateur playing in his first United States Open who was the only golfer in the top five to finish his round.AdvertisementScheffler will be a junior at Texas next fall and is a former United States Junior Amateur champion. His caddie is his sister, Callie, who began an internship a week ago but asked off from work to carry her brother’s bag.“Hopefully she doesn’t get in trouble,” Scheffler said.Spieth, another Texan, had an adventurous day with two bogeys and a birdie in the 11 holes he played. Spieth was clearly displeased by the results of some of his shots, which may have been because Oakmont played so differently Thursday than during the practice rounds.“Completely different golf course than we played in the practice round,” Spieth said afterward. “I mean, night and day.”Rain might have made the greens softer and the fairways more receptive, but it also made the rough heavier and more penalizing. And Spieth also just seemed to be getting into awkward spots, which is common at Oakmont. At one point, on the 15th green, Spieth had a putt of more than 118 feet, which is nearly 40 yards. He two-putted, which was a major accomplishment.But late in the afternoon, when he was finally out of the rain and wind, Spieth took solace in the idea that he had only seven holes to play tomorrow morning to finish his first round. So many of his competitors had yet to hit a shot in the first round.“Those other guys have to play 36 holes in a row at a U.S. Open,” Spieth said, “which isn’t easy.”Staying on schedule United States Golf Association officials said Thursday night that they expected to finish the tournament Sunday night. With the weather expected to improve, the plan is to complete the first round Friday and then start the second round around 2 p.m. The second round is expected to be completed Saturday morning.The goal is to start the third round by 1:45 p.m. Saturday and finish before darkness.A version of this article appears in print on June 17, 2016, on Page B8 of the New York edition with the headline: To the Relief of Some, Rain Stops Play at U.S. Open.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.