By MARC TRACYMARCH 13, 2016
In Duke’s first game of the season, with the defending champion Blue Devils hosting Siena in a tuneup game, the freshman Brandon Ingram shot a dismal 1 for 9 from behind the 3-point line. A few games later, in Duke’s 74-63 loss to Kentucky in Chicago, he shot 1 for 6 from the field.The early performances were disappointing to Duke fans, who had considered Ingram their top off-season prize. A native of Kinston, N.C., he grew into one of the nation’s top recruits and picked Duke over the other blue-clad national basketball powers: North Carolina, Kansas and Kentucky. But the early verdict was immediate: Ingram was less boom than bust.Ingram reads immediately as a physical specimen: At the 2015 Nike Hoop Summit, he was measured as 6 feet 8 inches yet with an astonishing 7-3 wingspan (a typical wingspan is about equal to height). On YouTube, there is video of him leaping and touching the top of a backboard. But inexperience aside, his play throughout the first month and a half of the season mostly did not live up to the hype.Then something clicked. Among other things, Duke increasingly relied on small lineups, with Marshall Plumlee as its sole big man, allowing for the kind of floor spacing ideal for a long wing player with a 3-point shot. Ingram scored 25 points in a January loss at Notre Dame. He led all players with 25 more in Duke’s home win over Virginia last month.AdvertisementOver the course of the season, playing an average of 34.2 minutes a game because of Duke’s paper-thin roster, Ingram managed to stay efficient.AdvertisementWhile the sophomore Grayson Allen is the face of the Blue Devils, Ingram’s raw talent and perimeter size probably go the, well, longest toward defining Duke’s offensive identity. And it is the Blue Devils’ dangerous offense, ranked sixth best in the country by KenPom.com, that makes them a threat this year.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.Oregon as a top seed caught some by surprise, but the Ducks are scorching. Winners of the Pacific-12 regular-season and tournament titles — with a 31-point win over Utah in the final — the Ducks are peaking at the right time. The biggest hurdles? They may have to get through Buddy Hield and Oklahoma to reach the Final Four.The do-it-all star for seventh-seeded Oregon State has a familiar name. Gary Payton II, son of the former Seattle SuperSonics star, averaged 15.9 points, 7.6 rebounds, 5.3 assists and 2.4 steals this season, leading the Beavers in all four categories — the first Oregon State player to do so in more than 30 years.No. 12 Yale has size, plays defense (16th nationally in scoring defense) and gets after it on the boards. The Bulldogs are also hungry, entering the tournament for the first time since 1962, when only 25 teams made a tournament that was completed in 13 days. No. 5 Baylor, meanwhile, has lost three of four.ZACH SCHONBRUNA version of this article appears in print on March 14, 2016, on Page D6 of the New York edition with the headline: Finding the Right Fit.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.