By CHRIS ADAMSKIMAY 27, 2016
PITTSBURGH — Sidney Crosby is going back to the Stanley Cup finals for the first time in seven years, thanks to a couple of rookies.Bryan Rust scored twice, and goaltender Matt Murray stopped 16 of 17 shots to lead the Pittsburgh Penguins over the Tampa Bay Lightning, 2-1, in Game 7 of the Eastern Conference finals on Thursday. Pittsburgh will host San Jose in Game 1 on Monday.The victory was Pittsburgh’s first in a Game 7 at the six-year-old Consol Energy Center. But these Penguins are different, in large part because they are youthful and fast — each partly a result of a midseason makeover by General Manager Jim Rutherford after a sluggish first two months of the season. Rust — called up from the minors for good after the New Year — scored his fourth and fifth goals of the postseason during a second period in which the Penguins dominated, outshooting the Lightning by 21-5.“I can’t even explain to you how excited I am for the group we have and how proud I am of them for how hard they play for each other,” Penguins Coach Mike Sullivan said. “I’ve been in the game a long time, and you don’t always get associated with a group that has the chemistry this group has. I do believe we have something special in that we have evolved into a team in the true sense of the word. And I thought tonight that was on display.”AdvertisementHe added: “I told them that we’re not finished yet. We have to re-energize and get ready for this next round here, which is the most important round of all.”AdvertisementThe five playoff goals from Rust, who turned 24 two weeks ago, are the most by a Penguins rookie in 46 years. His first on Thursday came 1 minute 55 seconds into the second period. It was an illustration of the quick, precise up-ice puck movement and speed that have become the signature of Sullivan, who took over in December.Rust said that “if there’s a way you want to write it up when you’re a kid, this is how it goes.”“We’ve got a lot of belief in here,” he added. “We’re having a lot of fun in here. There’s a lot of really good leadership and a lot of good character. One more hill to climb.”Taking advantage of a Lightning shift change while standing deep in his own zone, Olli Maatta swiftly got the puck to Evgeni Malkin entering the Tampa Bay zone. Malkin dropped it off for Chris Kunitz, who fed the speedy Rust skating down the slot. Rust’s wrist shot beat Andrei Vasilevskiy high to his glove side.Playing in this series only because Ben Bishop had sustained a lower-body injury early during Game 1, Vasilevskiy was solid again, making several quality saves and keeping Tampa Bay in the game even as the Lightning were outshot by 39-17. But Vasilevskiy, 21, allowed perhaps his first shaky goal of the series at a most inopportune time — 30 seconds after Drouin had tied the game midway through the second.Get the big sports news, highlights and analysis from Times journalists, with distinctive takes on games and some behind-the-scenes surprises, delivered to your inbox every week.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.Vasilevskiy failed in an attempt to freeze the puck to the side of the net and failed to cover his post when Rust slapped at the loose puck, which found its way through and gave the Penguins a 2-1 lead entering the third period. Until losing, 4-3, in overtime in Game 5 here on Sunday, the Penguins had been 46-0-0 when leading after two periods.But Pittsburgh bounced back with a 5-2 win in Game 6 in Tampa to force the winner-take-all contest. Such games had not been kind to the Penguins at home. They were 2-7, having lost the last five and not having won one since 1995.AdvertisementPlayoff disappointment had threatened to become part of the legacy of Crosby, possibly the sport’s most recognizable active player — but one who had not been on the league’s biggest stage since the Penguins made the Stanley Cup finals in consecutive years capping Crosby’s third and fourth N.H.L. seasons.Crosby said his feelings about returning to the Cup finals were “just nerves, excited.”He added, “It’s not easy, and having gone through a couple of those early on, 20 and 21 years old playing in the finals, I think you have more of an appreciation for it now and just love the opportunity of getting back.”The Lightning were trying to match those 2008 and ’09 Penguins’ feat of following a Stanley Cup finals defeat by claiming the Cup the next year. They received an unexpected boost Thursday from a player who, like Crosby, is a former N.H.L. goal-scoring champion and was a No. 1 overall draft pick.Steven Stamkos played for the first time since March 31 because of a blood clot discovered in his collarbone that required surgery April 4.Even after the morning skate, Stamkos and Tampa Bay Coach Jon Cooper said there had been no change in the captain’s status. But when the pregame warm-ups began, Stamkos joined his teammates.Speaking of his return, Stamkos said: “First couple shifts, once you get those under your belt, it comes back. When you don’t play for that period of time and you come back for a Game 7, it’s not easy. But it felt like the legs were good.”Stamkos’s ice time was clearly limited — 11:24 — as was his effect on the game. He did have a quality scoring chance with 3:49 left in the second when he sprung down the right wing alone. But Murray stopped his shot from the face-off circle.Another among Murray’s best stops came when he stuck his right pad out with 7:14 to play when Brian Boyle had a step on defenseman Kris Letang moments after Tampa Bay killed off a Penguins power play.Murray summed things up after the game, saying: “I keep saying this is my first time going through something like this, so a lot of new experiences. But I’ve said all along I’m just trying to stay within myself and stay in the moment and appreciate the moment and try to have fun. And that third period was some of the most fun I’ve had playing hockey.”A version of this article appears in print on May 27, 2016, on Page B11 of the New York edition with the headline: Pittsburgh Vanquishes Game 7 Ghosts.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.