AdvertisementSupported byOn BaseballBy Tyler KepnerWASHINGTON — Steven Matz finished the sixth inning here Wednesday by striking out the major leagues’ leading hitter, Daniel Murphy. Then something really crazy happened: Matz kept on pitching.He zipped through the seventh, survived Bryce Harper in the eighth, and turned his 2-0 shutout over to Jeurys Familia, who closed out the Washington Nationals in the ninth to give the Mets a series victory. Matz improved his career record to 11-1 in 14 starts.“Somehow, being in New York this year, he’s gone a little bit under the radar with some of the other guys we have,” David Wright said. “But that was about as dominant a performance as I’ve seen this year.”It is hard for a pitcher like Matz, or even Noah Syndergaard, to get much attention in the shadow of Matt Harvey. Both were slotted after Harvey in the World Series last fall, and again in the rotation to open this season. The Mets long ago anointed Harvey as their headliner, for better or worse.In Washington this week, their only blemish was the latest Harvey Day clunker, on Tuesday night. His starts are no longer cause for giddy anticipation. Harvey has not pitched beyond the sixth inning all season. He begins well enough, then falls apart, then leaves.When Harvey does not pitch, the Mets are 24-12. When he does, they are 3-7. Yet the Mets cannot get enough.Despite all the evidence — the fading fastball in the middle innings, the .509 opponents’ batting average in Harvey’s third time through the order, the persistent failure to minimize damage — the Mets will not skip his turn in the rotation. They will not send him to the minors or the bullpen. They will not even slide in Logan Verrett somewhere to give Harvey extra rest.The Mets’ plan is for Harvey to work in the bullpen on Friday but throw fewer pitches than he did in his session last week. Perhaps that will keep him fresher for his next start, on Monday. They insist he is healthy.The Mets, plainly, are desperate to bring back the caricature of Harvey as their swaggering savior. They are baffled, not only by his 6.08 E.R.A., but also by the lost soul they see on the mound.“I said, ‘Listen, what we’ve got to get away from is “Woe is me” — we’ve got to get back to who you are,’” Manager Terry Collins said.“One of the things I still think about any time I talk to Matt Harvey is the guy who walked into my office the first spring training and said, ‘I’m not here to show you what kind of stuff I have, I’m here to make your team.’ And the next spring training he said, ‘I’m not here just to be one of the starters, I’m here to be the best in baseball.’ And at the end of that year, although he got hurt, he was the best in baseball. That’s the guy we’re trying to get back.”Fair enough. Anyone can dream, or cite a hopeful precedent. There is the Cole Hamels example: young pitcher stars in the World Series, struggles for a year, resumes ace status. There is the Stephen Strasburg example: Tommy John patient takes time to harness consistent excellence, then dominates again.All the ingredients that have made Harvey great remain. In time — maybe next season, maybe even next week — they should coalesce again, and he will reclaim his place among the game’s elite. But he is not there now, and the Mets seem to think that following the same every-five-days pattern will produce different results.“I think we saw some positive signs last night, actually,” John Ricco, the assistant general manager, said Wednesday morning. “We’re watching him, and we look at a lot of the numbers, and we saw some encouraging signs. The easiest to see is a little bit of the velocity is starting to come back — he touched 97 — but even some of the more detailed stats showed some improvement. Those are the things Dan’s working on.”Dan Warthen, the pitching coach, has not spoken about Harvey’s struggles. The Mets have refused to make Warthen available to reporters. Shielding the organization’s foremost pitching expert from questions about a pitcher is absurd, but it underlines the sensitivity the Mets seem to feel. An insecure, ineffective Harvey rocks their world.Harvey basks in the spotlight when times are good and coverage is fawning. He rarely speaks otherwise, and sometimes, to be fair, he is burned when he does. His honesty in March about a blood clot in his bladder led to crass, if predictable, headlines. Harvey — who once posed naked, with only a room service tray, for ESPN The Magazine — cannot seem to laugh at himself anymore.“Saying nothing’s better than saying the wrong thing,” Collins said he had told Harvey, regarding the news media, and Collins has a point. But with a night to reconsider, Harvey again declined an interview request on Wednesday.His insights would help fans understand what he thinks is happening. But really, the important answers will come on the mound, where Harvey once strutted with macho fury.His opponents at Citi Field on Monday will be the Chicago White Sox. The team and the setting should evoke a warm memory.On May 7, 2013, Harvey pitched the best game of his career: nine shutout innings, 12 strikeouts, no walks, one infield single at home against the White Sox. So much has followed, but the one constant is that Harvey commands attention every time he takes the mound.For Mets fans, you might say, it was once almost like a national holiday — and on Monday, it actually is. Happy Memorial Day, Matt Harvey. Everybody wants a reason to celebrate.Advertisement