AdvertisementSupported byBy John BranchRIO DE JANEIRO — It is about a block and a half from where Pedro Solberg lives to where he practices on the sand of Ipanema, at the end of Rua Garcia d’Avila. Most days, when he is not traveling on the professional beach volleyball tour, Solberg does not venture more than about two blocks from home. All he needs is here: food, fun and practice.He is the definition of a Carioca, born and raised in Rio de Janeiro, and a local favorite in the Olympic event that feels most at home here. Beach volleyball for the Summer Games will take place at Copacabana, the next beach over from Ipanema. Perhaps no athlete will have such a short commute from home to venue, childhood to Olympics.“If I have a chance to play 10 Olympics and one of them is in Rio, and I could choose which one I could win?” Solberg asked in his apartment after a morning practice. “I would choose Rio, of course.”But Solberg, 30, one of the world’s best players for nearly a decade, has found the way to his first Olympics to be far more circuitous than his daily stroll in flip-flops. In 2008, the year he became the youngest winner on the world tour, Solberg missed the Beijing Games because his team was ranked third in talent-rich Brazil. Only two could qualify.In 2011, Solberg was suspended for doping, a finding that was later overturned. But by the time Solberg was cleared, his teammate had a new partner. They reached the quarterfinals at the 2012 London Games while Solberg stayed home. The World Anti-Doping Agency determined that a Brazilian laboratory had mishandled Solberg’s urine samples, a big reason the lab was suspended in 2013. (The lab, reinstated by WADA in 2015, was suspended again recently.)Finally, after eight years in which he has chased the Olympics around the world, the Olympics have come to him. The back story for what could be one of these Games’ most remarkable tales — after twice missing the Olympics, local man wins the premier event at his hometown Games, with a new teammate from Rio, too — is set, waiting for August.“We need a gold medal to be a complete story,” Solberg said with a laugh. “You’ve just seen the hard part. The beautiful part did not come yet.”At practice on a cool morning about to turn hot, Solberg worked with Evandro, 25, a 6-foot-10-inch space-consuming tower who is the latest in Solberg’s parade of partners, one that began the first time he fell short of the Olympics.Solberg rose to prominence in 2007 and 2008 with Harley, but Solberg split with him after they lost an Olympic qualifying match. Harley is more than a decade older than Solberg, who wanted someone he could play with for many years.It did not happen. His partner Pedro Cunha joined Ricardo Santos after Solberg’s positive steroid test and never came back. A few partners later, Solberg joined Bruno Schmidt, with great success, but they split at the end of 2014. (Schmidt joined Alison Cerutti, forming the top team in Brazil, if not the world.) Solberg played with Emanuel Rego, a three-time Olympic medalist who had turned 40, for a time in 2014. That, too, did not last.“There is nobody in the world who has more partners than I,” Solberg said. “There is no doubt. I played with so many guys. Many times, it was not the best decision I made. I regret some options I made. But it’s from the mistakes that you learn.”When he picked the little-known Evandro in late 2014, the insular beach volleyball world was surprised. The men make an interesting pairing on the court; they are considered similar players, not classically complementary ones.“Pedro is the best blocker in the world,” said Ed Costa, Evandro’s coach. “And Evandro has the best serve in the world. They wanted to play together. So they are testing, trying something different.”Solberg, who is 6-4, thought that Evandro’s extra height and power, along with one of the world’s best serves, would add more than his lack of experience or defense would subtract.“Of course, nobody knew that,” Solberg said. “But I had that feeling already.”Their results on the world tour have been scattered, filled mostly with top-eight finishes. But they have won several times, finished third at the 2015 world championships and were second at an event on Copacabana in March.They make an interesting combination off the court, as well. Evandro is from the lower-class Rio neighborhood of Madureira. Solberg grew up wealthy in the neighborhood of Gávea, not far from the beaches. But since their partnership began, Evandro has moved into Solberg’s apartment building in Ipanema.“We grew up in different situations, but I love how he is,” Solberg said. “I like the music he likes. Not all of it, it’s true, but he also likes the music I like. It’s different. He has a lot of things to show me, and I have a lot of things to show him. It’s good for me and good for him.”As the men practiced, a fit 55-year-old deftly passed a volleyball with her grandchildren closer to the water. It was Isabel Salgado, a two-time Olympian for Brazil’s indoor team whose career moved to the beach. She is the mother of Solberg and his sisters Carol and Maria Clara, who have been highly ranked players on the world tour for more than a decade. (They did not qualify for the Olympics.)“He has played since 4 or 5 years old,” Salgado said, taking refuge from the sun under an umbrella. “In the house, I painted the wall, and Pedro, he hit the ball — boom, boom, boom — and it hit the wall. I had a tree, and he hung a net on it. He worked. He didn’t sit and wait for his dream. He worked to get it. It’s a natural course. It’s his dream. I’m very happy to see him like this. But it is only part of life.”Salgado sees these Olympics as a dream unfairly delayed. A urine sample that Solberg gave on May 30, 2011, came back positive for androstane. Solberg denied any steroid use but was suspended by volleyball’s governing body.But Solberg’s sample had not reached the Rio-based testing lab until June 2, four days after he supplied it. The lab, Ladetec, lost its accreditation from WADA, and Solberg was cleared. (He and his family won a lawsuit against the lab in 2015.) But his chance to qualify for the London Games was long gone.“In 2008, he lost in the qualifiers,” Salgado said. “We were really sad. One game, and he was kept out of the Olympics. But he lost on the court. It’s fair. We were sad, but it was completely fair. This side of sports is very nice, very democratic. But in 2012, it was taken from him.”But there is hope for a happy ending, right near home. Solberg has a chance to win gold while becoming the Carioca face of these Games — a well-known local excelling at the quintessential Brazilian sport. No athlete could represent Rio like Solberg.“He loves this city,” his mother said. “He’s very close to this city. I was with Pedro walking down the street, and I saw this fat, wasted man coming toward us. I said, ‘Pedro, let’s change sides of the street.’ And he said, ‘Mom, come on. We know everybody in this neighborhood.’ And this guy gets close to us and he says, ‘Pedro!’ and gives Pedro a big hug. I started to laugh. I was afraid of someone who loves Pedro. He’s very open-minded. I just hope he enjoys this moment.”A few feet away, Solberg and Evandro finished practice and walked up Rua Garcia d’Avila to the apartment building, just over a block away. With his windows open to the sea breeze, Solberg relaxed with some cold water, sounding like someone smitten with his place in this world, this city and this neighborhood.“I love the people,” Solberg said. “I love the beach. I love the sun. I love the rain. I love the forest. I love the waterfalls. I love the food. I love the way we talk. I love the mix of people that you don’t have anywhere else.”He slipped on a shirt, slid his tan feet into a pair of flip-flops and headed down the street, looking for something to eat. There was no place he would rather be.Helena Rebello contributed reporting.Advertisement