JULY 2, 2016
To the Sports Editor:Re “Pat Summitt, Tennessee Basketball Coach Who Emboldened Women’s Sports, Dies at 64,” June 28: Pat Summitt was one of the most inspirational women I have followed in my 67-plus years.I attended Tennessee for one year (1967-68). At the time, women’s basketball was evolving from a sport in which there were six players on each team to what it is today — an exciting, wonderful game to watch. Pat was such an integral part of that growth.When she learned she had Alzheimer’s disease, I wrote her what can only be described as a fan letter, thanking her for years of dedication to women in general and Tennessee in particular. She sent me a handwritten note, saying that she was “fighting her toughest opponent ever.” Indeed. Such class. Such devotion.There will never be another Pat Summitt — gracious in victory and defeat — and I will always cherish that note.AdvertisementWanda Fischer, Schenectady, N.Y.To the Sports Editor:Pat Head Summitt carried women’s basketball on her shoulders for nearly four decades.AdvertisementI had the privilege of playing with her on several national teams, culminating at the 1976 Olympics in Montreal, the first Games for women’s basketball. After we won the silver medal, Pat carried the torch through the years, busting through every obstacle, every barrier imaginable.In the 1970s, ’80s and on, she ushered women’s basketball to the golden era it is in today and she did it right. Her players had an astounding graduation rate, going on to success as professional players, lawyers, doctors and entrepreneurs, and in life. Rest in peace, Pat.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.Mary Anne O’Connor, Point Richmond, Calif.To the Sports Editor:With all due respect to the memory, accomplishments and suffering of Pat Summitt, I don’t think that one of Ms. Summitt’s noteworthy achievements is the cited multimillion-dollar salary paid to many of today’s college coaches.Considering the staggering levels of college debt these days, I believe that, for starters, the absurdly high salaries of college coaches, as well as college presidents, are prime culprits driving today’s high levels of college tuition.Robert Sternberg, Manchester, N.H.To the Sports Editor:The article on how Pat Summitt emboldened the world of women’s sports was nicely written, but I do have to be critical of the mentioning of her son’s struggles (“an inappropriate relationship” reportedly with a player), especially when it’s written in the survivors section of the article.This is tasteless. Why was that brought into the article at all, especially when it’s supposed to be about Pat herself?Amy Asbury, Oak Ridge, Tenn.A version of this article appears in print on July 3, 2016, on Page SP10 of the New York edition with the headline: Summitt Inspired More Than Athletes.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.