
On Golf By                     
 BILL PENNINGTON
 
JULY 15, 2016
TROON, Scotland — On Monday, several days before the start of the 2016 British Open at Royal Troon, Keegan Bradley and a couple of his golf buddies surreptitiously scaled the giant yellow scoreboard perched atop the sprawling grandstand at the 18th green. Bradley and his companions, whom he did not name, did a bit of dreaming.“We put our names up on the leaderboard,” said Bradley, the 2011 P.G.A. Championship winner, who has yet to add a second major to his résumé. “It’s so cool seeing your name up there. But I probably shouldn’t have said that — going to get in trouble for that.”Or perhaps Bradley will be cut a little slack, since his name was legitimately on the leaderboard Friday evening. Bradley was tied for third place, three strokes behind the second-round leader, Phil Mickelson.“It was fun to see my name up there next to Phil’s,” Bradley said with a giggle. “For real.”AdvertisementForgive Bradley his giddiness. His journey back into contention at a major has been long, checkered and replete with taxing failure. His slump seemed, at times, on the verge of knocking him off the rails entirely.AdvertisementBy last season, he had fallen to 64th on the PGA Tour’s money list, down from 10th in 2012. In his last seven major championship appearances, he missed the cut three times, at events including last month’s United States Open. His best major finish in that period was 22nd, and even then he had to settle for a tie.“Everybody comes up to me and says, ‘What’s wrong with you?’” Bradley said Friday. Asked if that dragged on him, he replied with a wry grin, “Big time.”But it was understandable if people had wondered about where Bradley’s career was heading. His preshot routine had grown twitchy and jumpy. He became a putting-problem poster boy in the days after the prohibition on golfers’ anchoring long putters against their bodies.Bradley had anchored his putter, and he struggled on the greens while trying to adjust his style.If Bradley looked nervous, it was because he had been. It is something he now embraces with the help of a sports psychologist.Get the big sports news, highlights and analysis from Times journalists, with distinctive takes on games and some behind-the-scenes surprises, delivered to your inbox every week.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.“If I feel nervous, I just feel it, try to accept it and move on,” he said. “I don’t try to block it out.”Bradley said trying to block out the thought was more of a distraction than the thought itself.“Yeah, if you try not to think about something, then you will think about it,” he said. “So we’ve been working on accepting it’s going to be there. Just because you feel that way doesn’t mean it’s going to happen.”In a lesson to recreational golfers everywhere, Bradley said that he had also learned that feeling nervous meant he was playing well. After all, when he is playing poorly, no one watches him, and no one cares how he performs.Advertisement“When you feel nerves, it’s a good thing,” he said. “It means you’re doing something right. Especially in a major.”Bradley said that on the 10th tee, the beginning of a daunting par 4, he had felt particularly anxious. He relied on his newfound peace — or whatever it is — as he faced the familiar emotion.“I probably hit the best shot of the day there,” Bradley, 30, said with a smile. “So to me, that’s a good sign.”If this is the start of a comeback — Bradley shot a 68 in wind and rain on Friday to back up a first-round 67 — he would give some of the credit to the community of pro golfers who know just how hard it is to remain confident in the face of ballooning scores.“I’ve had a lot of veteran players reach out to me — Hall of Famer-type guys — and they’ve all said, ‘We all went through this at some point,’” Bradley said. “They said it was just a little dip, and people freak out.”Among those who counseled Bradley was Mickelson, whom he will be chasing in Saturday’s third round. Part of the message Bradley heard in those conversations was to accept the effort it will take to create a turnaround. As Bradley said Friday, “It’s my job to enjoy the challenge of coming back.”In the meantime, Bradley was just happy to see some putts drop again with his still long, but now unanchored, putter. He was glad to be hitting fairways and greens. When he felt a jangle of nerves, he knew to acknowledge it and persevere. No one at Royal Troon was asking him what was wrong with him.Best of all, when he walked onto the 18th green on Friday and waved to the cheering fans, he saw his name near the top of the giant yellow scoreboard. And it was no joke.A version of this article appears in print on July 16, 2016, on Page D3 of the New York edition with the headline: To Calm His Jittery Nerves, Bradley Embraces Them.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.See More »