By BRUCE WEBERJULY 9, 2016
Carl Haas, an auto racing entrepreneur best known for his ownership, with the actor Paul Newman, of a racing team that won more than 100 IndyCar races, died on June 29 at his home near Chicago.His death was announced on the website of Carl Haas Automobile Imports, based in Lincolnshire, Ill. He started the company, an importer and distributor of racecars and parts, in 1960.Most news reports have said that Mr. Haas was born in 1930 and was 86 at his death. But a spokesman for the company said he was 87. ESPN.com reported that Mr. Haas had Alzheimer’s disease.Mr. Haas and Mr. Newman, who died in 2008, became partners in 1983 after having been competitors in the Can-Am sports car series — its races were held in Canada and the United States — since the 1970s. (In addition to being an accomplished driver, Mr. Newman had been a partner in a different racing management team.)AdvertisementBut rather than sports cars, Newman-Haas Racing specialized in IndyCars — the kind of powerful, single-seat, open-cockpit, open-wheeled cars featured in the Indianapolis 500.AdvertisementTo drive for them, they attracted some of the biggest names in racing, including Mario Andretti, who was the team’s first anchor driver. Through the mid-1990s, he won 18 races; his son Michael Andretti won 31.Get the big sports news, highlights and analysis from Times journalists, with distinctive takes on games and some behind-the-scenes surprises, delivered to your inbox every week.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.Thirty Newman-Haas cars started the Indianapolis 500 from 1983 to 2011, six of them finishing in the top five. During a period when rival racing circuits emerged, the team won eight titles in the annual series administered by Championship Auto Racing Teams and its successor, Champ Car.After Mr. Haas’s death, the website of IndyCar, the sanctioning body of what is now the leading series of races, described Newman-Haas Racing as “one of the most successful operations in the sport’s history.”Mr. Haas’s survivors include his wife, Bernadette.Most sources say Mr. Haas was born in Chicago on Feb. 26, 1930, but the company spokesman said he was born in Germany in 1929. A 1985 article in The Chicago Tribune reported that his father, who sold leather goods, left Germany in the 1930s, apparently for Chicago, where Carl went to Hyde Park High School, Woodrow Wilson Junior College (now Kennedy-King College, part of the City Colleges of Chicago) and the Illinois Institute of Technology.Mr. Haas was in a Ford management training program when he attended his first auto race and was bitten by the driving bug. In the early 1950s, he participated in rallies sponsored by the Sports Car Club of America and began winning races, a number of them at an oval in West Allis, Wis., known as the Milwaukee Mile, a racetrack that he would operate himself in the 1990s.As a driver in Europe in the late 1950s, Mr. Haas encountered English racecars made by Elva and Lola and became the American importer and distributor of their cars and parts. Lola chassis were frequent features of Newman-Haas cars.His other racing-related enterprises included operating a Formula One team in the 1980s, a Nascar team in the 1990s and the Houston Grand Prix from 1998 to 2001, according to his company.He was, by most accounts, a popular figure in the racing world, known for a lack of pretension, an eye for talented drivers, high expectations of all employees and a cigar in his mouth, often unlighted.AdvertisementAsked by The Chicago Tribune to name the secret of Mr. Haas’s success, Mr. Newman replied, “The core of his mind rests in his cigar, and it’s a good cigar.”A version of this article appears in print on July 10, 2016, on Page A20 of the New York edition with the headline: Carl Haas, 87, an Owner of a Formidable IndyCar Team.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.