By DANIEL VICTORAUG. 10, 2016
Bernard Farrelly, a pioneering Australian surfboarder who won the sport’s first world championship, in 1964, died on Saturday. He was 71.Farrelly’s death was reported by Surfing Australia, the country’s surfing organization, which did not say where he had died. The cause was stomach cancer, according to the Encyclopedia of Surfing.Farrelly, who was known as Midget although he was 5 feet 8 inches tall, was among the top surfers of the 1960s, when the sport gained in popularity worldwide. As a 17-year-old in 1962, he won the Makaha International, considered an unofficial world championship, in Hawaii.Then, in 1964, Farrelly won the first official championship, at Manly Beach in Sydney, Australia. In an interview with the Australian National Surfing Museum in 2014, Farrelly said that it had taken him at least 20 years to appreciate the victory.Advertisement“My surfing always came first,” he said. “It was my freedom from a world that I didn’t think was necessarily made for me.”AdvertisementHe added an Australian national title in 1965 and then placed sixth in the 1966 world championships and second in the 1968 world championships.With surfing taking its place alongside tennis and cricket among Australian pastimes, Farrelly emerged there as a prominent pop-culture figure, starring in surf films, writing a newspaper column and posing for cover shoots for magazines. He was inducted into the Sports Australia Hall of Fame in 1985 and was added to the Surfing Walk of Fame in Huntington Beach, Calif., in 2007.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.But he had also been an outsider in the surfing world. In 1969, he editorialized against illicit drug use, which had become ingrained in the surfing culture.“Does the beach take dope, do the waves take dope, do the sea gulls take dope?” he wrote in Surfing World. “Man, if you’re part of that scene, you won’t, either.”Farrelly helped create the International Surfing Federation, which staged some of the first championship events. He was an influential designer of short boards and started Farrelly Surfboards and Surfblanks Australia, both of which remain in business. He began designing boards at 14.Farrelly was born on Sept. 13, 1944, in Sydney. He is survived by his wife, Beverlie, and their three daughters.The magazine Surfing Life said on its website that he had surfed until a few weeks before his death.Christopher Mele contributed reporting.A version of this article appears in print on August 11, 2016, on Page A16 of the New York edition with the headline: Bernard Farrelly, 71, First World Surfing King.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.