By ANDREW KEHMARCH 14, 2016
LOS ANGELES —  Seconds before the game between the Knicks and the Los Angeles Lakers on Sunday night, Kobe Bryant and Carmelo Anthony hugged near the sideline and smacked each other’s chests. There was a final battle coming. The two superstars would be guarding each other for long stretches of the game at Staples Center.Moments such as these have been accumulating for Bryant, who will retire at the end of the season: his last matchup against another star player, his last appearance in front of former coaches and close acquaintances. On Thursday night, he squared off against LeBron James. On Sunday afternoon, it was Anthony, Bryant’s former coach Phil Jackson and the Knicks.Beneath the veneer of star power and nostalgia was an unattractive matchup between two ineffectual teams. It culminated with a flurry of excitement, and the Knicks eked out a 90-87 win.The Lakers had just 11 points in the first quarter and trailed the Knicks at halftime, 46-35. But they fought back in the fourth.AdvertisementWith 1 minute 32 seconds left, Bryant drained a turnaround jumper over Arron Afflalo to give the Lakers an 85-81 lead. Anthony responded with a 3-pointer and, about 30 seconds later, a long 2 to give the Knicks a 1-point lead. Back and forth it went. With 41.1 seconds left, the Lakers’ Lou Williams hit a long jumper. Then Robin Lopez made one of two free throws to tie the game at 87-87.AdvertisementWith the fans on their feet, Bryant missed a bank shot, leaving 9.3 seconds for the Knicks.It was not pretty, and probably not how they planned it, but the Knicks sealed the win: Jose Calderon inbounded the ball to Lopez, who hesitated with it near midcourt as the clock ticked down. Lopez flipped it back to Calderon, who heaved a deep 3-pointer that splashed in with 0.2 of a second left. Calderon kept a straight face as he walked back to the bench.Asked why he did not show any emotion and what he was thinking after the shot, Calderon smirked and said, “I’ll keep that one to myself.”Anthony had 26 points and 12 rebounds for the Knicks. Bryant scored 14 points, shooting 5 for 15 from the field.Throughout the game, Bryant chatted with various Knicks players. In the second, he walked over to the visitors’ bench and conversed with Knicks Coach Kurt Rambis, who spent many years as an assistant in Los Angeles. In the third, Bryant and Sasha Vujacic, a former Laker, spoke at length while a Knicks player was shooting free throws, the two of them covering their mouths with their hands.Jackson, who won five championships coaching Bryant and the Lakers, was shown on the scoreboard between the first and second quarters — the John Sebastian song “Welcome Back” blared over the speakers — and received a loud ovation from the crowd. As the camera lingered on Jackson, who is in his second season as president of the Knicks, he smiled and waved.“Basketball went back a few years with that one,” Jackson said after the game, chuckling, as he walked by reporters. “Tough one to watch.”Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.On Friday, Jackson reminisced about Bryant’s singular work ethic during their time together with the Lakers.“I would be going into film study, and he’d be coming out of his first workout that started at 6 in the morning, and he would take a nap between that and the team workout,” Jackson said. “I had to respect the dedication that he played basketball with and the desire that he had. Those moments brought us together when I’d see him over there and then we’d meet and have breakfast before anybody else came in.”AdvertisementThe Knicks were short-handed, playing without the rookie forward Kristaps Porzingis, who had arrived at the arena with a stomachache. About an hour before the game, he left the locker room and headed back to the team hotel with a grim look on his face.Fans were deprived of a chance to see Porzingis, the No. 4 pick in the 2015 draft, on the same court as Lakers guard D’Angelo Russell, the No. 2 selection. Russell finished with 4 points, shooting 1 for 7 from the field.Russell said on Saturday that he was looking forward to the matchup against Porzingis and the Knicks as a “statement game” to prove himself beside another high pick. Russell added, though, that the real attraction on Sunday would be “Kobe and Melo’s show,” given that it would be the last time the two stars would play against each other.Anthony and Bryant have grown close over the years, with Bryant becoming something of a mentor and sounding board for Anthony. Last month in Toronto, Anthony, Chris Paul and Dwyane Wade organized a private farewell dinner for Bryant. Anthony marveled last week that Bryant, a guarded person, had even allowed them to hold the event.Sunday’s game was the 29th regular-season meeting between Bryant and Anthony. Through the first 28, Bryant averaged 27.2 points, and Anthony averaged 23.4.“He’s an assassin,” Anthony said of Bryant. “You can’t take any plays off going up against him, even now. We’re seeing flashes of him out there. He still has that look in his eye when he gets the ball.”Bryant, who called Anthony “a bear” last week, played Anthony physically, and Anthony complained to the referees several times about the excessive contact. When the frantic game was over, they were smiling and hugging on the court one last time.A version of this article appears in print on March 14, 2016, on Page D10 of the New York edition with the headline: Knicks Beat Buzzer to Take Last Game Against Bryant .  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.