By DAVE CALDWELLMARCH 13, 2016
The Pittsburgh Penguins played their first game Sunday in what will probably be a six-to-eight-week stretch without the injured Evgeni Malkin, but they put together a second period that alarmed Rangers Coach Alain Vigneault so much that he used only three forward lines.The Rangers had lost Saturday in overtime to the Red Wings, so Vigneault asked even more from the top of his lineup. The Rangers held on to tie the score three times, but Pittsburgh got a critical late goal from their 39-year-old forward, Matt Cullen, to put the Penguins ahead in a game they won by 5-3.“We are not executing as quick as I think this group can right now,” Vigneault said.Sidney Crosby scored an empty-net goal with 39 seconds left to clinch the victory for Pittsburgh. But Cullen scored the goal that mattered, hustling past Rangers center Derick Brassard and flipping a shot that clattered off the skates of defenseman Marc Staal and skipped past goaltender Henrik Lundqvist at 11 minutes 9 seconds of the third period.The Penguins scored their first goal Sunday on a shot by forward Patric Hornqvist, who collected the rebound of a power-play shot by Crosby and slapped it from a severe angle off Lundqvist’s left pad and into the goal.Advertisement“Unfortunate bounces or not, they were creating some time in our zone,” said defenseman Ryan McDonagh, the Rangers’ captain. “I’m really just frustrated we can’t find a way to get a point out of that game — hopefully two, but if not, one.”The Penguins (36-24-8), clutching one of two wild-card berths in the Eastern Conference, won for the third time in four games despite the absence of Malkin, their star center, who sustained an upper-body injury in their game Friday against Columbus. The Rangers (39-23-7), in second place in the Metropolitan Division, had their second straight loss, and their third in four games.The Rangers are to depart Monday for a trip that includes games against the Anaheim Ducks, the Los Angeles Kings and the San Jose Sharks — the top three teams in the Pacific Division. The Rangers are almost assured of making the Stanley Cup playoffs, but they have not yet earned a berth.Get the big sports news, highlights and analysis from Times journalists, with distinctive takes on games and some behind-the-scenes surprises, delivered to your inbox every week.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.“We didn’t have that killer instinct,” Rangers defenseman Dan Girardi said, adding: “We need to get the points. Even though we’re second in the division, it doesn’t mean anything.”Forwards Dominic Moore and Kevin Hayes did not play at all in the third period. In the second period, Hayes lagged far behind Penguins forward Conor Sheary, who raced up the ice and took a pass from Tom Kuhnackl to score his second goal of the game.AdvertisementSheary’s goal was his fifth of the season, but his second in the lopsided second period, during which the Penguins outshot the Rangers, 10-2. Although the Penguins had scored first, Vigneault was pleased with his team’s first-period effort, which included 19 shots on goal.“I was trying to get us to play quicker and to have the same jump we had in the first period,” Vigneault said.Brassard responded to Sheary’s first goal with a booming, power-play slap shot to tie the score, 2-2. The Rangers countered Sheary’s second goal at 5:04 of the third period, when McDonagh rolled around the goal and beat Pittsburgh goaltender Marc-Andre Fleury with a wraparound shot to tie the score a third time. It was McDonagh’s ninth goal of the season.But Cullen scored again, simply by tracking down the puck behind the goal line, despite being hounded by Brassard, who had missed Saturday’s game with the flu.“I was confident that if I could keep the game close, we could come back,” Fleury said.After taking 13 of the first 16 shots on goal, the Rangers were outplayed in the second period and became flustered. Mats Zuccarello picked up a slashing penalty by whacking Pittsburgh defenseman Ian Cole’s stick out of his hands, sending it flying.The third period opened with a fight between Pittsburgh forward Chris Kunitz and Rangers forward Chris Kreider, who earlier had scored his fifth goal in nine games, and his 16th of the season.McDonagh’s goal tied the score five minutes later, but that was it for the Rangers, who lost on Saturday in Detroit, 3-2, after Brad Richards, the former Rangers forward, tied the score with 32 seconds left in regulation and Darren Helm scored his second goal of the game in overtime.Sitting at his dressing-room stall after Sunday’s game, Lundqvist said: “It comes down to will. This game is all about will, and how badly you want it.”AdvertisementCatching the first-place Washington Capitals, who remained 18 points ahead of the Rangers, is pretty much out of the question. And the Rangers do not even have a comfortable lead over the third-place Islanders (37-21-8), who remain 3 points back but have three games in hand.“Anytime you get the opportunity to be together as a group and play against some good teams out west, it’s going to be good for us,” said Eric Staal, a Rangers newcomer and Marc’s older brother.After two disappointing losses, he sounded as if he were doing some wishful thinking.MAPLE LEAFS 1, RED WINGS 0 Jonathan Bernier made 38 saves in his 12th career shutout, leading visiting Toronto over Detroit. (AP)LIGHTNING 4, BLUES 0 Ben Bishop made 37 saves, Steven Stamkos had two goals and an assist, and Tampa Bay beat host Columbus to end a three-game losing streak. (AP)A version of this article appears in print on March 14, 2016, on Page D10 of the New York edition with the headline: Rangers Keep Coming Back, but the Penguins Thwart Them Without Malkin .  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.