By SAM BORDENNOV. 21, 2016
About two years ago, during an interview at a country club in Southern California, Jurgen Klinsmann spoke at length about what he considered to be “success” when it came to his job as coach of the United States national team.“The more players we can get playing at the top levels over there, the better it will be,” he said, referring to leagues in Europe. “That is one sign of progress.”Fair enough. Europe, and the higher quality of play in leagues there, were a constant talking point for Klinsmann, a German, throughout his tenure.But he mentioned many other areas of emphasis, too. He often roamed widely in his definitions of success for his new post, also highlighting the growth of the United States’ youth national teams and a greater sense of accountability among players.AdvertisementAt other points during his five years in charge of the team, he talked about establishing an American style of play as well as raising the bar on expectations for players and fans in this country. He talked endlessly of getting players “out of their comfort zones,” even if that meant haranguing veterans or testing young and old alike in unfamiliar, or unworkable, roles.AdvertisementKlinsmann was always that way, a big-picture coach willing to let others dwell on the details. (When he coached Germany’s national team, he was said to have let his more tactically astute assistant, Joachim Löw, handle those duties.) Ultimately, Klinsmann — as many coaches do — promised a lot. But how close did he come to delivering? Here is a look at a few of the areas he tried to address.AMERICANS ABROAD Klinsmann constantly denigrated the quality of play in Major League Soccer — to the point that the league’s commissioner, Don Garber, once felt he had no choice but demand that he stop — and there was no question that his preference was always for players to go abroad to play whenever possible. But did that translate to more players from foreign teams on the roster than those from M.L.S.? Not always.While injuries and form always play a role in roster decisions, at the 2010 World Cup under Bob Bradley, 19 of 23 players on the United States team played outside M.L.S. Four years later in Brazil, under Klinsmann, the split was about even, with 13 of 23 players coming from foreign clubs. By the Copa América last summer, the percentages had flipped: Only 11 of the 23 American players were employed overseas.The other problem was that Klinsmann’s opinions on the topic were subject to change. He criticized Clint Dempsey and Michael Bradley when they accepted big-money offers to return to M.L.S. from Europe ahead of the last World Cup, but when Jozy Altidore made a similar move after the tournament, Klinsmann seemed fine with it.Get the big sports news, highlights and analysis from Times journalists, with distinctive takes on games and some behind-the-scenes surprises, delivered to your inbox every week.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.“He’s very unlikely to play for Sunderland, and he has a playing guarantee in M.L.S.,” Klinsmann said at the time. “So that’s a good thing.”NATIONAL IDENTITY: This is one of the more difficult areas to quantify, particularly because in modern soccer, every team must be able to play multiple styles and formations depending on the opponent. Yet Klinsmann, despite saying early on that he wanted to see the Americans became more of a finesse, possession-style team that was confident on the ball, struggled to actually instill that mantra.There was some progress, and he will get credit — though not from everyone — for beating the bushes in his search for more technical players. But the promised change in style was never sharp enough and, most important, never consistent enough. And it showed against the best teams. In the Copa América semifinal against Argentina last summer, the United States was overrun, 4-0, with the Americans completing just over 70 percent of their passes (a fairly dreadful percentage). Against Colombia, earlier in the tournament, the United States was only marginally better (82 percent) while the Colombians were safely in the 90s.AdvertisementAnd whatever you think of Klinsmann’s tactical acumen, he did try different things, even if they sometimes backfired. In the Nov. 11 loss to Mexico that may have played a role in his firing, Klinsmann began the game in a 3-4-3 formation that, he said afterward, was designed to give as much space as possible to Christian Pulisic, the team’s wondrously talented wide midfielder. Did it work? Not at all. But the premise behind the decision was at least creative.SHIFTING POSITIONS One of Klinsmann’s first initiatives with the national team was declaring that no one player owned a particular jersey number, but rather that the starting lineup in any given game would wear Nos. 1 through 11 (as in soccer’s old days) and the substitutes would follow from 12 through 23. Thus, the thinking went, each player would have to fight for his shirt for each game.The thinking, of course, was fine. But Klinsmann changed his rosters and his lineups and the positions of the players so often that it was nearly impossible for anyone to ever really take hold of a particular jersey. Klinsmann also routinely played players away from their most comfortable positions, a strategy that confounded fans and rankled his players. Most notably, he played four of 10 outfield players away from their preferred positions in an ugly 2-0 defeat against Guatemala this year, then denied that any of them was actually playing out of position.Klinsmann fairly argued that like many national team coaches, he was often at the mercy of club coaches — who move their own players around as well — and that his lineups were just the positions he thought best for his players. Yet the fluidity made it difficult for players (like Bradley, Fabian Johnson and Geoff Cameron, among others) to deliver good performances regularly.As for the rule about jersey numbers? Within a year, Klinsmann had changed that, too.YOUTH MOVEMENT Do not forget, Klinsmann was also the technical director of U.S. Soccer, a job that looks at the larger development of the national team programs at all age levels. Youth national team performances are not always (or even often) predictive of what the senior team will do, but they do matter. The most glaring struggles under Klinsmann were the under-23 team’s failure to make the Olympics in 2012 and 2016. There was a good run from the under-20 team at its World Cup — the team is coached by Tab Ramos, who is seen as a potential long-term replacement for Klinsmann — but the under-17 team finished last in its World Cup group.Most important, there was little progress seen in the style of play from the younger teams. Lots of long kicks and precious little continuity from one age group to the next meant that Klinsmann’s hopes of seeing more attractive soccer evolve within U.S. Soccer was not evident either at the senior level or below.Klinsmann does, however, deserve credit for elevating a host of talented young players to the senior team. Bobby Wood, in particular, was a player few besides Klinsmann saw making a difference, and Pulisic, Cameron Carter-Vickers, DeAndre Yedlin, John Brooks and Jordan Morris are players who figure to be around for a long time after Klinsmann is gone.A version of this article appears in print on November 22, 2016, on Page B11 of the New York edition with the headline: The Coach’s Goals: A Mixed Scorecard.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.