By ANDREW DASMARCH 12, 2016
The French coach, the Spanish striker, the Italian playmaker and the American goalkeeper all agree on this: New York City F.C. will get better at communication, and defending, and everything else, as the season goes on.Not that last week’s season opener in Chicago was anything to run from: N.Y.C.F.C. started the season with a victory, which was an improvement on last season’s inaugural game. And the team produced four goals for its new French coach, Patrick Vieira, none of them scored by that Spanish striker, David Villa, or that Italian playmaker, Andrea Pirlo.The problems were mostly at the other end of the field, where a leaky and makeshift defense surrendered three goals. But Vieira and goalkeeper Josh Saunders assured fans last week that those errors can be fixed.“It’s a process,” said Saunders, whose four-man back line included three newcomers to the team. “First game, we got a win out of it, away from home, which is very difficult.”AdvertisementN.Y.C.F.C. will try to match the feat on Sunday when it opens its home schedule against Toronto F.C. at Yankee Stadium. Toronto F.C. has its own issues — because of stadium construction, it will play its first eight games on the road this season — but it also arrives off a season-opening win, 2-0 over the Red Bulls last Sunday.Get the big sports news, highlights and analysis from Times journalists, with distinctive takes on games and some behind-the-scenes surprises, delivered to your inbox every week.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.And in Sebastian Giovinco, last season’s most valuable player in Major League Soccer, Toronto has precisely the type of field-stretching forward who can tear apart a back line still finding its way. When the teams met last July, Giovinco scored a first-half hat trick in a 4-4 tie (although he was shut out in the clubs’ two other meetings).AdvertisementGiovinco’s speed and his ability to get behind defenses, combined with an N.Y.C.F.C. team still getting used to several newcomers and Vieira’s preference for a high defensive line, could be a dangerous mix. By playing a high line, N.Y.C.F.C. essentially is trying to put itself on the front foot, taking the game to opponents.The risk, as it learned at Chicago, is that mistakes are easily punished; on the Fire’s first goal last week, the new center back Frederic Brillant was caught out, playing too high. Later, his turnover — when he lost possession deep in his end and without support — handed Chicago another easy goal. Fortunately for Brillant, his teammates scored four.“As a coach, when you score four goals and you concede three, you are happy, because you created chances and managed to score goals,” Vieira said. “But even if you don’t talk about the three goals, I think we conceded too many chances.”Vieira added: “We have to defend much better as a team. We conceded a lot because we did not defend better up front, and this is one of the aspects we need to improve.”Both teams are expected to be missing key players again on Sunday. Jozy Altidore (hamstring) will most likely remain out for Toronto, and Frank Lampard (calf) probably will be out again for N.Y.C.F.C. On Friday, N.Y.C.F.C. announced that it had added another attacker, confirming the signing of the 23-year-old Colombian Steven Mendoza from Brazil’s Corinthians. Mendoza scored 13 goals last season on loan with Chennaiyin of India’s Super League.A version of this article appears in print on March 13, 2016, on Page SP9 of the New York edition with the headline: In Home Opener, a Focus on Bolstering the Defense.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.