By DAVID POLLAKMAY 26, 2016
SAN JOSE, Calif. — The San Jose Sharks are going to the Stanley Cup finals for the first time in the franchise’s 25-year history after a convincing 5-2 victory over the St. Louis Blues on Wednesday night that ended the Western Conference finals in six games.Two goals by San Jose forward Joel Ward and one each from Joe Pavelski, Joonas Donskoi and Logan Couture provided the San Jose offense, while St. Louis forward Vladimir Tarasenko added two goals late in the third period. Sharks goaltender Martin Jones made 24 saves.Although they played down the stakes, the Sharks clearly wanted to avoid the need for a winner-take-all Game 7 on the road.“You don’t want to waste opportunities,” Pavelski, the San Jose captain, said before the game.The loss had to be a bitter one for St. Louis, which had not advanced to the conference finals since 2001 and has now gone 46 years without reaching the final round of the tournament.AdvertisementThe Sharks scored early when Pavelski scooped up a missed shot by linemate Joe Thornton behind the St. Louis net and tucked it past the left pad of the goaltender Brian Elliott at 3 minutes 57 seconds of the first period. It was Pavelski’s N.H.L.-leading 13th score of the postseason.Get the big sports news, highlights and analysis from Times journalists, with distinctive takes on games and some behind-the-scenes surprises, delivered to your inbox every week.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.Ward, who was signed as a free agent last summer because of his reputation for clutch playoff performances, gave San Jose a 2-0 lead at 5:02 of the second period when he deflected a shot from the right point by the defenseman Brent Burns. Ward made it 3-0 at 3:01 of the third period when he steered a centering pass from Couture into the net, and Donskoi gave the SAP Center crowd, announced at a sold-out 17,562, another chance to roar its approval when he scored a little more than five minutes later.AdvertisementJones, completing his first N.H.L. season as a starting goalie, made his biggest save of the night midway through the second period when he slid across the goal mouth to rob Blues forward Jori Lehtera on a one-timer. He finally surrendered goals at 11:39 and 16:25 of the third period to Tarasenko, St. Louis’s top sniper, who had been held without a point in the series. Couture scored into an empty net with 19.7 seconds left in the game.The game was arguably the most important in the San Jose franchise’s 25-year history, as it was the team’s first opportunity to reach the final round of the playoffs with a single victory. But Sharks Coach Peter DeBoer was not about to frame it that way before the game.“We’ve been in that mode — that this is the most important game — for a while now,” DeBoer said, noting the team had been struggling as recently as late December. “When you’re fighting for your playoff life right until the end, fighting for position in the playoffs, playing the L.A. Kings in the first round, every game has been the most important next game. That’s nothing new to us.”San Jose reached the finals two years after a heartbreaking first-round loss to the Los Angeles Kings after having won the first three games of the series, and one year after failing to make the playoffs altogether.The Sharks will face either the Pittsburgh Penguins or the Tampa Bay Lightning in the Stanley Cup finals, which begin Monday.A version of this article appears in print on May 26, 2016, on Page B14 of the New York edition with the headline: Hockey; Sharks Make the Stanley Cup Finals, Finally.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.