By SCOTT CACCIOLAMAY 25, 2016
CLEVELAND — LeBron James was familiar with this situation. Not much catches James by surprise, not after so many seasons and so many playoff runs.On Wednesday night, James strode into the pressure cooker known as Game 5 of the Eastern Conference finals. For the 13th time in his career, his team was deadlocked in a postseason series at two games apiece. So this was nothing new to the Cleveland Cavaliers’ leader, who channeled his inner yogi by emphasizing tranquillity before the game. He could have been strumming a sitar at an ashram.“Just a sense of calmness,” James said. “That’s all. A very calm moment for myself, personally. I relish this opportunity.”Sure enough, the Cavaliers played with a sense of calm. They calmly leaked out for dunks. They calmly buried jump shots. They calmly defended and forced turnovers and went about the inhospitable business of eviscerating the Toronto Raptors in a 116-78 victory at Quicken Loans Arena.AdvertisementBehind James, who finished with 23 points, 8 assists and 6 rebounds, Cleveland seized a three-games-to-two lead, and though neither team has won a game on the road, the Cavaliers can secure a second straight trip to the finals with a win in Toronto on Friday night.AdvertisementAfter losing two games at Air Canada Centre, the Cavaliers returned home and looked like a different team. Gone were their defensive lapses. Gone was their self-doubt.“They kicked our butts,” Raptors Coach Dwane Casey said. “That’s the bottom line.”The Cavaliers led by 18 at the end of the first quarter, and the indignities began to mount for Toronto. Richard Jefferson, Cleveland’s 35-year-old statesman, soared for an alley-oop dunk. The Raptors’ DeMar DeRozan committed a personal foul just to stop the game so he could scream at an official. He earned a technical.Leaving nothing to chance, Cavaliers Coach Tyronn Lue called a timeout with 14.2 seconds left in the first half. He wanted to draw up one more play. Cleveland was up by 31.Kevin Love scored 25 points, and Kyrie Irving added 23 for the Cavaliers, who shot 57 percent from the field. More impressive, perhaps, was their defense.DeRozan finished with 14 points but was 2 of 8 from the field, and his fellow guard Kyle Lowry had 13 points. In Toronto’s two wins, DeRozan and Lowry had combined to average 59.5 points a game.“Lord knows, we didn’t come with the same focus and physicality to meet what Cleveland was doing,” Casey said.Get the big sports news, highlights and analysis from Times journalists, with distinctive takes on games and some behind-the-scenes surprises, delivered to your inbox every week.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.It has been an odd series; difficult to define. After the Cavaliers won the first two games here by a combined 50 points, the Raptors took the next two in Toronto.AdvertisementBefore Game 5, James underscored a couple of keys. The Cavaliers needed to play with more urgency on defense, especially at the start of the game, and they had to play with greater tempo. Speed, he said, has always been Cleveland’s friend.“When we play with pace and we run and we get fast-break points, we’ve been a very good team,” James said.James chose not to wade into Cleveland’s recent propensity for drifting to the perimeter, arguing that it was just a matter of making shots. But the Cavaliers had been at their best in this series when they had attacked the rim. The seductive call of the 3-point line had been kryptonite. Witness their 82 attempts, most of them misses, in their two losses at Air Canada Centre.Nobody had been struggling more from the outside than Love, who shot 5 of 23 from the field while averaging 6.5 points in Games 3 and 4 — a jarring decline in production after he had averaged 18.4 points through the first 10 games of the playoffs. Lue said he had spoken with Love on Tuesday in an effort to reassure him.“When he feels the guys trust him, he trusts the guys,” Lue said. “I think that’s the biggest thing.”On nearly every possession of the first quarter, the Cavaliers dumped the ball to Love, who went to work against his defenders — first Luis Scola, and then Patrick Patterson. Love made his first shot, and then another.The Cavaliers continued to give Love pass after pass, doing little do disguise their motives. In the first quarter, he sank a 3-pointer to push Cleveland’s lead to 11.At the other end, the Cavaliers hounded DeRozan and Lowry, who found their space invaded by long limbs, their looks congested by active hands. They combined to shoot 4 of 14 from the field in the first half.Advertisement“I don’t know if we were ready for the train that was about to come down the tracks on us tonight,” Casey said.Not even the return of Jonas Valanciunas could inspire the Raptors. After spraining his ankle on May 7 in the Raptors’ series against the Miami Heat, Valanciunas, the starting center, ceded the stage to his understudy, Bismack Biyombo, who played well in his extended absence.On Wednesday, Valanciunas came off the bench in the first quarter and went to work, scoring on a layup and a midrange jumper. But the Cavaliers were already beginning to build their lead, possession by possession, turning a playoff game into a clinic.“I’ve been a part of some really adverse situations,” James said, “and I just didn’t believe that this was one of them.”A version of this article appears in print on May 26, 2016, on Page B13 of the New York edition with the headline: Cavs Crush the Raptors as Home Court Holds.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.