By THE ASSOCIATED PRESSMAY 25, 2016
BENTON HARBOR, Mich. — Fresh off a landmark victory, Bernhard Langer will try to enter a league of his own at the Senior P.G.A. Championship.Langer is coming off the 100th victory of his career — at a major, no less — having won the Regions Tradition in Alabama. It was his sixth major championship as a senior, and he became the second player, after Jack Nicklaus, to have won four different majors on the senior tour, now known as the PGA Tour Champions.Nicklaus was the first to win the Senior Grand Slam — it took him all of two years to win the four after he turned 50 in 1990 — but he had largely retired by the time the Senior British Open was added to the major rotation. Nicklaus played that event as a major only once, in its first year, 2003.Langer is going for an unprecedented sweep of all five senior majors as the Senior P.G.A. begins Thursday at Harbor Shores.Advertisement“It’s huge in a sense that nobody’s ever done it before,” Langer said. “We have had many, many great players and illustrious careers, and they haven’t.”AdvertisementHe added: “Nobody’s ever done it. So it’s a challenge. And I like challenges. I like to set goals, and I wasn’t even aware of that until last week. So this is a new goal of mine, and it’s fun. It’s fun to look forward to doing something that is unusual.”Langer, 58, contended the last two times the Senior P.G.A. was at the Nicklaus-designed Harbor Shores, in 2012 and 2014, and he figures to be one of the favorites based on his play this year. He has already won twice and leads the money list.Get the big sports news, highlights and analysis from Times journalists, with distinctive takes on games and some behind-the-scenes surprises, delivered to your inbox every week.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.Winning back-to-back major titles is difficult enough. Langer is faced with winning back-to-back majors in successive weeks. Under the PGA Tour Champions schedule, three major tournaments are held in a four-week stretch, with the Senior Players Championship two weeks from now.Then again, Langer has done this before.Six years ago, he won the Senior British Open at Carnoustie and then traveled across eight time zones and won the United States Senior Open at Sahalee outside Seattle.“That’s hard to do because your body is worn out, and we’re wearing out faster in our 50s than the 20- or 30-year-olds do,” Langer said. “And they don’t have back-to-back majors. You learn how to manage your time and your lifestyle and what you need to do to prepare, and some prepare more, some prepare less. I feel I’m well prepared. I do what I need to do, and hopefully I’m not going to be tired come Saturday or Sunday.”John Daly will play his second of what could be seven majors this year on both tours — he is exempt into the P.G.A. Championship and the British Open as a past champion. Daly has failed to seriously contend in his two PGA Tour Champions events since turning 50.He has tied for 15th and 17th in his two tournaments, although Daly said he was still shaking off rust from not playing much before he turned 50.Advertisement“I’m not expecting a lot this week,” he said. “I would love to play great this week, but as long as I keep making a lot of birdies, for me that’s the key. Because I know I’m going to make mistakes; I know I’m going to make doubles right now. It’s just trying to not make so many of them until I got my game where I want it.”Colin Montgomerie is the two-time defending champion.For years, Montgomerie was viewed as being one of the best Wednesday interviews in golf, and this Wednesday was no exception. Going for his third straight title in the seniors’ oldest championship, Montgomerie was asked if he had ever won a tournament three times in a row.“Just the P.G.A.,” he replied.Montgomerie never won the P.G.A. Championship, or any regular major, so the question was posed again.“Just the P.G.A. at Wentworth,” he said, referring to the European Tour’s flagship event. “That was all. It wasn’t such a big deal, really. Beat Ernie Els again in 1998. And then I won in ’99 and 2000. So yes, I’ve won one tournament three times in a row, the P.G.A. And I’m looking at this P.G.A. here. So let’s hope there’s fate involved.”A version of this article appears in print on May 26, 2016, on Page B15 of the New York edition with the headline: Taking Aim at a Senior Major Sweep.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.