By SCOTT CACCIOLAMAY 24, 2016
DeMar DeRozan was momentarily distracted by his young daughter, Diar, who was sitting on his lap late Monday night at his postgame news conference. Having forgotten the question that had been asked of him, DeRozan turned to Kyle Lowry, his Toronto Raptors backcourt teammate, for an assist, which was fitting enough.“What have you learned about yourself?” Lowry said, repeating the reporter’s question.The N.B.A. playoffs are full of high-profile buddy acts. Out west, Russell Westbrook and Kevin Durant of the Oklahoma City Thunder have been grappling with Stephen Curry and Klay Thompson of the Golden State Warriors in a conference finals series fraught with drama.DeRozan and Lowry have engineered their own star turn in the shadow cast by the Cleveland Cavaliers’ LeBron James and Kyrie Irving. Not long ago, Toronto’s season was on the brink. But with two straight home wins, the Raptors have tied the Eastern Conference finals entering Game 5 on Wednesday.On Monday, DeRozan and Lowry combined for 67 points while shooting 28 of 43 from the field in a 105-99 Game 4 victory over the Cavaliers at Air Canada Centre.Advertisement“It’s a cakewalk for me once he gets going,” said DeRozan, who shot 14 of 23 from the field for 32 points. “It opens up everything for me on the floor. Teams try to focus in on him, and he knows when to get me going.”DeRozan and Lowry needed two games to revive the Raptors’ hopes of a championship — yes, a championship. If they have gotten used to the world (outside Toronto) doubting or dismissing them, then they are adept at channeling all that outside noise for the good of the team.Advertisement“We’ve been counted out,” DeRozan said, “and we like that challenge.”It might sound cliché, but who would be crazy enough to count them out now? The Cavaliers looked unstoppable when they showed up in Toronto last week, having won all 10 of their playoff games. But DeRozan and Lowry rediscovered their rhythm, turning a seven-games-if-needed series into a best-of-three.Lowry, in particular, has returned to form. After making 8 of 28 from the field in the first two games of the series, he has shot 21 of 33 in the last two. On Monday he was 14 of 20 and scored 35 points.“I think some games we haven’t shot the ball well, and we just continue to go back and understand the work that we’ve put in,” said Lowry, who took the liberty of speaking for DeRozan. “I know the work he’s put in, and I know the work I’ve put in. You can’t go away from that. You have to stay with the process that you’ve had throughout your career.”Dwane Casey, the coach of the Raptors, is fond of saying the N.B.A. is a “make-or-miss league.” If your team makes enough shots, you win. In Toronto, the Raptors made shots. The Cavaliers did not, or at least not enough.The Cavaliers went away from what had been working for them — aggressive drives. After resisting the lure of the 3-point line in the first two games of the series (41 attempts), the Cavaliers had 82 3-point attempts in Games 3 and 4, making 33 percent.Get the big sports news, highlights and analysis from Times journalists, with distinctive takes on games and some behind-the-scenes surprises, delivered to your inbox every week.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.Enter Bismack Biyombo, who has been a stout defender for the Raptors — and one of the more entertaining surprises of the postseason. Pushed into a starting job because of an ankle injury sustained by the higher-scoring Jonas Valanciunas, Biyombo has excelled at center. In the Raptors’ two wins, he had a total of 40 rebounds, with 26 in Game 3.AdvertisementCompared with Valanciunas, who is more of an interior defender when healthy, Biyombo also gives Casey added versatility on defense. Biyombo has the ability to roam outside the paint and annoy opponents like James and the long-range threat Kevin Love.“It’s a luxury,” said Casey, who, like much of Canada, is fond of the finger-wagging Biyombo, a native of the Democratic Republic of Congo. “Biz is one of our best athletes. He’s always teasing about chasing lions and everything in the Congo. I’ve got to go over there this summer and see that.”Biyombo’s play has created a small quandary for Casey ahead of Game 5: Does Casey opt for more big minutes for Biyombo, or does he work to reintegrate Valanciunas into the lineup? On Wednesday, Casey indicated that he would probably opt for more Biyombo if the Cavaliers continued to favor a smaller lineup with Channing Frye at center.In any case, the Raptors, led by DeRozan and Lowry, seem to have unlocked some sort of formula as the series returns to Cleveland.“I don’t know if they’ve grown,” Casey said of his players. “I don’t know if you’re going to grow in three or four games. Again, it’s a feel. It’s a rhythm. It’s confidence. If you’re asking if it gives some confidence to win two games at home, yes.”He added: “But I will say this: It’s going to be a different animal back in Cleveland, as it is in every series. When you go into another team’s home territory, it’s a little bit tougher. But it does give us more rhythm and more confidence going against them now that we have a little bit better feel of what we can and cannot do against this team.”A version of this article appears in print on May 25, 2016, on Page B8 of the New York edition with the headline: Now in Groove, Guards Pull Team Out of Rut.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.