
On Pro Basketball By                     
 HARVEY ARATON
 
MAY 25, 2016
OKLAHOMA CITY — Inside the cramped Golden State Warriors locker room here late Tuesday night, there was deflation bordering on a sense of utter disbelief. Players dressed in silence, blankly staring into smartphones, looking for answers, or perhaps it was sympathy.Andre Iguodala slumped in his seat, wearing a yellow T-shirt that read, “Strength in Numbers.” Except the numbers were all trending the wrong way for the Warriors, the defending N.B.A. champions, who were suddenly in a three-games-to-one Western Conference finals ditch, looking up at an Oklahoma City Thunder team that had taken more than just two games in successive blowouts at Chesapeake Energy Arena.Within 48 hours, the Thunder had stolen the Warriors’ identity — a team all season tagged as irrepressible, unstoppable and irresistible, and now just bewildered by the 28- and 24-point beat-downs they’d had to endure.Their record-setting 73-victory season was officially on the brink, and no quantity of pronouncements that the series wasn’t over could call into dispute the Thunder’s budding ascendancy, or Russell Westbrook’s dominance, largely at the expense of a struggling Stephen Curry.AdvertisementKlay Thompson, who gave Golden State a fighting chance in Game 4 with a third-quarter outburst — “Why not go out there and start gunning?” he said, in a solo concession to the Warriors’ predicament — glanced at a box score of the 118-94 defeat.AdvertisementFor a second straight game, the Thunder had strafed a proud and normally hyperactive Warriors defense for 72 first-half points. “We did limit them to 46 points in the second half,” Thompson said, before adding, “I mean, we had 40 assists; that’s a positive.”In the interview room, he took another look at the sheet in front of him.“No, never mind,” he said. “Fifteen. Way off.”Fifteen measly assists from a team celebrated for its ball movement, its sharing. Westbrook had almost as many on his own, 11, to go with his 36 points, 11 rebounds and 4 steals. Like the 67-victory San Antonio Spurs before them, the Warriors simply have not been able to handle Westbrook’s power and energy, his ability to switch gears and tirelessly motor wherever he needs to get in order to, as he likes to say, “create some havoc.”His penetration, the attention he demanded, made bonus scoring contributors Tuesday night of his backcourt mate Andre Roberson, supposedly a player to leave alone and allow open looks. Roberson scored 17 points, and Serge Ibaka had 15 of his 17 in the first half, which was a near replica of Game 3, minus the Draymond Green groin kick to Steven Adams.Curry, the two-time league most valuable player, paled in comparison to Westbrook, missing 14 of his 20 shots, turning the ball over six times, weaving little of the magic that had made him a global sensation, biting on a mouth guard as he chewed up opposing defenses.“He’s not injured,” Warriors Coach Steve Kerr said to an obvious question looming over the series. “He’s coming back from the knee, but he’s not injured.”“No, I’m fine,” Curry concurred. “I’ve just got to play better.”And what of Green, who had said, after being spared a suspension for the wince-inducing attack on Adams, that he would — in the manner of his team, which hadn’t lost consecutive games all season — make amends for his maladroit play on Sunday night?AdvertisementHe shot 1 for 7 and, like Curry, was responsible for six of his team’s 21 turnovers, a ruinous breakdown against the explosive transition game of the Thunder.“This is the first time in my life that I didn’t respond to critics,” Green said.Facing elimination at home in Oakland on Thursday night, the Warriors could also soon be looking at a critical dissection of their collective achievements, from last season through this one.In the build-them-up-and-tear-them-down culture that passes for talk show and Twitter-disseminated entertainment, you just know that some people will be champing to reconsider the Warriors’ 2015 playoff run, in which New Orleans, Memphis, Houston and most obviously Cleveland were operating with postseason manpower shortages.There will be the predictable chortling from the Old Guy network, all the way back to Oscar Robertson, who revels in dissing the contemporary game in comparison to the classic one, and especially from defenders of the Michael Jordan generation.Following up their franchise’s first title since 1975, the Warriors had the audacity to better the record 72 regular-season victories claimed by Jordan’s Chicago Bulls in 1995-96. Then Curry was unanimously voted M.V.P., a show of perfection Jordan was never afforded.Get the big sports news, highlights and analysis from Times journalists, with distinctive takes on games and some behind-the-scenes surprises, delivered to your inbox every week.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.To a generation of his peers and fans, Jordan is the godfather of all that is historically great, and Curry — fabulous shotmaker that he is — has also been the beneficiary of a sport gone soft. With all due respect, they say, he couldn’t do what he has done in the era of hand-checking.Earlier this season, Isiah Thomas said, “Right now, perimeter defense in the N.B.A. is kind of the worst I’ve ever seen, an absolute joke.” More recently, Gary Payton wondered how it was possible that Curry could be a unanimous M.V.P. when Jordan never was.Charles Barkley, Jordan’s inept golfing partner, weighed in by saying: “People think us old guys hate when we talk about it. It has nothing to do with the Warriors’ greatness, LeBron’s greatness, but I’ve never seen the N.B.A. as bad as it is, and I’ve been saying it the last three or four years.”AdvertisementOf course, that becomes an indirect indictment of the Warriors’ 73 victories, a commentary on the quality of their competition, as if the Jordan era N.B.A. didn’t have teams, a good number of them, not worth watching.Yet the inalterable truth is that the 72-victory Bulls did punctuate their historic regular season by winning a championship over Payton’s Seattle SuperSonics. Kerr knows all about it; he was a contributing member of that Bulls team, and the one a year later, when he made the title-clinching shot, and the last one, too, when Jordan buried that era-ending jumper and the Jazz in Utah.Better than most, Kerr knows the harsh standards by which the Warriors will be judged if they do not rally, even if it was his contractual duty to dismiss the carry-over weight of the 73 wins.“To me, they are separate issues,” he said. “We had a tremendous regular season. Our guys competed every single night and did something nobody’s ever done before, and we’re proud of that.”He added, “In the playoffs, everybody starts 0-0.”And now it is 3-1 for the Thunder, who arguably have the two best players remaining in the playoffs, a field that includes Cleveland’s LeBron James, and at least this version of Curry, the reigning M.V.P.“Long, long way to go,” Curry said.They go back to Oakland for Game 5 on Thursday night, to play for another trip here, to a house of horrors they departed Tuesday night wearing their first consecutive defeats by the combined, astounding sum of 52 points.A version of this article appears in print on May 26, 2016, on Page B11 of the New York edition with the headline: Asterisk Takes Shape.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.See More »