By SETH BERKMANMAY 24, 2016
Nathan Eovaldi and R. A. Dickey share as much in common in pitching style as the musical proclivities of the portly rapper Fat Joe and the aging gray-haired rocker Jon Bon Jovi, who were both in attendance for Tuesday night’s game between the Yankees and the Toronto Blue Jays.Eovaldi’s flair — six-plus innings of shutout ball — won out over Dickey’s fluttering artistry, as the Yankees defeated the Blue Jays, 6-0, at Yankee Stadium.The victory moved the Yankees to 22-22, the first time they have reached .500 since April 14, and extended their winning streak to six games.Carlos Beltran collected two R.B.I. off Dickey, his former Mets teammate, including a booming leadoff home run into the second deck in right field in the fourth.Advertisement“It’s good after the way we started the season,” Beltran said of reaching .500. “There’s no doubt we played horrible the first month.”A key to the Yankees’ turnaround has been Eovaldi (5-2), who improved to 5-0 in his last six starts. Last Wednesday, he shut down the Arizona Diamondbacks, allowing one run on one hit in six innings. Eovaldi, who rears back and scowls before pushing forward to unfurl his fastballs, was even more impressive in neutralizing a more powerful Blue Jays lineup.AdvertisementThe challenges came immediately. Last week, Blue Jays Manager John Gibbons began deploying a lineup often used by Little League coaches to maximize the at-bats for their best hitters. He moved Jose Bautista into the leadoff spot, followed by Josh Donaldson and Edwin Encarnacion. Combined, those three have 30 home runs and 90 R.B.I.Facing Eovaldi’s upper-90s fastballs, the top of the order had the potential to create a hazardous recipe. But Eovaldi allowed the three only one hit, and the Blue Jays two hits over all, while striking out five.“Really impressed,” Yankees Manager Joe Girardi said when asked about Eovaldi’s outing. “To be able to hold that offense down when his stuff wasn’t really sharp the first couple of innings, I thought he did a really nice job.”The Yankees’ sturdy pitching, which has carried them during their improved play over the last week, was a necessity against Dickey. Aside from Beltran’s homer, Dickey, a knuckleballer, gave up only two other hits entering the seventh inning.“You don’t win six in a row without what they’ve done,” Girardi said of his staff. “The rotation is extremely important. Starting pitching is what sustains you, and they’ve got it going.”Get the big sports news, highlights and analysis from Times journalists, with distinctive takes on games and some behind-the-scenes surprises, delivered to your inbox every week.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.As Dickey began to wear down and the Yankees chipped away at the Blue Jays’ bullpen, they were able to pick up two runs in both the seventh and the eighth.AdvertisementThe Blue Jays had prime scoring opportunities in the second and the third against Eovaldi, but they left runners on third base both times. In the third, after Josh Thole walked and Bautista singled, Donaldson laid down a sacrifice to move both into scoring position. But Eovaldi struck out Encarnacion, swirling a splitter into catcher Austin Romine’s mitt, and Michael Saunders flied out.“I think after the third inning, I felt a lot better,” Eovaldi said, adding that he began driving his splitter to the plate to create a sharper angle. “I was able to locate the ball inside and my off-speed got better.”Despite having Dellin Betances warming up in the bullpen, Girardi sent Eovaldi to the mound for the seventh. He walked Troy Tulowitzki and was replaced by Betances, who retired the next three batters.Kirby Yates and Luis Cessa followed and combined to preserve the two-hit shutout.The four insurance runs in the late innings meant that Girardi did not have to use Andrew Miller or Aroldis Chapman.After the game, the Yankees’ clubhouse seemed refreshed. The Yankees had crawled out of an ominous hole, and talked as if they were starting anew almost two months into the season. But, back on even ground, there are still mountains to climb.A version of this article appears in print on May 25, 2016, on Page B9 of the New York edition with the headline: Eovaldi and Yanks Keep Up Their Winning Ways.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.