By VICTOR MATHERNOV. 22, 2016
Oakland Raiders fans got a dose of hope last season when, under a dynamic new coach, Jack Del Rio, their long-moribund team finished at 7-9, a sharp improvement after 4-12, 4-12 and 3-13 seasons. Still, it was their 13th straight year without a trip to the N.F.L. playoffs.Before the season, oddsmakers at Ladbrokes made the Raiders a 40-1 shot to win the Super Bowl, the same as the Jets (3-7) and the Jacksonville Jaguars (2-8).But, defying expectations, the Raiders have taken the league by storm. After Monday night’s 27-20 victory over the Houston Texans in Mexico City, they are 8-2, needing just one win in their final six games for their first winning record since 2002.The Raiders are tied for second with the New England Patriots for the best record in the league, behind the Dallas Cowboys. The Upshot’s computer gives them an 89 percent chance of making the playoffs in the tough A.F.C. West. If the season ended today, they would be the No. 1 seed in the conference and have home-field advantage until the Super Bowl.AdvertisementThe team’s improvement has come mostly because of the offense. This year, the Raiders are seventh in yards per play (eighth in passing and sixth in rushing). Last season’s rankings were 24th, 22nd and 23rd.
                Explore every team's path to the playoffs.            After a poor rookie season, quarterback Derek Carr improved to make the Pro Bowl last year and has taken another step forward this year. He is still not Tom Brady or Russell Wilson, but he is more than competent. His adjusted-yards-per-pass figure is 7.8 (ninth in the N.F.L.), his completion percentage is up, and he has thrown only four interceptions.AdvertisementMuch of the credit goes to the offensive line, which has given Carr the second-lowest sack percentage of any quarterback. Amari Cooper and Michael Crabtree are Carr’s favorite targets, and Latavius Murray has eight rushing touchdowns.The Raiders have achieved their success despite defensive numbers mostly in the bottom half of the league.Del Rio has earned a great deal of the credit for the Raiders’ overall improvement and their aggressive gambling mentality. In a Week 1 upset of the New Orleans Saints, he went for a 2-point conversion late in the game and succeeded, to clinch a 35-34 victory. Many criticized the risky move.
            Good thing ESPN isn't coaching the Raiders https://t.co/X6tB1YlZ4d The Raiders have a challenging end to the season; not one of their six remaining opponents is bad. The games include tough road contests against the two teams that are a game behind them in the West, the Kansas City Chiefs and the Denver Broncos.The Raiders are not dominating their opponents, outscoring them by a total of 29 points, which is low for an 8-2 team. Their victories include wins in regulation by 1, 1 and 3 points, and a 6-point overtime victory. That could be why they are only 16-1 to win the Super Bowl, behind the Patriots, the Seahawks, the Cowboys and the Pittsburgh Steelers.Even if the Raiders make a deep playoff run, or even win it all, the success could be bittersweet for Oakland fans. There is talk that the principal owner Mark Davis will move the team to Las Vegas or Los Angeles. A golden year for the Oakland Raiders may be a last hurrah as well.An article in some editions on Wednesday about the Oakland Raiders’ success this season in the N.F.L. misidentified, in some copies, the team that was beaten by the Raiders, 35-34, during Week 1. It is the New Orleans Saints, not the Seattle Seahawks.A version of this article appears in print on November 23, 2016, on Page B10 of the New York edition with the headline: In a Turnaround, the Raiders  Close In on a Winning Season.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.