By KEN BELSONJULY 11, 2016
New York City F.C., along with the city, Adidas and the U.S. Soccer Foundation, will build 50 junior-sized soccer fields in New York City’s five boroughs over the next five years in a $3 million partnership intended to increase participation in the sport and to promote health and social skills among young people in underserved neighborhoods.On Tuesday, Mayor Bill de Blasio will announce the location of the first eight fields at Millbrook Playground in the South Bronx, where an all-weather synthetic field will replace part of a dilapidated playground. The 50 fields will be built on an array of underused or rundown city property, including existing parks and school playgrounds. The project will eventually reach an estimated 10,000 children, the team and city officials said.The four partners will contribute $750,000 apiece to build the fields. The $3 million will also cover maintenance of the fields and after-school activities based on an existing U.S. Soccer Foundation sports and life skills program.“The city and public have skin in the game, and the private companies have skin in the game, so it’s a way to build bridges throughout our city that is very significant,” said Gabrielle Fialkoff, the director of the Office of Strategic Partnerships, which oversees the Mayor’s Fund to Advance New York City, a nonprofit group that helps children in underserved areas of the city. “When you couple those private resources with the scale and breadth of our city agencies, innovative solutions can happen in a way that public systems can’t do by themselves.”AdvertisementThe partnership was born last year in a meeting of officials from the Mayor’s Fund, which specializes in public-private partnerships, and the U.S. Soccer Foundation, which wanted to build 1,000 soccer fields around the country. The foundation then met New York City F.C., which suggested installing 50 fields in New York, by far the most of any city. The team recruited Adidas, a Major League Soccer sponsor.AdvertisementThe city has identified various unused or dilapidated spaces in parks, public housing projects and schools, 28 percent of which lack dedicated physical fitness space. Besides Millbrook Playground, fields will be installed at the Cypress Hills Houses in Brooklyn, Public School 83 in Manhattan, the Eagle Academy on Staten Island and other locations in the first round of construction.Get the big sports news, highlights and analysis from Times journalists, with distinctive takes on games and some behind-the-scenes surprises, delivered to your inbox every week.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.The new program is being unveiled as New York City F.C. — the city’s newest top-level pro team — has made little public progress in finding a site for its own soccer stadium. The team, which is partly owned by the Yankees, has played its home games at Yankee Stadium in its first two seasons. While the team draws well, the arrangement — which involves the installation and removal of a narrow field when the Yankees are on the road — is not ideal.Jon Patricof, the president of New York City F.C., said the team was continuing its search for a location in the five boroughs. He added that the team’s participation in the partnership with the city was not about attracting new fans, but about a broader goal of having an impact on the community.“For us, this is not about what happens on our match days,” Patricof said. “For us, this is about our commitment to the sport and all the positive things soccer can do for kids and their families.”A version of this article appears in print on July 12, 2016, on Page B11 of the New York edition with the headline: Partnership Will Build Soccer Fields in New York.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.