AdvertisementSupported byGlobal SoccerBy Rob HughesLONDON — When the Portuguese substitute Éder brushed aside the last French defender to strike the winning goal in the European Championships, he exposed just how tired and vulnerable France was at the rear.Éder took his chance in the final on Sunday. And the rest is history.It was noticeable that Laurent Koscielny, the France defender he muscled aside, was weary. He had started the game with his left knee wrapped in bandages. France’s other central defender on Sunday, Samuel Umtiti, was playing only his third game for the national team. Umtiti, 22, lacked the experience to spot the danger and get across to cover for Koscielny.Éder, no youngster himself at 28, took his chance of a lifetime and shot from 25 yards out.France was threadbare at center back because injuries to Raphaël Varane and Jérémy Mathieu ruled the two defenders out before the Euros could even start. It also could not pick Mamadou Sakho, the man known as “The Beast” for his speed and daunting strength.Sakho had defended for France at the 2014 World Cup. But the 6-foot-2 center back for Liverpool was told in late April that he had failed a drug test while playing in a Europa League match against Manchester United in March. He had reportedly tested positive for a fat burner and was given an initial 30-day suspension.Liverpool subsequently lost the Europa League final to Sevilla. France could not take the risk of selecting him. And so it went to the Euros depleted.Last Friday, just 48 hours before the final between France and Portugal, a UEFA panel met in Paris and dismissed the case against Sakho. A London lawyer, Mike Morgan, established that the fat burner, a supplement commonly used by bodybuilders, was not on the World Anti-Doping Agency’s list of prohibited drugs. Sakho, who had been chided about his weight by a top official when he played at his previous club, Paris St.-Germain, missed out on the end of the Premier League season. He might have made a difference for the club in the Europa League final — which gives the winning team a place in the Champions League.After that, Sakho was sitting idle while his French colleagues played through the Euros. He issued a brief but restrained message on Facebook after being informed that the case against him had been dropped. “The truth always comes out in the end!” he wrote. “I can finally express myself and above all it’s important for me to thank all of you for your trust and your support that you have been communicating during those two months and a half!” Liverpool Coach Jürgen Klopp simply told reporters that the “hard time is over for Mama.”But need it have been such a hard, and potentially costly, time for all involved? For Sakho, for his club and for his country?UEFA, the governing body for European soccer, is in somewhat of a state of limbo at the moment. Its president, Michel Platini, was barred from office after the Swiss authorities accused him of improperly receiving a $2 million payment from FIFA and Sepp Blatter, who also is barred from the sport. Platini’s secretary general at UEFA, the Swiss lawyer Gianni Infantino, then switched organizations when he was elected president of FIFA. So while the 24-team, 51-game Euros played out in Platini’s home country — it was very much his own project to expand the European Championships — there were interim leaders at the top of the organization. Infantino was in the Stade de France when the European Cup was handed to Portugal’s captain, Cristiano Ronaldo. Platini was not.And neither was the unfortunate Sakho.Among the torrent of facts and figures released by UEFA before the final was the announcement that of the 1,878 blood, urine and serum samples taken in doping tests since January, all were negative.No one, not even Sakho, was now under suspicion.But last month, when Sakho needed a just decision that might have enabled France to select him, the chief medical and antidoping officer for UEFA, Marc Vouillamoz, made an odd statement to the French sports newspaper L’Équipe: “Some substances cause an automatic suspension, others not. And in this case, the player wished to be suspended temporarily, of his own will, and UEFA accepted his request.” Vouillamoz added, “To my knowledge, the disciplinary committee will decide fairly quickly on the case. Information was taken from experts, documents were passed to the defense of the player. Now the player has the opportunity to speak.”The chance to speak in his defense, but not to play in the defense for his national team, which, in the end, needed someone fit and fresh and ready to step up.Sakho sent his best wishes to the team before the final on Sunday. It lost. And he lost playing time at the prime of his career. And with all the issues surrounding drugs and cheating hanging over so many sports, justice was fudged in soccer these past four months.Advertisement