
On Pro Basketball By                     
 HARVEY ARATON
 
JULY 9, 2016
Now that some of the N.B.A.’s middling (or worse) players are among the richest athletes in professional team sports, the league should summon its inner Bernie Sanders and spare some comparative loose change for its most impoverished.The owners and the players’ union should collectively bargain an agreement that would finally pay a fair working wage to players at the developmental level and, even better, enact much-needed cultural change by disavowing the practice of forcing high school graduates into the clutches of the exploitive N.C.A.A.Dumbfounded or dismayed by the ballooning contracts handed out this summer? You shouldn’t be. The 30 franchises are  obliged to pay 50 percent of designated basketball-related revenue to the league’s players. With $2.66 billion in television riches pouring into the league for each of the next nine years, would critics of these collectively bargained payouts prefer the money remain in the hands of the owners?The cash infusion further enriched owners who had already benefited from wildly escalating franchise values after the league forced Donald Sterling to accept a $2 billion exit prize two years ago for the sale of his Los Angeles Clippers to Steve Ballmer.AdvertisementMonths later, Arn Tellem, a once-prominent player agent turned sports executive, wrote in an article published by the defunct website Grantland, “With its new television deals and record franchise valuations for teams in all markets, the N.B.A. has entered an era of incredible financial prosperity.”AdvertisementBut Tellem wasn’t just commenting on the league’s Fort Knox fortunes, a result of television networks desperate for live programming — and perhaps not positioned to sustain such spending in the long term if viewing habits continue to evolve and the loss of subscribers does not abate.Tellem was making the case that in such an era of financial plenitude, it was time for the N.B.A. to finally cease outsourcing player development to the college game.“If the amateur landscape is being reshaped, then why wait to follow the N.C.A.A.’s lead?” he wrote, referring to litigation in recent years challenging the governing structure of big-time college sports. “The N.B.A. should act preemptively in what, down the line, will be in its own best interests.”Tellem, the vice chairman of Palace Sports & Entertainment, which owns the Detroit Pistons, proceeded to offer a widely read player development manifesto.All teams in the N.B.A. Development League operated this season with payroll budgets of about $170,000. Players were paid within a tiered system that topped out in the $25,000 range for a 50-game schedule (plus playoffs). Those paltry numbers are projected to rise insignificantly next season, with the league growing to 22 teams from 19.As Tellem wrote, “Barely a livable wage — which partly explains why no prospect would ever voluntarily choose the D-League over college.”The issue of minor league pay has become contentious in at least one other sport. Major League Baseball is facing a class-action lawsuit filed in 2014 by 34 plaintiffs — since expanded drastically — in San Francisco, asserting that minor leaguers make less than required by state and federal laws governing minimum wage and overtime. A trial is scheduled for 2017.AdvertisementAccording to N.B.A. people familiar with negotiations designed to avert a rancorous opt-out of the current deal next summer by owners or players, management and labor have mutual interest in raising D-League standards — but, not surprisingly, with different goals in mind.Commissioner Adam Silver is known to want the N.B.A. age limit extended to two years after high school, perhaps in exchange for increased D-League pay. Michele Roberts, the National Basketball Players Association’s executive director — while observing a moratorium on public comment during negotiations — has previously described herself as a firm opponent of any age restrictions.N.B.A. players have never galvanized to challenge the current one-year age restriction. A good number no doubt support it, sharing the league’s conviction that preps-to-pros jumpers diminish the quality of play and push veterans out of the league prematurely.Tellem wasn’t the first to argue that the solution is to make the D-League a more attractive option than college, with each of the 30 N.B.A. teams operating a franchise. He just presented the pertinent details that would, among other things, protect N.B.A. teams that draft high school talent by not counting their D-League salaries against the cap; provide more options and maneuverability for high school players; and compensate the college game by committing high schoolers who do not enter the N.B.A. draft to remain in college for at least two years.After making its debut as more of a career lifeline for players on the way out, the D-League has become a viable N.B.A. feeder. Its teams are allowed to sign high school graduates, but, as Tellem wrote, who would choose such woeful compensation over a packed campus arena at Kentucky or Duke?Get the big sports news, highlights and analysis from Times journalists, with distinctive takes on games and some behind-the-scenes surprises, delivered to your inbox every week.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.The age limit imposed in 2006 gave birth to the college game’s one-and-done era, in which the teenage elite commit for one season, becoming pretend students whose only financially prudent alternative is playing abroad.Silver’s predecessor, David Stern, often acknowledged that the culture of the college game was objectionable at best. To their credit, Stern and Silver have never stooped to a once common and paternalistic contention that a year or two at Slam Dunk State was a preferred social or academic pathway to young adulthood — a rationale seldom mouthed in sports more populated by whites.The status quo of having players pitched to the public during March Madness and having a bridge year or two in college for maturity and evaluation has been better for N.B.A. business, they believed.AdvertisementBut in an interview last season, Malcolm Turner, the D-League’s president, said: “From a development standpoint, the feedback I hear from N.B.A. coaches and general managers is that the college game is very different from the N.B.A. game. So you can argue that the D-League is even more important today to prepare young players because it is N.B.A.-style coaching, N.B.A.-type training.”If the D-League offered salaries even somewhat representative of the N.B.A.’s growing prosperity, how many 18-year-olds would suddenly lose the phone number of Kentucky Coach John Calipari?In an interview last year, Silver said he could envision increased D-League pay, although the figure he hypothetically suggested, $50,000, was only the minimum proposed by Tellem, who also imagined $2 million team budgets, excluding first-round picks who might apprentice in what would become a true minor league.The owners could demand to have the D-League salary budget come out of the players’ cut. The players could bargain for a stake in potential profits generated from enhanced interest and revenues.The college game would lose star power, but that’s the problem of Calipari and company. The players would deservedly be positioned to finally circumvent N.C.A.A. chicanery, and those not destined to make it to the big stage would at least get paid decent money until their dreams were competitively snuffed out.“The time is right to develop a legitimate minor league that protects younger players, nurtures and cultivates future stars, and works in the N.B.A.’s best interests,” Tellem wrote.After the recent orgy of free-agent spending, who would argue that the league can’t afford it?A version of this article appears in print on July 10, 2016, on Page SP9 of the New York edition with the headline: N.B.A. Can Afford to Invest Much More in Its Future.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.See More »