AdvertisementSupported byBy Raphael MinderMADRID — Among Barcelona’s roster of international superstars, the team has long singled out Lionel Messi for special care. But after Barcelona began an online campaign in support of Messi after he was sentenced in a tax fraud case, many in Spain are asking just how far a club should go to support its best player.The debate began almost immediately after Barcelona announced its “We Are All Leo Messi” campaign on Saturday. Social media reaction was swift on both sides, and top government officials joined the chorus of critics this week. On Tuesday, Miguel Cardenal, president of the High Council for Sport, the government agency that oversees sports in Spain, described Barcelona’s public campaign as “completely wrong.” Cardenal told reporters that Spain had laws that allowed Messi to appeal such a ruling — which the player plans to do — without requiring extra support from his club team, especially one with a global profile as large as Barcelona’s.“Messi should be satisfied with living in a country with the advanced system of protection that we have,” Cardenal said.As part of Barcelona’s campaign to support Messi, the club asked fans to show solidarity by posting photos online of themselves with their hands open. Josep Maria Bartomeu, the team’s president, posted his own message on Twitter in which he addressed his superstar: “Leo, those who attack you are attacking Barça and its history. We’ll defend you to the end. Together forever!” Barcelona’s campaign was in response to a court ruling that sentenced Messi and his father to a largely symbolic 21 months in prison for failing to disclose to Spain’s tax authorities some of his advertising contracts. Lawyers for Messi and his father, Jorge, have said that the men will appeal the sentences, which in any case are almost certainly not going to result in their imprisonment as the sentencing was below the two-year threshold set by Spanish law for first-time tax offenders to enter prison. Both men were also fined.The club has defended its campaign by insisting that the sentence against Messi was “unjust.” Amid dozens of high-profile financial fraud and corruption cases in Spain, Barcelona’s active support for Messi has infuriated those struggling to collect Spanish taxes.Carlos Cruzado, president of Gestha, an association of tax inspectors, said in a statement on Tuesday that the club and its star player should have just accepted the sentence and closed this chapter. Instead, Barcelona’s campaign is “dismantling the pedagogic work that should be done to make citizens more conscious” of their tax obligations, Cruzado said. The tax inspectors also argued that Messi, as a superstar, should be setting an example for the public, and that Barcelona should be reminding its followers that they are all taxpayers.Predictably, one of the responses to Barcelona’s crusade has been the start of an “I Am Not Leo Messi” campaign online.The sentencing in the case came shortly after Messi announced his retirement from international soccer after he missed a penalty kick in Argentina’s shootout loss to Chile in the final of the Copa América Centenario.Messi, 29, left Argentina as a teenager to join Barcelona’s youth training academy. Although he has lost four major finals with his national team, he has one of the greatest club records in soccer history in his career at Barcelona. This year, Barcelona completed another domestic double, winning the Spanish league title and the top domestic cup competition, the Copa del Rey, but the team failed to defend its title in the Champions League.Messi has repeatedly denied wrongdoing in the tax case, saying in court that he had no knowledge of his financial affairs. In 2013, Messi and his father made a voluntary additional tax payment of 5 million euros (about $5.5 million) to cover the unpaid taxes as well as interest charges shortly after Messi’s advertising deals were placed under formal court investigation.Advertisement