By REBECCA R. RUIZJULY 1, 2016
The woman who helped bring about the global ban of Russia’s track and field team — prompting President Vladimir V. Putin to call her “Judas” for having betrayed the country — may be the only Russian athlete running in the Summer Olympics next month.World track and field officials ruled on Friday that Yuliya Stepanova, a middle-distance runner who blew the whistle on widespread doping in Russia two years ago, should be allowed to compete in Rio de Janeiro.The final decision on Ms. Stepanova’s eligibility now lies with the International Olympic Committee. If Olympic officials permit her to participate, it is unclear whether she will represent Russia or compete under a neutral flag, as track and field’s governing body has recommended.Russian sports officials have said they will not name Ms. Stepanova, an 800-meter runner, to the country’s Olympic team.AdvertisementMs. Stepanova and her husband, Vitaly Stepanov, who worked for Russia’s antidoping agency from 2008 to 2011, spoke out in 2014 about a sophisticated, state-run doping system within Russia. The couple’s detailed accusations set off a series of investigations and additional whistle-blower accounts that have caused turmoil in global sports.AdvertisementRussian sports officials have apologized for general doping problems while denying government involvement and attributing the intense scrutiny of Russian athletes to international politics.The International Association of Athletics Federations, which oversees track and field globally, announced the decision to allow Ms. Stepanova to compete two weeks after it had voted to bar Russian track and field athletes from the Rio Games, ruling that the country had not done enough to restore confidence in the integrity of its athletes.“Yuliya’s thankful the I.A.A.F. looked at her case and decided that she deserves to compete again,” Mr. Stepanov said by phone. “That was always the hope.”In instituting the ban on Russian athletes, track officials left what they described as a “very tiny crack in the door” — a chance for athletes who had been living outside Russia and subjected to rigorous drug testing to petition to compete.Rune Andersen, who leads the I.A.A.F. task force that is monitoring Russia, has said that the loophole was created on the advice of lawyers, to insulate the ban from court challenges. (Russian sports officials have suggested that they plan to appeal the ban of the country’s athletes with the Court of Arbitration for Sport in Switzerland.)The I.A.A.F. said in a statement that as of Friday, it had received 80 applications from Russian track and field athletes seeking to compete. The announcement about Ms. Stepanova did not necessarily reflect the final number of applicants who may be approved.Athletes have until Monday to apply for an exemption. All rulings will be made by July 18, when Olympic entry lists are scheduled to be completed. The Rio Games open on Aug. 5.AdvertisementMs. Stepanova, who is also known by her maiden name, Rusanova, was vocal about wanting to run in Rio well before the I.A.A.F. ban was announced, and global sports officials had been expected to support her appeal.“Any individual athlete who has made an extraordinary contribution to the fight against doping in sport should also be able to apply,” Mr. Andersen told the I.A.A.F. leadership last month. “In particular, Yuliya Stepanova’s case should be considered favorably.”Get the big sports news, highlights and analysis from Times journalists, with distinctive takes on games and some behind-the-scenes surprises, delivered to your inbox every week.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.The I.A.A.F. statement said that European Athletics officials had been informed of Ms. Stepanova’s exemption from the ban, clearing the way for her to compete in the European track and field championships in Amsterdam, which start Wednesday.Together with her husband, Ms. Stepanova went public in 2014 with allegations of a government-sponsored Russian doping program. She told the German public broadcaster ARD that she had been extorted and pressured to take drugs, and she provided recordings suggesting that she was far from alone.The Stepanovs left Russia before Stepanova’s allegations were broadcast, and they are now living in the United States.The I.A.A.F. has been firm in its assertions that any Russian athletes who are deemed exempt from the ban should compete under a neutral flag. The I.O.C., however, has said that Russian athletes whose appeals are successful should compete for the Russian team.Thomas Bach, the president of the I.O.C., has also emphasized that he respects the sovereignty of the I.A.A.F. over track and field, saying that no national government will influence the I.O.C.’s final ruling.In the wake of the allegations made by the Stepanovs and other whistle-blowers, sports officials have called for better policies for the reporting and investigation of possible wrongdoing. The World Anti-Doping Agency, the regulator of doping in sports, has been criticized for taking years to respond to tips that dated to 2010; the agency has attributed its delay to a lack of resources and proper policies.On Friday, WADA announced that a new director general, Olivier Niggli, had taken office. Mr. Niggli, who worked as a lawyer for the agency starting in 2002, was among the WADA employees who met with Mr. Stepanov to hear his allegations in 2011, years before he and Ms. Stepanova turned to the news media with their story and prompted WADA to commission an independent investigation.AdvertisementIn a statement Friday, Mr. Niggli said that he was focused on “bolstering our investigative work and implementing a new whistle-blower program” by November.A version of this article appears in print on July 2, 2016, on Page D1 of the New York edition with the headline: Whistle-Blower Gets Reprieve From Doping Ban.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.