By THE ASSOCIATED PRESSNOV. 22, 2016
MEXICO CITY — Derek Carr woke up a struggling Oakland offense by throwing two touchdown passes in the fourth quarter as the Raiders capped a successful trip to Mexico with a 27-20 victory over the Houston Texans on Monday night.Oakland had been held to 120 yards through three quarters, with the running game going nowhere and Carr finding few open receivers downfield. But that suddenly changed in the fourth quarter, and the Raiders won a fourth straight game for the first time since 2002.With the star receiver Amari Cooper lined up in the backfield, Carr found fullback Jamize Olawale open for a 75-yard catch and run that tied the score at 20-20.Then Oakland took advantage of two questionable spots by the officials to take over on downs at the 15. The Raiders drove 85 yards in five plays to take the lead on a 35-yard pass to Cooper.AdvertisementThat set off loud celebrations from the pro-Raiders crowd of 76,743 in the second regular-season game ever played in Mexico. What was originally scheduled as an Oakland home game featured Raiders music during stoppages and frequent “Rai-ders!” chants. Tommie Smith lit the Al Davis torch in a memorable return to Mexico City nearly a half-century after his black-power salute at the 1968 Olympics.Get the big sports news, highlights and analysis from Times journalists, with distinctive takes on games and some behind-the-scenes surprises, delivered to your inbox every week.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.While the atmosphere was electric, the field was a bit slippery, leading to some falls, and the high elevation — 7,380 feet above sea level — was a factor. The Raiders needed to use a timeout on defense in the fourth to catch their breath, and receiver Michael Crabtree was seen gasping for breath at one point.AdvertisementThe two spots that upset the Texans in the fourth quarter came on third and fourth down on the drive before Oakland went ahead.On third-and-2, Lamar Miller was stopped just short of the first down, even though Houston believed he had gotten it. Coach Bill O’Brien went for it on fourth down, but Akeem Hunt was stopped about an inch short, and the play stood after a replay challenge.Houston quarterback Brock Osweiler had to deal with an unusual distraction during the game as a fan with a green laser pointer frequently shined it on him as he dropped back to pass in an act seen often in soccer games played here.It was not the only soccer tradition employed by fans at the game. They also used a homophobic chant on kickoffs. Mexico’s soccer federation has been punished by FIFA when the chant is used during World Cup qualifiers.With an extra point in the second quarter, Oakland’s Sebastian Janikowski scored a point in his third country, having previously done so in the United States and Britain.Joe Nedney is the only other player to score in Mexico, the United States and Britain. Five other players have scored in Canada, Britain and the United States: running back Steven Jackson and the kickers Robbie Gould, Matt Bryant, Dan Carpenter and Jay Feely.A version of this article appears in print on November 22, 2016, on Page B10 of the New York edition with the headline: Raiders Pull Away From Texans in Mexico.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.