

 Scott Cacciola
 

ON PRO BASKETBALL
MARCH 12, 2016
OAKLAND, Calif. — Damian Lillard tried to insulate himself from any potential distractions before the Portland Trail Blazers faced the Golden State Warriors on Friday night. Lillard, who grew up in Oakland, remained with his teammates in San Francisco before they made the trip over the bridge for the game.At the same time, Lillard bought about 40 tickets for friends and relatives so they could take in the festivities at Oracle Arena. Warriors tickets are not cheap these days, but Lillard was willing to make the investment. He expected an exciting evening of basketball.“I make pretty good money,” he said before the game. “I think I can afford some tickets once a year.”Lillard has excelled for the Trail Blazers, putting them firmly in the playoff picture; at the start of the season, few pundits expected them to even flirt with respectability. He has had a lot of good games — great games, in fact. He has established himself as one of the most dynamic guards in the N.B.A.AdvertisementBut the Warriors have made a habit of turning solid teams into rubble, and for two hours here, Lillard got another reminder of the behemoth that towers over the Western Conference.“They’re a championship team, and they played like it,” Lillard said after the Warriors throttled the Trail Blazers, 128-112, for their 47th straight home victory.The Warriors, who improved to 58-6 ahead of their game Saturday night against the Phoenix Suns, are offering nightly clinics. It was clear to Lillard that his challenge would be daunting when Steph Curry and Klay Thompson combined to go 8 of 12 from 3-point range — in the first quarter. The Warriors scored 81 points in the first half. They led by as many as 32.Lillard, 25, has earned oodles of respect this season while leading the Trail Blazers, and his meetings with Curry, 27, have the potential to be one of the league’s more intriguing subplots for years to come. Andre Iguodala of the Warriors described them as “new-age point guards,” both capable of dominating games from the 3-point line and with dazzling drives.“The N.B.A. is made up of great personal matchups,” the Warriors’ Draymond Green said, “and I think that’s a really good one.”AdvertisementLillard sounded edgy before the game, drawing stimulation from the teams’ most recent meeting — a 32-point win by Portland on Feb. 19. Lillard was sensational that night, scoring 51 points while shooting 18 of 28 from the field. Afterward, Steve Kerr, the coach of the Warriors, observed that Lillard “looked like Steph Curry out there.”Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.Lillard revealed Friday that he did not appreciate those comments. He does not like being compared to anyone, especially Curry — an indication, perhaps, of their brewing rivalry.“What he’s doing with this team is special,” Lillard said of Curry. “But I’m not impersonating anyone, you know what I mean? I’m just being myself, and I want to be able to do my job well without someone saying, ‘Oh, he’s doing his best impersonation of this guy.’ ”Lillard added, “I’m my own person.”Kerr said he meant no offense. He was simply trying to praise the way in which Lillard had eviscerated the Warriors by burying shots against a series of hapless defenders from 40 feet — which, to be fair, is something that Curry does with freakish regularity. It was intended as a compliment.“So I didn’t mean anything by it,” Kerr said. “He’s a great player. He should have been an All-Star. I voted for him, for the record.”Motivation is a funny thing. Athletes are always looking for fuel, no matter how innocuous the material might appear. Lillard has plenty of it, including the All-Star snub — a gross oversight. Then there is the considerable shadow cast by Curry, whom Lillard described as the best point guard in the league.“Dame’s an amazing talent, and he obviously has a chip on his shoulder for a lot of different reasons,” Curry said. “He feeds off of that, and it’s working. I’m sure he wants to create his own identity in who he is as a player and make noise that way. So I understand where he’s coming from, for sure.”But if Lillard had lingering business ahead of Friday’s game, so did the Warriors. They do not lose often, and they almost never get blown out. So the memory of their debacle in Portland was fresh to them when they arrived at the arena.“Anytime you lose to a team, you don’t want it to happen again,” said Curry, who collected 34 points and made 7 3-pointers on a ho-hum night for him.Lillard finished with 17 points and 5 assists while shooting 5 of 19 from the field, a subpar effort. It was a homecoming to forget, except that he will probably remember all of it — each missed shot and every errant pass, the fire likely to smolder until the Trail Blazers return to Oracle Arena on April 3.A version of this article appears in print on March 13, 2016, on Page SP5 of the New York edition with the headline: Curry vs. Lillard Has the Makings of an Epic Rivalry.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.See More »