By JERRY GARRETTNOV. 20, 2016
HOMESTEAD, Fla. — Jimmie Johnson pulled off an improbable last-place-to-first-place drive in Sunday’s Nascar Sprint Cup season finale at Homestead-Miami Speedway to claim a record-tying seventh series championship.Johnson, 41, took his first lead of the Ford EcoBoost 400 on the final restart, a two-lap overtime sprint to the checkered flag, and finished several lengths in front of Kyle Larson. Kevin Harvick was third, followed by the championship contender Joey Logano.“Come on, champ, one last perfect lap,” Johnson’s crew chief, Chad Knaus, said, coaching him over the radio on the final lap.After Johnson crossed the line, Knaus, who has been his crew chief for all seven titles, told him: “I am so proud of you. You’re a good man, a great champion, and now a seven-time champion.”AdvertisementJohnson’s seventh title tied Richard Petty and Dale Earnhardt for the most in Nascar’s 68-year history.Advertisement“I thought there was no way on earth this race was going to come to us,” said Johnson, who had been relegated to the back of the field for the start after Nascar officials found a technical issue on his Chevrolet in a prerace inspection.Johnson quickly made up most of the deficit, passing 34 cars in the first 50 laps of the 267-lap scheduled distance. But then his progress stopped, and he spent the rest of the race trying to close the gap on the other three drivers, Carl Edwards, Kyle Busch and Logano, who all entered the race with a chance to win the championship.Although Larson and Harvick seemed to have the cars to beat in the race, Edwards was consistently fastest of the four contenders. But he triggered a fiery nine-car pileup on a restart with 10 laps to go, when he moved to block Logano.“That was just good hard racing, and it was my deal, I own it,” Edwards said afterward. “I had to block Joey to have any chance at winning the championship. I couldn’t have gone to bed tonight if I had given up that lane to him.”Logano, whose car was slightly damaged in the melee, agreed that it was unavoidable contact in that situation.“He had to block me, or I would have passed him for sure,” Logano said. “That was the only thing he could do in that situation.”Get the big sports news, highlights and analysis from Times journalists, with distinctive takes on games and some behind-the-scenes surprises, delivered to your inbox every week.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.Logano was able to get his car repaired after the ensuing red-flag race stoppage, and he made another run for the front when the race restarted. But his progress was thwarted when Ricky Stenhouse spun out and triggered another yellow-flag slowdown for the field.AdvertisementJohnson had worked his way unscathed through the Edwards-Logano jumble to third. Then he moved to second on the next restart. And when the green flag waved for the final time, he dived inside Larson and grabbed the lead.“Jimmie just willed himself to the front,” said Dale Earnhardt Jr., who visited Johnson in victory lane. “I told him I wished my dad was here to shake his hand, because he would have said Jimmie has put himself in the conversation for the best driver ever.”The victory was Johnson’s fifth of the season and the 80th in his career, which began in 2001, the year Earnhardt Sr. was killed in a crash. Johnson passed Earnhardt, at 76 wins, for seventh on the career list earlier this year. Petty, whose career started in 1958 and continued to 1992, leads all drivers with 200 victories.Nascar issued a congratulatory statement from Petty, but his son Kyle said Petty had departed the track earlier.“My dad isn’t the type to give out many compliments,” Kyle Petty said. “But he said, after Jimmie won five championships in a row, back in 2006 to 2010, that he was just blown away but that accomplishment. This just adds to that.”Johnson had scored his sixth championship in 2013 but had been frustrated in attempts to put himself in position for another one under Nascar’s latest playoff format.Johnson, who grew up in El Cajon, Calif., as a part of the robust desert racing community centered there, said he never expected a career in Nascar stock car racing, much less his success in the series.“I wouldn’t be here without so many people believing in me and giving me this chance, from my dirt days,” said Johnson, whose career started at age 5 on pee wee motorcycles.AdvertisementJeff Gordon helped him get a ride with Rick Hendrick’s team. Johnson quickly not only proved himself, but he also eclipsed Gordon, who had won four titles before Johnson joining the team. Gordon would win no more.“What Jimmie has accomplished is really quite special,” Gordon said after congratulating Johnson. “I take my hat off to him. I was glad I was here to see this. It was a historic night.”When Tony Stewart, the three-time champion who retired after the race, went to congratulate Johnson, Johnson gave Stewart his helmet.“That was special to me,” said Stewart, who finished 22nd in the final race of his career. “It will definitely go into my collection.”A version of this article appears in print on November 21, 2016, on Page D6 of the New York edition with the headline: Jimmie Johnson Ties Mark With Seventh Title.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.