By ALLAN KREDAMARCH 11, 2016
SYOSSET, N.Y. —  Islanders goaltender Thomas Greiss and his wife, Brittney, were running errands in his enormous truck during a late January snowstorm that ultimately canceled the team’s home game that night against Philadelphia.Greiss decided to take his wintry outing a step further, using a towrope to extricate several less-prepared and potentially stranded motorists out in the windswept mess. None of them apparently realized their helper was the Islanders goaltender, signed last summer as a free agent to back up Jaroslav Halak, in what may have been one of Garth Snow’s savviest moves in his decade as general manager.But with Halak — who had a career high in victories last season as the Islanders finished with 101 points — very likely to miss at least the next six weeks with a lower-body injury, Greiss may not be anonymous much longer. He treats his on-ice role in the same easygoing manner in which he hastened to aid neighbors in distress.“It was no big deal to help people; it took me five minutes,” said the soft-spoken Greiss, a native of Fussen, Germany. “It’s never nice to be stuck. I was just happy to get them back on the road.”AdvertisementThe Islanders, who were 2 points behind the second-place Rangers with two games in hand heading into Saturday’s contest at Boston, will need a similarly unflustered approach from him as their starting goaltender. They spoke confidently of the team’s immediate challenge with Greiss in net, backed up by the rookie Jean-Francois Berube, who has started two games this season.Advertisement“Thomas has played very well,” said John Tavares, the team’s captain. “Obviously, we miss Jaro and he’s a big part of our team, but we remain confident in our goaltenders. It’s a strength for us.”Greiss, 30, was a third-round draft pick in 2004 by the San Jose Sharks who played exclusively in Germany before joining the Sharks’ A.H.L. team in Worcester, Mass., in 2006. After parts of four seasons with the Sharks, Greiss started 20 games two seasons ago for the Phoenix Coyotes. Last season, he was Marc-Andre Fleury’s understudy with the Pittsburgh Penguins, registering nine wins.This season, the 6-foot-1 Greiss already had a career-high 18 victories heading into the weekend and was among the league leaders in save percentage. His success with the Islanders has not surprised Tavares.“I realized how good Thomas was when we started practicing in training camp,” Tavares said. “He’s a big dude with an ability to be quick, and he has that elastic type of movement. It never seems like he’s out of the play.”Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.Greiss has been such a positive revelation that there is no discernible sense of panic among the Islanders as they head into a stretch run of 17 games over four weeks.“I’ve been on teams where the backup can’t carry that much of a load, but Thomas has been a blessing for us,” right wing Cal Clutterbuck said. “Shooting against him in practice all the time, he’s hard to score on.”Greiss takes praise in stride. Having logged more games in the A.H.L. than the N.H.L., he surely knows that work ethic and determination are essential as pressure increases for a franchise that has not won a playoff series since 1993.“I’m always calm, trying to stay relaxed,” he said. “I just want to play my game.”This straightforward outlook heartens Islanders Coach Jack Capuano, who appreciates players who quietly put in necessary and extra effort behind the scenes.Advertisement“For me, it’s his work ethic and battle level, which for a goalie can go unrecognized,” Capuano said. “I see him in the gym constantly before practice; plus there’s the attention he gives to video with the coaches.”Capuano accepts that part of this season’s script has yet to be written as the Islanders try to secure home ice in the opening round of the playoffs for a series that could pit them against the Rangers.“We’re in for a fight,” he said. “This is new territory for Thomas. We’ll see how it goes, and I’m hoping he will get rewarded for the way he works and his attention to detail.”Greiss also brings a critical team-bonding element that teammates cite, his dry wit.“He’s a funny guy,” Clutterbuck said. “A lot of times, goalies keep to themselves and can be a bit oddballish, but he’s right in there. He’s a good guy to have around, for sure.”A version of this article appears in print on March 13, 2016, on Page SP7 of the New York edition with the headline: Calmly Coming to the Islanders’ Rescue.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.