By MIKE VORKUNOVNOV. 20, 2016
The Knicks came together Saturday for a team meeting, which offered them an opportunity to air their grievances. Although they had played only 12 games, their patchy start had left them in need of introspection.So over the course of about an hour, the Knicks talked about how they wanted the season to go and about what they wanted changed. Attendees said that every member of the team was included in the meeting, with players, coaches and even the team president, Phil Jackson, participating — although Jackson was present for only part of the discussion and, uncharacteristically, did not speak.The results, forward Carmelo Anthony said, were a catharsis and a more empowered roster. Anthony declined to offer specifics, but he insisted that the meeting had done its job by allowing the players to share their frustrations.“It comes a point in time throughout the season where you need to kind of re-evaluate things and step out of the situation,” Anthony said, “and look into the situation and see where we can be better, what we can do better, look in the mirror at each other, at yourself, and see the things we can improve on.”AdvertisementThat the Knicks followed up with a victory, perhaps their most impressive of the season, could have been coincidence or correlation. Regardless, they beat the Atlanta Hawks, one of the Eastern Conference’s best teams, by 104-94 at Madison Square Garden on Sunday, putting together the kind of defensive performance that had been a rarity for them even as they played without center Joakim Noah, who was a late scratch because of an illness.AdvertisementAnthony, with a game-high 31 points, shouldered the scoring burden. He was a firecracker, taking the reins of the offense, hitting 12 of 22 shots from the field and helping the Knicks rebound from a woeful loss to the Washington Wizards on Thursday.“I don’t want to say we won today because of the meeting,” Anthony said. “But you clear the air like that and guys speak out and talk and they don’t have to hold it in, they don’t feel pressured in an open forum. Guys spoke, and everybody responded to it well.”Get the big sports news, highlights and analysis from Times journalists, with distinctive takes on games and some behind-the-scenes surprises, delivered to your inbox every week.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.Regardless of their motivation, the Knicks, one of the worst defensive teams in the N.B.A., played with a verve they had not shown often, hardly seeming to miss Noah. The Hawks, who are averaging nearly 106 points a game this season, looked unnerved. They were held to 40 percent shooting from the field and hit just 6 of 21 3-point attempts.Dwight Howard provided a visage of their dissatisfaction. At one point, he seemed to hit Knicks center Willy Hernangomez out of irritation.Although Howard, the Hawks’ muscular center, scored 18 points and grabbed 18 rebounds, the Knicks kept him in check for most of the afternoon. Kyle O’Quinn was an energetic replacement for Noah in the starting lineup, disrupting Howard as they banged bodies. O’Quinn finished with 8 points and 8 rebounds in 17 minutes, most of them in the first quarter, as he frenetically defended Howard and the Hawks’ pick-and-roll.Hernangomez also stepped into a larger role, recording 8 points and 7 rebounds while playing a career-high 29 minutes. At 6 feet 11 inches and 240 pounds, he was a physical nuisance for Howard.Even Marshall Plumlee, making his N.B.A. debut, gave the Knicks five useful minutes.He had woken up at about 10 a.m. Sunday to a phone call with the news that he was being promoted from the Knicks’ franchise in the N.B.A. Development League, the Westchester Knicks. After hopping aboard a commuter train from White Plains to Grand Central Terminal, Plumlee jumped into a cab and paid his driver $60 to run a red light in an effort to speed his trip to the Garden, with the game set to begin at noon.AdvertisementStymied by traffic, Plumlee eventually left the cab and ran the final stretch to the arena, arriving midway through the first quarter.Although his commute was a slapstick series of events, it also served as a symbol of the Knicks’ persistence. Buoyed by their meeting, they walloped the Hawks with an efficiency that has been missing too often this season. The Knicks’ regular failings — defensive lapses and problems with the shape and direction of their offense — appeared worked out, at least for the day.“As you can see, it was a different focus; it was a different mind-set,” Anthony said. “It was a different energy that we approached the game with today.”A version of this article appears in print on November 21, 2016, on Page D3 of the New York edition with the headline: Knicks Mend Fences and Patch Up Problems.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.