AdvertisementSupported byThunder 118, Warriors 94 | Oklahoma City leads series, 3-1By Harvey AratonOKLAHOMA CITY — The Golden State Warriors came here with a well-earned reputation as cool and collected, the greatest basketball show on earth.The defending league champions and the most credentialed regular-season team in N.B.A. history, with 73 victories, the Warriors left Chesapeake Energy Arena late Tuesday night on the brink of elimination, battered in successive games by an Oklahoma City Thunder team that played like a tornado.With a convincing 118-94 Game 4 victory, the Thunder took a three-games-to-one lead in the Western Conference finals, setting up a close-out game Thursday night in Oakland, Calif.Russell Westbrook played more like the league’s most valuable player than Stephen Curry, who won the award this season and last. Westbrook riddled the Warriors’ defense for 36 points and 11 assists, with 11 rebounds for a triple-double. Kevin Durant added 26 points and 11 rebounds for the Thunder.“He just plays with incredible passion,” Thunder Coach Billy Donovan said of Westbrook. “He’s got such great force and great will, and he’s also a really, really high basketball I.Q. player.”Westbrook said: “I know that my energy and aggression can impact the game. My energy was good tonight. I was just using my size to get to the basket and create some havoc.”Curry endured a 6-for-20 shooting night, with six turnovers. Klay Thompson had 26 points to lead the Warriors, who finished with 21 turnovers.“This is probably the longest team in the league that we’re facing, and we are continuing to try to throw passes over the top of their outstretched arms,” Warriors Coach Steve Kerr said of the turnovers. “It’s probably not a great idea.”Most satisfying for the Thunder and their raucous fans was Draymond Green’s continued poor play — he shot 1 for 7 and had six turnovers — after the N.B.A. did not suspend him for his kick of Steven Adams’s groin in Game 3.“The league is pro-business — he’s one of the best players,” Durant said, suggesting the league was not going to meddle too much in its marquee series. “We’re not upset about it; that’s just how it goes.”Given time to sleep on the N.B.A.’s decision to punish but not suspend him, Green insisted he would not become tentative or change the essential character of his game.“I’m never going to be careful — I’m an emotional player,” he said before Game 4.He was not being defiant, or flippant, saying that the Warriors needed all the passion they could muster against a Thunder team brimming with talent and growing in confidence.Green at least was a man of his word. On the Thunder’s first possession, Adams grabbed an offensive rebound, backed into the lane against Andrew Bogut and was hacked by Green, helping out from the weak side.But for all of Green’s promises of a new night, a renewed aggression, it was Adams who had a far greater impact on a first half that looked strikingly familiar to the start to Sunday’s Game 3.For the second straight game, Adams, switching out to defend Curry on the perimeter, deflected one of Curry’s pull-up 3-pointers, a further demonstration of the agility of Adams, a 7-foot New Zealander. It also signaled a nightmarish half for Curry, who missed 10 of 14 shots, turned the ball over three times and added to the speculation that he is not entirely healthy.“He’s not injured,” Kerr said. “He just had a lousy night. It happens, even to the best players in the world.”Curry said: “It’s a terrible night to have that happen. It’s a terrible feeling not stepping up. But the series isn’t over. There’s a long way to go. Got to protect home court and try to figure out how to win in this building.”As they did in Game 3, the Thunder sprinted ahead early to a double-digit lead, forcing Kerr to call two timeouts on the way to a 22-8 deficit, the second of which came at the 5-minute-41-second mark and after three straight turnovers led to 8 Thunder points.The Thunder were far from the Durant and Westbrook show, with Serge Ibaka knocking down 6 of his 8 shots and scoring 15 points while Durant and Westbrook were combining for 36.Once again, the Thunder piled up a meaty advantage at the free-throw line, making 21 of 28 — Durant hit all eight of his attempts, and Adams converted 5 of 6 — while the Warriors made 9 of 17. Six of those attempts — and five of the misses — belonged to Festus Ezeli, a backup center getting extended minutes because Bogut had three fouls.Donovan — one win from the N.B.A. finals after making the jump from the college game — took advantage, intentionally putting Ezeli at the line three times just as the game really began to resemble Sunday night’s.It was during the last six minutes of Game 3’s second quarter that the Green-Adams episode ignited the Thunder on a run that provided a 72-47 halftime lead, a burst from which the Warriors never recovered.This time, the Thunder held a 48-40 lead when the first Ezeli foul occurred. He missed both shots, leading to an Andre Roberson put-back basket off a missed Durant jumper. He scored again as Adams, with a no-look pass from inside the lane, found him at the rim for a layup.Flaunting his versatility and increasing influence, Adams hit Roberson again from the key area for another layup.The lead was 69-50 when Curry hit a 3-pointer in the final seconds of the half. But he left enough time on the clock for Westbrook to rise up from 30 feet and nailed a half-ending 3, giving his team 72 points again and a 19-point lead.It was not quite the 25-point hole the Warriors were in Sunday night, but it was still going to require a very different Warriors team in the second half.Unlike Game 3, in which the third-quarter deficit ballooned to 41, Game 4 featured a Warriors push back behind Thompson, with the team getting as close as 80-74 with 4:48 left in the third.But Curry could never put his imprint on the game as desperation led to another defeat and put that record 73-victory season on the brink.Advertisement