AdvertisementSupported byBy Victor MatherAs the free agency period began in the N.B.A., the news arrived early Friday that the Russian free-agent center Timofey Mozgov was leaving the Cleveland Cavaliers to join the Los Angeles Lakers.And multiple news media accounts said his contract would be for four years and $64 million. If confirmed, that would be an average of $16 million a year, more than Stephen Curry will make next season.Yes, Timofey Mozgov, who averaged 6.3 points a game last season and has never averaged more than 11. Timofey Mozgov, who averaged 5.8 minutes and 1.2 points in the playoffs. Timofey Mozgov, who will be 30 next season and 33 when his new contract ends.The contract will bring a sharp raise from the $4.65 million he made last season with the world champion Cavaliers.Though he played a useful role, if not a starring one, in a partial season with Cleveland in 2014-15, Mozgov fell down the rotation last season in a manner befitting a player on the decline, not one about to score a rich payday.In the statistic “box plus-minus,” which sums up all of a player’s contributions, Mozgov ranked 51st among centers last season, behind Nene Hilario, Mike Muscala and Lavoy Allen, among many others. He did finish one spot ahead of Dewayne Dedmon. Other advanced statistics give similar numbers: He was the 39th-ranked center in win shares and 50th in value over replacement player.If you prefer old-fashioned statistics, 106 players outrebounded Mozgov last season, and 224 scored more points.Mozgov is the first player, but by no means the last, to benefit from the rise in the salary cap for the coming season. Stoked by a nine year, $24 billion television deal, the cap will rise sharply, from $70 million to an estimated $94 million. That gives teams plenty of money to throw at journeymen.Mozgov’s $16 million average annual salary will exceed the 2016-17 figures for Draymond Green ($15.3 million), Kyle Lowry ($12 million), Karl-Anthony Towns ($5.9 million) and other valuable players.This rich deal brought disbelief and disdain from many commentators and fans.“It’s funny there are people going, ‘Yeah, that’s the going rate and market for Timofey Mozgov in this climate,’” wrote Sam Vecenie of CBS Sports. “No, it’s not. It’s a bad deal.”It is easy to compare the salaries of sports stars with those of police officers and teachers, and shake one’s head over the injustice of it all.But what about stars of other sports? Mozgov will make more than all but about 20 players in the N.F.L., exceeding the 2015 salaries of Julio Jones, Richard Sherman, J.J. Watt and Tom Brady. He’ll make more than the baseball stars Jake Arrieta and Bryce Harper; more than every player in the N.H.L. and Major League Soccer; and more than any golfer or tennis player made in prize money last year.And other well-compensated entertainers, like movie stars? Even by those standards, Mozgov’s pay is looking pretty sweet. Although Robert Downey Jr. reportedly made more to play Iron Man in the hit “Avengers Age of Ultron,” Mozgov will make more per year than Captain America, Thor or the Hulk earned for that film.Mozgov, who began his career with a 34-game Knicks cameo, before moving on to the Nuggets and the Cavaliers, was a fairly productive pitchman in his time in Cleveland, including an awkward ad for a local taproom.He is unlikely to need to supplement his income in Los Angeles.Advertisement