By KAREN CROUSEJULY 9, 2016
SAN MARTIN, Calif. — On the way to claim her luggage at San Jose International Airport, Gerina Piller passed signs welcoming the gymnasts vying for spots last week on the team that will compete for the United States at the Summer Olympics in Rio de Janeiro. Piller has her sights set on becoming an Olympian by weekend’s end, though she was not in town for the gymnastics trials.Goodness, no. “I’m not flexible at all,” Piller said, laughing. “I cannot even touch my toes.”Piller is an American golfer, ranked 16th in the world. With a top-17 finish at the United States Women’s Open, being played at CordeValle Golf Club, she could climb into the top 15 and secure a berth at Rio. After three rounds, she was tied for 20th, seven strokes off the lead.“It would be a really big deal for me,” Piller said, adding, “To represent your country at an event like that would be pretty awesome.”AdvertisementPiller’s enthusiasm is almost universally shared by her L.P.G.A. peers, contrasting sharply with an epidemic of ennui on the men’s side. On Saturday, Dustin Johnson, the world No. 2, removed himself from consideration for the Olympic teams, which will be set on Monday. Thirteen other players with PGA Tour ties — including Jason Day, the world No. 1, and three Americans besides Johnson — previously withdrew. The men have cited a number of reasons, including the fear of spreading the Zika virus, an infection that can cause birth defects, to their partners who are trying to become pregnant; an endless summer of big tournaments; and an imperative to improve their position in the FedEx Cup standings by playing concurrent PGA Tour events.AdvertisementWhile many top male players have opted out of golf’s return to the Olympics after a 112-year absence, only one woman, Lee-Anne Pace of South Africa, has chosen to forgo the competition in Rio, even though the pool from which the field will be culled is filled with women of childbearing age.When it comes to golf in the Olympics, why are the men unwilling while the women are able? The answer is rooted in the greater exposure — and purses — in men’s golf. Card-carrying members of the PGA Tour are not as desperate for the spotlight provided by the world’s biggest sporting stage to enhance the game and their individual brands.“I would say the PGA Tour, where it’s at now, it’s probably one of the most popular tours on the planet, including the other sports,” said Shanshan Feng, a one-time major winner who will represent China at the Olympics. “I think the L.P.G.A. is not where it’s supposed to be at yet, so the L.P.G.A.’s really trying hard to let people know about us, to see us more on TV, to show them how good we are. Being part of the Olympics, it’s a very great platform to show off.”When they talk about the Summer Games, L.P.G.A. members sound like gymnasts or swimmers, for whom the Olympic gold medal is the ultimate achievement, and not like athletes with five shots at glory in the majors every year. Feng, 26, who became the first major winner from China with her victory in the L.P.G.A. Championship (now the women’s P.G.A. Championship) in 2012, said: “If you ask me, if I have to choose one out of the gold medal at the Olympics or to win a major title, I would say of course I’d choose the gold medal. Because in four years, we have 20 chances to win majors. In four years, we have only one chance to win a gold medal at the Olympics.”In contrast with men’s golf, the women have a two-week break built into their schedule after their fourth major, the Women’s British Open, to accommodate their participation in the Olympics. They will follow the men’s competition in Rio, and play the same course. Playing second fiddle to the men has one advantage that Feng can see. “I believe that if anything will happen, by the time we are there, it is already solved,” she said.The health risks posed by the mosquito-borne Zika virus was a conundrum that Pace, 35, could not resolve. Late last month, she reluctantly removed her name from Olympic consideration, joining her male compatriots Louis Oosthuizen, Charl Schwartzel and Branden Grace on the sideline. Their decisions to back out did not influence hers, Pace said Wednesday as she prepared to play a practice round at CordeValle.“It’s completely based on my health and safety,” Pace said, adding, “I really, really want to have children.”AdvertisementHer L.P.G.A. peers have been “really supportive” of her decision, Pace said. “Everybody understands.”Adam Scott, a former world No. 1, set off the men’s rush away from Rio when he announced that he would forgo the Summer Games because of scheduling concerns. Pace said of her decision, “I hope it doesn’t have the same effect and others follow.”She added: “It’ll be a great Olympic Games. I’m really, really sad to miss it.”Julieta Granada, a one-time L.P.G.A. Tour winner from Paraguay, was selected to carry her country’s flag in the opening ceremony. And the women’s world No. 1, Lydia Ko of New Zealand, is figuratively carrying the torch for golf in the Olympics.Get the big sports news, highlights and analysis from Times journalists, with distinctive takes on games and some behind-the-scenes surprises, delivered to your inbox every week.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.“Just to have this opportunity to represent my country amongst those many other talented athletes is going to be a really cool thing,” she said. “And I think this is a great step forward for the game of golf. I think juniors or fans or people outside of the golfing industry could turn on the TV and learn so much about our players and about the game.”And Ko, who never saw herself as particularly athletic, relishes the chance to compete on the same stage as the fastest and strongest specimens on the planet. “My P.E. teacher always told me thank goodness I’m good at golf, because I wasn’t very good at any other sport,” Ko said.Golf is not guaranteed a spot in the Summer Games after 2020, and the women worry that the men’s reluctance to embrace the Olympics will hurt the sport’s chances of staying in the program.“It would be a shame if we weren’t a part of the Olympics going forward,” said Stacy Lewis, who, with Lexi Thompson, has secured a place on the United States team.“People say that golf shouldn’t be there in the first place,” she added, “but I just think it’s such a cool honor to represent your country in that manner and to be a part of that.”AdvertisementWhile the top male and female golfers occasionally compete on the same courses — CordeValle, for example, has hosted a PGA Tour event — Lewis understands they travel in different circles. Thirty-seven players on the PGA Tour have earned more this season than Ko, the leading women’s money winner, with $1,816,738.“Those guys play for so much money, and I think you kind of get lost in that at times,” she said. “You can’t blame them for being that way. They’re basically bred to be that way, with the amount of money that they play for.”As long as the pay gap exists in men’s and women’s golf, so too will the interest gap in the Olympics.“Winning a gold medal would be up there with winning a major championship to me,” Lewis said, “and that’s the difference of the men versus the women.”A version of this article appears in print on July 10, 2016, on Page SP1 of the New York edition with the headline: Carrying the Torch for Golf Where Men Are Reluctant to Go.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.