By BRAD SPURGEONJULY 8, 2016
It may not be the birthplace of Grand Prix racing — that would be France — but Britain is the spiritual home of the Formula One series, with the first-ever race in the series, the 1950 British Grand Prix, held at the Silverstone racetrack. Over the past 50 years, Britain has gone on to become the manufacturing and business base of the sport.Eight of the 11 Formula One teams are based in England, all within a short drive of the Silverstone circuit, which has hosted most of the country’s Formula One races for the past 66 years and where the British Grand Prix takes place this weekend.But this time, the race comes just two weeks after a majority of Britons voted in favor of pulling their country out of the European Union. And so Formula One is watching anxiously to see how a so-called Brexit might affect this heavily British-based sport.Much of the business activity of the series is carried out in Europe: There are eight races staged in Europe — not counting in Russia and Azerbaijan — which is more than in any other region in the world. For those eight races, each Formula One team crisscrosses borders with fleets of trucks transporting tons of equipment, including not just the racing cars and mechanical and computer equipment, but vast hospitality suites used only in Europe to meet and entertain sponsors and business partners from around the world.AdvertisementAccording to a recent study by the Motorsport Industry Association in Britain, as of 2012 the racing industry had an annual turnover of 9 billion pounds, or about $11.6 billion, with approximately 4,500 companies involved and employing at least 41,000 people. Of those companies, 87 percent export their products or services, and the European Union is the largest exporting region.AdvertisementBut Bernie Ecclestone, Formula One’s commercial promoter, is a Briton who has never hidden his dislike of the European Union and has welcomed a British exit, saying it will not affect the series.“I have been a supporter of this all the way through,” he said after the vote. “I think it’s the best thing. We should be ruling ourselves.”“If we’ve got something to sell, and it’s a good product at the right price — people will buy whether they are Chinese, Italian or German,” Ecclestone added. “People will just get over this and get on with their lives.”Perhaps in terms of his primary task, which is to sell the series to promoters, television companies and sponsors around the world, things may change little if Britain is no longer in the union.But the heart of Formula One is not the sale of its rights. It’s the 11 teams that contest the series and the global industry that has grown up around making the cars. The business of the eight teams based in Britain is certainly going to be affected if Britain leaves the European Union.Formula One would face some of the same challenges as other sports in Britain, such as soccer, including the need for visas and work permits for European Union participants who would now be considered foreign. But a sports series that depends on a specialized industry that builds the world’s most advanced racing cars and constitutes the biggest traveling road show in the world has many other potential challenges, too.At the Austrian Grand Prix last weekend, Toto Wolff, the director of the Mercedes team and the Mercedes motorsports program, quoted his boss, Dieter Zetsche, the chief executive of Daimler, when asked about the situation.Advertisement“Geographically, the country may be an island; politically and economically, it is not,” Zetsche had said after the vote, referring to Britain.Wolff then put it in his own words: “I think that in this day and age, trying to do things on your own is not going to go, in my opinion.”That, in fact, has been the approach of Mercedes in Formula One. The German company bought a British team in 2010 in order to build its racing car in the heart of the sport’s technological center.Since 1958, when Formula One began awarding a constructors’ title to the team that scores the most points in a season — as opposed to the drivers’ title, which goes to the winning driver — all of the constructors’ titles have gone to teams residing in Britain, with the exception of Ferrari, which is based in Italy.Britain is where the expertise is in terms of building winning racing cars, and the area around London and Silverstone, in the Midlands, has developed into a Silicon Valley of motor racing, sometimes called “motorsport valley,” with tens of thousands of jobs related to motorsports having been created over the last 50 years or so. That employment growth has increased exponentially since 1973, when Britain became part of what is now the European Union.The owners of those eight Formula One teams in Britain come from around the world. Only three of the teams have British majority owners; the others are owned by companies from Austria, France, Germany, India and the United States.Days before the Brexit vote on June 23, Ron Dennis, the owner, executive chairman and chief executive of the McLaren Technology Group, which owns the McLaren team, wrote a letter to the editor of The Times of London, warning of negative consequences if the country voted for withdrawal from Europe.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.“This referendum is a choice between the known and the unknown,” Dennis wrote. “The known is contemporary Europe: a diverse but united commercial and cultural powerhouse. The unknown has no model, no measurability and no process. It is undeserving of the word ‘alternative.”’“McLaren is based in the U.K.,” he added. “More than 3,000 families are affected by our fortunes, as are our British suppliers and their employees. Remaining in Europe is fundamental to the prosperity of the McLaren business.”AdvertisementEven with its British roots, the series is a prime example of international cooperation and development within an industry, with teams employing highly skilled international staffers, though most are from Britain or European Union nations.At the Spanish Grand Prix in May, Wolff, an Austrian, declined to comment on the British vote, which he referred to as politics. But last weekend in Austria, he discussed the possible negative effects an eventual British exit would have on staffing at his team, which is owned by a German company but is based in England and relies for some engine development on its parent company in Germany.“It goes in both directions; it is about E.U. people working in the U.K. and whether they get their working permit — so maybe you can get rid of me, over all, because I wouldn’t get a permit — because we have quite a high percentage of Europeans working in Brackley and also working in Brixworth,” Wolff said, referring to the sites of the chassis and engine factories in England.He added that Mercedes was also present in other series besides Formula One, such as the DTM series in Germany, and that these, too, would be affected by a British pullout from Europe.“In our DTM team, we have lots of British people. Will they get the permit? Will we be able to freely move?” he asked. “We haven’t yet discovered all of the potential detrimental effects of that decision.”Some of the problems the teams may now encounter can be seen in the experience of Sauber, one of the three teams not in Britain. Sauber’s home is in Switzerland, which is not in the European Union but has a special relationship with the bloc, something Britain might try to achieve.Sauber is currently in last place in the series and was close to bankruptcy this year. Beat Zehnder, who is in charge of logistics for the team, noted the considerable paperwork that his team has to deal with every time it enters a European Union country.“I can give you some guidelines on working with customs papers if you are not belonging to the E.U.,” he told some of his fellow team managers during a press conference in Austria.AdvertisementThe other two teams that are outside of Britain, Ferrari and Toro Rosso, are headquartered in Italy, a European Union member. Both also have British employees, including key staff members.A fundamental question about the effects of a Brexit is economic. After the global financial crisis of 2008, several car manufacturers left the series. Toyota, BMW, Honda and even Renault — as a manufacturer, but not as an engine provider — sold their teams as they pared their racing budgets.The British automobile industry, the biggest industry in the country, produces 1.59 million cars a year and employs 800,000 people. Toyota, Nissan, Tata and Honda all have factories in England, and Mercedes sells cars there. Britain is also a major market for Renault, BMW, Mercedes, Audi, Volkswagen and Porsche.Britain’s biggest export is automobiles, worth $46 billion annually, according to the Observatory of Economic Complexity, a trade data compiler, and cars are also the largest import, worth $47.3 billion in 2014.In a report released last month, the Society of Motor Manufacturers and Traders said that profits in Britain’s car industry rose 7.3 percent last year, and that 17,000 jobs were created. But it warned that withdrawing from Europe could greatly harm the industry and its sales, as the European Union is the biggest export market for the British automobile industry, for both cars and car parts: Last year, 57.5 percent of Britain’s car exports went to the European Union, the report said.If Britain’s exit from Europe causes a sea change in the British car industry, it could also have consequences for the Formula One series and businesses that are involved in its marketing, as well as for the development of its technology in a concentrated area.The British vote has, however, delivered some immediate rewards for the Formula One teams: The British pound plummeted to a 30-year low after the result. That means the value of the commercial rights rewards to the teams, which is paid in dollars, could rise to £720 million from £640 million.A version of this special report appears in print on July 9, 2016, in The International New York Times.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.See More »