
On Tennis By                     
 CHRISTOPHER CLAREY
 
NOV. 21, 2016
Good things do come to tennis players who wait, as Andy Murray reminded us this month by finally reaching No. 1 at age 29.But Murray’s chase reads like a short story in comparison with Argentina’s longform pursuit of the Davis Cup.The strongest tennis nation never to win the sport’s premier team competition, Argentina first took part in the Cup in 1923 and first reached the finals in 1981 with Guillermo Vilas and Jose Luis Clerc — no love lost between them — falling short against John McEnroe and the Americans in Cincinnati.Argentina returned to the finals in 2006, 2008 and 2011. No other nation in the Cup’s 116-year history has reached four finals without winning, and the latest opportunity for heartache comes this week in Zagreb, Croatia, where an Argentine team featuring Juan Martín del Potro takes on a Croatian team featuring Marin Cilic.Advertisement“They are the favorites,” del Potro said of Croatia before boarding a plane in Argentina.“Favorites” can mean very little in Davis Cup, a pressure chamber in which journeymen can be transformed into leading men, and grown men often end up in tears. Del Potro and the Argentines were favored at home in 2008 when the Spaniards arrived without the injured Rafael Nadal but were still more unified than the infighting Argentine team in an indoor arena that was and remains the loudest place I have covered tennis.AdvertisementThere will be no shortage of decibels this week, either. Croats — dressed in their checkered gear — are particularly passionate about their national teams. Arena Zagreb holds 15,000, and tickets sold out within hours of going on sale.Cilic is delighted that the International Tennis Federation’s tentative plan to stage future Davis Cup finals at neutral venues to help with planning and revenue has not yet been approved.“It’s special to play at home,” Cilic said. “Even if we would have played in Argentina, it would have been an amazing atmosphere. But if this were in neutral ground, if the finals were somewhere like Johannesburg, how many Croats are going to go to the final? I don’t support this idea.”If there is to be change, Cilic prefers the idea of a Final Four and a switch to best-of-three-set matches. He has, like many men before him, played a surplus of tennis down the stretch: having qualified for the ATP World Tour Finals in London, where he was eliminated in the round-robin phase last week.For many, this Davis Cup will feel like an afterthought to the season, coming only a few days after Murray and Novak Djokovic dueled for the year-end No. 1 ranking in London.Get the big sports news, highlights and analysis from Times journalists, with distinctive takes on games and some behind-the-scenes surprises, delivered to your inbox every week.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.But the duel in Zagreb will have its charms, too. Though Cilic, at No. 6, is the only top-10 player involved, the 38th-ranked Del Potro, the ATP’s comeback player of the year, has certainly been doing a convincing imitation of a top-10 player of late, reaching the Olympic final and the United States Open quarterfinals and winning in Stockholm.He and Cilic are the only men to have beaten both Murray and Djokovic this season, and each is acutely aware of what a Davis Cup victory would mean to his country.AdvertisementCroats already know how it feels. Long a part of Yugoslavia, Croatia won the title on its own in 2005. Ivan Ljubicic played the leading role throughout the season, and Mario Ancic won the decisive point in the fifth and last match of the finals in Bratislava, Slovakia.Ancic, whose playing career was cut short by a back injury and the aftereffects of mononucleosis, is now an investment banker in New York with Credit Suisse.“I think there’s just a unique kind of pressure that comes with Davis Cup, especially being part of the fifth match where everything is on your shoulders and there’s no way back from there,” Ancic said in a telephone interview.“Handling that was not easy, but I feel like deep down it’s something every true athlete wants, that responsibility. It’s like shooting penalties in the final of the World Cup or having the final ball in basketball in the final of the Olympics.”It did not hurt that Ancic, then just 21, was playing Michal Mertinak in that fifth match. Mertinak had never been in such a situation before, either, and was only called on because of injuries to other Slovaks. But victory was still particularly sweet.“Hopefully the boys can experience what we experienced in 2005,” Ancic said. “I don’t think we fully understood how big it was until we got home and saw thousands and thousands of people waiting for us in the airport and in Zagreb’s main square.”Both Ancic and Ljubicic are planning to attend the final, along with Croatia’s biggest tennis star: Goran Ivanisevic, the former Wimbledon champion who was on the roster for the 2005 final but did not play.But one member of that 2005 team could still play a major role on court. Ivo Karlovic is now 37 and making his return for the final, four years after he announced he would no longer participate in Davis Cup competition.Croatia certainly needs him with Borna Coric, its 20-year-old star of the future, in uncertain form after knee surgery in September. Karlovic, with his huge frame, intimidating serve and crisply sliced backhand, is ranked 20th after a strong season. He would be the oldest man to play singles in a final in nearly a century: Norman Brookes was 43 when he played for Australia in 1920.AdvertisementBut the Argentines and their long-suffering fans at home remain much more interested in writing some Davis Cup history of their own.The On Tennis column on Tuesday, which previewed the coming Davis Cup finals between Argentina and Croatia, misspelled the surname of a player on the Slovakian team that Croatia defeated to win the Davis Cup in 2005. He is Michal Mertinak, not Martinek.A version of this article appears in print on November 22, 2016, on Page B9 of the New York edition with the headline: Argentina Hopes These Davis Cup Finals Go Better Than Previous 4.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.See More »