By ALLAN KREDANOV. 20, 2016
Sidney Crosby had three weary Islanders right where he wanted them early in overtime on Friday at Barclays Center.Crosby and his longtime teammates Evgeni Malkin and Kris Letang toyed with the puck as the Islanders tried to counter them.In a flash, Crosby spotted Letang gliding out from behind the net and slid the puck cross-ice. Letang whipped it past Jaroslav Halak, the Islanders’ goaltender, and the Penguins skated off with a 3-2 win.That is the way it has been going for the Penguins, except for a few hiccups on the road. They keep benefiting from hard work and happenstance, in much the same fashion as they did as last season, when the team changed coaches in December and stormed to the Stanley Cup in June.AdvertisementHeading into this week’s home-and-home games against the Rangers, who are battling the Penguins and the Washington Capitals for the lead in the Metropolitan Division, the Penguins are led by their usual stars, plus the sturdy forwards Chris Kunitz and Phil Kessel and the goaltending tandem of Matt Murray and Marc-Andre Fleury.AdvertisementCrosby, the team’s 29-year-old captain, remains matter-of-fact, invariably talking about staying on an even keel and imploring his teammates to focus on hustle and grit.“It’s up to us to outwork the other team,” Crosby said after the victory over the Islanders. “There are still things we can do better.”Get the big sports news, highlights and analysis from Times journalists, with distinctive takes on games and some behind-the-scenes surprises, delivered to your inbox every week.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.After dropping a 2-1 contest in a shootout at Buffalo on Saturday — their third game in four nights — the Penguins can focus on the Rangers for two games, Monday night in Pittsburgh and Wednesday night in Madison Square Garden.Crosby leads the Penguins with 12 goals and is tied with Malkin for the team lead with 16 points. Crosby scored Pittsburgh’s only goal against the Sabres. It was the 350th goal of his career, which began when was 18 and under the tutelage of Mario Lemieux in the 2005-6 season after the Penguins made him the first overall pick in the draft.Crosby attributes his fast start to putting in additional work as a member of the World Cup-winning Canada squad before the season.“It was beneficial coming off World Cup, playing high-intensity hockey,” he said. “I felt like I was starting off right.”Mike Sullivan took over as the Penguins’ coach on Dec. 12 after a lackluster start under Mike Johnston, who was fired. The Penguins finished with 104 points and won the Stanley Cup by defeating the San Jose Sharks in the finals. Along the way, the Penguins defeated the Presidents’ Trophy-winning Capitals and the Tampa Bay Lightning in the Eastern Conference playoffs.AdvertisementThe Penguins’ postseason run started with a five-game demolition of the Rangers in the first round, a defeat that prompted the Rangers to essentially copy their blueprint by adding youth and speed to their roster before this season.The former Ranger Carl Hagelin, acquired by the Penguins from the Anaheim Ducks midway through last season, epitomized the Penguins’ ascent. A swift 28-year-old who scored six goals in the playoffs, Hagelin brought a sense of urgency to the entire roster.“We’re a team that brings a lot of energy every night,” said Hagelin, who has two goals and four assists this season. “We skate, and because of our skating, we get to pucks and we win battles. Our identity is a fast-paced team that creates a lot of turnovers.”The Rangers have forged a similar identity with additions that include forwards Mika Zibanejad, Michael Grabner and Brandon Pirri. Employing relentless speed and a puck-pursuit model, the Rangers had won 13 of their first 18 games before losing to the Florida Panthers, 3-2, in a shootout on Sunday night at the Garden. The loss also cost them Zibanejad, whose left fibula was broken in overtime.Hagelin, who was traded to Anaheim after the 2014-15 season, was almost bashful when asked if he was quietly proud that the Rangers had replaced him with players just like him.“Obviously, they are doing a good job, and their record speaks for itself,” said Hagelin, a fan favorite with the Rangers who scored a series-clinching overtime goal against the Penguins in the first round of the 2015 playoffs.Despite several lopsided road losses for the Penguins in recent weeks — including a 7-1 thrashing at Washington on Wednesday — Hagelin said he was eager to face his former team, especially in Wednesday’s game at the Garden.“To play in New York gives you energy,” he said. “You want to go out there and do well. We’re a confident group. We know it takes a lot of hard work to be a good team in this league, to win on a consistent basis.”Sullivan was an assistant with the Rangers under John Tortorella, and his no-nonsense approach has seeped into his team’s psyche. Part of that success involves relying on players who have been wearing the Penguins’ black and gold for a decade or more.Advertisement“I trust the leadership of this group,” Sullivan said. “These are proud guys, and they want to win. And they know how to win. Our team plays the game the right way. We just have to stay the course.”A version of this article appears in print on November 21, 2016, on Page D2 of the New York edition with the headline: Penguins’ Steady Ascent Shows Rangers the Way.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.