By DAVID WALDSTEINMAY 24, 2016
PARIS — As Andy Murray and Radek Stepanek met at the net to shake hands after Murray’s harrowing five-set victory, a weary Stepanek reached out to hug his opponent, a rare gesture for a first-round match.For the 37-year-old Stepanek, this was a powerful moment, even in defeat. His match with Murray had stretched over two days and included encroaching darkness, chilly conditions, a couple of contentious moments and plenty of compelling tennis, mostly from Stepanek.It was almost as exhausting for fans at the French Open to watch as it was to play, and Stepanek looked as if he needed the embrace to commemorate the moment and confirm that he and Murray, the No. 2 player in the world, had engaged in such an unexpectedly grueling encounter.Murray put one arm around Stepanek, but stood upright and kept a safe distance from his opponent, a trick that was not so easy to do during the course of play.Advertisement“Incredible match,” Stepanek, the oldest player in the draw, said. “Tough battle. I can be proud of what a game I played pushing Andy into the corner after what he’s done on clay this year.”AdvertisementFor Murray, a strong contender to win the title because of his recent form on clay, the outcome was not so much a moment of celebration as relief.The specter of losing to the 128th-ranked Stepanek, who had to win three qualifying matches just to gain admittance to the main draw, was a very real possibility when Stepanek won the first two sets Monday.After the match was suspended because of darkness, play resumed Tuesday with Murray leading, 4-2, in the fourth set. The fifth-set shootout, as Murray called it, was tense throughout, but Murray finally broke serve in the 11th game to win, 3-6, 3-6, 6-0, 6-3, 7-5.“It was obviously an extremely difficult match, very tricky and challenging,” Murray said. “Today was pretty stressful.”Get the big sports news, highlights and analysis from Times journalists, with distinctive takes on games and some behind-the-scenes surprises, delivered to your inbox every week.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.Murray said the win was more important to him than had been assumed, perhaps an indication of his high expectations here. With Roger Federer not playing because of an undisclosed injury, and Rafael Nadal and Novak Djokovic on the same side of the draw, Murray is in a good position to win. He reached the final in Madrid this month and won the Italian Open a week before the French Open began.“It could turn out to be one of the biggest wins of my career,” he said, adding, “It may not.”When the match began Monday, Stepanek was playing brilliantly, changing pace and spin to confound Murray. But the match pivoted sharply when Murray took the third set in only 23 minutes. During the changeover, he complained to the chair umpire that Stepanek was using a bathroom break to delay the match and hasten the suspension.Advertisement“I had to go,” Stepanek said Tuesday. “Trust me.”Stepanek began serving in the fifth set, and with the players holding serve through the first 10 games, he was the one in the lead, applying increasing pressure to Murray and pounding his chest after key points.Murray exhibited great emotion, too, with fist pumps and yells after successful shots, and angry growls and self-directed mutterings after bad ones.At 5-5, Stepanek started to show some nerves. He made two unforced errors on groundstrokes into the net and double-faulted. Murray finished it on his serve, and when Stepanek missed a volley for the final shot, he smiled.“I was hiding the sadness,” Stepanek said.Many of Murray’s exhortations were directed at his box in the stands, which did not include his former coach, Amélie Mauresmo. In a recent interview in L’Equipe, Mauresmo answered questions about why she and Murray had split. When asked specifically if his on-court behavior was a reason, she said, “Andy is complex.”Murray denied that he and Mauresmo had a contentious breakup, but did not deny his complexity and acknowledged that at times he could be petulant on court.“Some good attributes that I have on the court, too,” he said quietly. “I displayed them in abundance today, in my opinion, and yesterday. I fought extremely hard from a very, very difficult position. Yes, I was getting frustrated, but I gave everything to try to win today’s and yesterday’s match, and got myself out of a situation that not all players would have been able to get themselves out of.”It was a revealing moment for the former Wimbledon and United States Open champion. It almost seemed as if he needed a hug.We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.