By DOUGLAS ROBSONNOV. 20, 2016
LONDON — As Andy Murray closed in this fall on Novak Djokovic’s run of more than two years at No. 1 and then overtook him this month, one thing was missing: a punctuating win over Djokovic, his toughest and longest rival.The two had not met since June 5, when Djokovic defeated Murray in the French Open final to complete a career Grand Slam.“You can only beat who you’re playing against,” the top-ranked Murray said on the eve of Sunday’s winner-take-all showdown against Djokovic at the ATP World Tour Finals.Murray’s convincing 6-3, 6-4 win in front of 17,800 boisterous fans at the O2 Arena gave him the signature victory he craved, as well as his first World Tour Finals title. It ensured that he would end 2016 holding the top ranking for the first time, no small feat in an era of historic greats.AdvertisementDjokovic, Roger Federer and Rafael Nadal have taken turns holding the No. 1 slot over the past 12 years. Andy Roddick, in 2003, was the last player other than those three to end the season at No. 1.AdvertisementMurray and his older brother, Jamie, also became the first siblings to rank No. 1 in singles and as part of a doubles team to end the year. Jamie and his Brazilian partner, Bruno Soares, clinched the top ranking on Friday.Although Djokovic had fresher legs, Murray’s unrelenting resilience, peaking confidence and dictating baseline play ruled the day.“I’m happy to get the win today and finish the year No. 1,” Murray said on the court shortly after Djokovic’s forehand return sailed long on his third match point, which denied him a fifth consecutive crown and extended Murray’s unbeaten streak to 24 matches. “It’s very special, and something I never expected.”Few did.In the first half of the season, Djokovic had looked nearly invincible, squelching Murray and everyone else on the sport’s biggest stages.He had won three of the two players’ four meetings during that time, in the finals of the Australian Open, the French Open and the Madrid Open. Murray notched a straight-set win in the title match in Rome.Djokovic looked as if he was on course for the first true Grand Slam by a man since Rod Laver’s in 1969.But Murray, a sometimes grouchy, self-critical player who had become a father in February, pushed himself to the verge of the top spot during a spectacular second half.AdvertisementAfter splitting in June with his coach, Amélie Mauresmo, Murray rehired his former coach, the no-nonsense Ivan Lendl. Their chemistry worked, and Murray won Wimbledon and a gold medal in singles at the Rio Olympics, both for the second time. Lendl had helped guide Murray to his first two major titles, at the 2012 United States Open and at Wimbledon the next year.After falling in the United States Open quarterfinals to Kei Nishikori, Murray went on a tear. He won titles in Beijing, Shanghai, Vienna and Paris, where he ended Djokovic’s 122-week run at No. 1 and ascended to the top spot for the first time on Nov 7.Djokovic, meanwhile, was uncharacteristically wobbly.He lost in the third round at Wimbledon to Sam Querrey, in the first round at the Olympics to Juan Martín del Potro and in the United States Open final to Stan Wawrinka. His last tournament win was at the Rogers Cup in July.On Sunday, Djokovic said he had suffered a letdown after finally winning the French Open, and he called the last few months far from ideal.“I needed some time to really take it all in, digest it,” he said.If little separated Murray and Djokovic before Sunday, freshness was not it.Murray had logged nearly 10 hours on the court in London, including the two longest three-set contests of 2016. He already had played a tour-high 86 matches, with 77 wins.He needed 3 hours 21 minutes to defeat Nishikori on Wednesday. Against Milos Raonic of Canada in Saturday’s semifinals, Murray saved a match point during a tense victory that took 3 hours 38 minutes.By contrast, Djokovic needed 6 hours 33 minutes for his four victories, including a 6-1, 6-1 drubbing of Nishikori in the semifinals of the tournament.AdvertisementTheir divergent seasons had come down, fittingly, to the final match of the year.After an uneasy start, Murray controlled patterns from the baseline, particularly on his forehand. He kept rallies shorter than usual, was broken just once late in the second set, and came up with several big serves on crucial points.Djokovic, by contrast, lacked his usual pinpoint footwork and depth of shot. He appeared uncertain at key moments and hit 30 unforced errors — many off his vaunted backhand — to just 15 by Murray.“More than anything, he felt comfortable in the rallies and exactly knew what to do,” said Djokovic, who finished No. 1 in four of the past six years. “On the other hand, I hesitated, and it didn’t work.”For his part, Murray said he was “lucky I got it finished in two sets.” Murray had never beaten Djokovic in four previous matches indoors, and he still trails in their overall head-to-head record, 24-11.Get the big sports news, highlights and analysis from Times journalists, with distinctive takes on games and some behind-the-scenes surprises, delivered to your inbox every week.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.A version of this article appears in print on November 21, 2016, on Page D8 of the New York edition with the headline: Murray’s Convincing Victory Over Djokovic Secures Finals Title and No. 1 Ranking.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.