By BEN ROTHENBERGJULY 3, 2016
WIMBLEDON, England — When Svetlana Kuznetsova of Russia reached across the net to embrace her American opponent, Sloane Stephens, after a hard-fought 6-7 (1), 6-2, 8-6 victory on Sunday afternoon, she did so without hesitation, but also with a purpose.“I saw her having her hands like that, so definitely I hug her,” Kuznetsova said. “Great, great sportsmanship. I think it’s a great example for the next generation: You don’t have to have hate for each other. It’s all about peace, not war. We have to show that, because sometimes they mix sport with politics. It’s very important that we show for the next generations that this is out of that, you know? To give a good example.”Relations may be strained between Kuznetsova’s native Russia and the United States, but she is conscious of her role as a symbol of shared values in sports that transcend political differences.“This has nothing to do with our countries,” Kuznetsova said. “This is the thing, you know? Here, we are united. Doesn’t matter what country you are. We have a difficult relationship with Ukraine now, Russia. But we have nothing to do with that. We are doing sports; we are out of politics. We are really true athletes who work hard every day. We don’t depend on politics.”AdvertisementKuznetsova does see politics, however, in the recent decision to bar Russian track and field athletes from competing at the Olympics in Rio de Janeiro, where Kuznetsova plans to represent her country.Advertisement“This is, for me, politics,” she said, smiling ruefully and shaking her head. “Suddenly, everything has to go against Russia. Suddenly, in Russia, they’re all bad, and all the world is good. For me, it’s a little bit funny. I have nothing to do with that. I hope they resolve it. And the clean athletes who deserve to go to the Olympics, they will go. For me, I think this is the key.”Kuznetsova’s next opponent, Serena Williams, is a four-time gold medalist herself, and from a similar generation of the game — Kuznetsova turned 31 last week; Williams is 34. They first played each other on tour 12 years ago, and Kuznetsova says their common experiences make for shared outlooks on the game.“You look at things with the same view position, I would say,” Kuznetsova said. “Some young girls, they do some things, and we older ones, we look at them, like, O.K., you need some experience.”Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.Kuznetsova handed Williams one of her four defeats of the year in March in Miami but lost in their most recent match in Rome. Williams, who has won nine of the 12 matches between the two, said there would be few surprises in their fourth-round clash at Wimbledon.“Playing someone you haven’t played before is a little bit tricky, because they present different things, and you’re not quite sure how they play,” Williams said. “But going up against someone like Svetlana, she knows my game; I know her game. Then it’s just really down to who’s really going to fight to win it.”Williams won convincingly on Sunday after going down an early break against Annika Beck of Germany, losing only four points in the second set — and none on her serve — for a 6-3, 6-0 win.“It gives me a lot of confidence,” Williams said of the emphatic finish to her victory. “I know what it takes to win these tournaments. It’s just about now just doing it.”The American CoCo Vandeweghe, who won, 6-3, 6-4, over sixth-seeded Roberta Vinci of Italy is also playing with considerable confidence on the grass, her preferred surface. Vandeweghe, who is from a family of basketball players, plays above-the-rim-style tennis, ideal for the slick lawns of Wimbledon, with a booming serve and easy power that quickly overwhelmed Vinci.Vandeweghe, who made her first Wimbledon quarterfinal last year and lost a close three-set match to Maria Sharapova, won her second career grass-court title last month in the Netherlands. She will face Anastasia Pavlyuchenkova of Russia in the fourth round, and then could face either Williams or Kuznetsova in the quarterfinals.Advertisement“I’ve never really doubted myself on the possibility of beating good players, beating players in a big tournament,” Vandeweghe said. “I’ve never doubted that capability of doing it. But you have to prove it, and do it, in every tournament, or the majority of tournaments. I think that’s what I’ve been doing a better job of the last two years of playing: beating the better players for a majority of the time, and not just flash-in-the-pan sorts of moments.”A version of this article appears in print on July 4, 2016, on Page D7 of the New York edition with the headline: Peace for Kuznetsova, Who Calls Tennis a Refuge From Political Strife.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.