By SETH BERKMANJULY 5, 2016
On Sept. 28, 2011, the final game of the regular season, Jose Reyes led off the bottom of the first for the Mets by bunting toward the left side of the infield and sprinting safely to first base for his 181st hit of the year. Just as quickly, Reyes exited the game to protect his first, and only, batting title.It was hardly the most courageous way to beat out every other batter in the National League, and it left many baseball people unsure of what to make of it.On Tuesday, Reyes was back at Citi Field as a Met for the first time since that day, hitting leadoff and playing third base, not far from where the last ball he hit as a Met stopped on the infield grass. After serving a 51-game suspension in connection with a domestic abuse case, Reyes was manning a position he had never played before in the major leagues and looking to provide a jolt for a club that had just won five straight games and maybe did not need one.Reyes’s second act with the Mets began much like the first one ended, with an air of uncertainty on how it should be assessed.AdvertisementFor one night, with his old uniform number back, thanks to Travis d’Arnaud, who graciously switched from No. 7 to No. 18, Reyes was cheered heartily by fans, many of whom stood and recited the popular “Jo-se, Jo-se” chant. Reyes, however, had a quiet night. He led off by striking out on three pitches and went 0 for 4. He seemed overanxious, leaving his feet a few times while swinging and did not hit a ball out of the infield. He did not field a ball on defense.AdvertisementGiancarlo Stanton had more success, blasting two home runs and driving in all five Miami Marlins runs, sending the Mets to a 5-2 loss that Steven Matz began with six shutout innings.Poignantly, Reyes’s spot on the Mets’ 40-man roster was made possible by the decision to put David Wright, Reyes’s longtime Mets teammate and the player he is replacing at third base, on the 60-day disabled list.Aside from a solid glove, the Mets hope Reyes has not slowed much at age 33, giving them at least an occasional threat at the top of the order, something they have lacked since his departure.“I try to stay away from expectations, because all they can do is break your heart,” Manager Terry Collins said when asked about Reyes, who was released by the Colorado Rockies after his suspension ended and then signed by the Mets on June 25.Get the big sports news, highlights and analysis from Times journalists, with distinctive takes on games and some behind-the-scenes surprises, delivered to your inbox every week.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.Collins supported Reyes during the 2011 season, his first as manager, and also over the last eight months whenever he was asked about Reyes’s domestic violence case. But Reyes’s arrival makes Collins’s job harder, because it moves Wilmer Flores back into a utility role after he was handed the third-base job when Wright was first placed on the disabled list one month ago.Flores drove in a key run in the Mets’ comeback from a 6-0 deficit in Monday’s win over the Marlins, and he was 6 for 6 in Sunday’s wipeout of the Chicago Cubs, tying a Mets record for most hits in a game. That record was set by Edgardo Alfonzo, who tutored Reyes on how to play third base while Reyes did a quick rehabilitation stint for the Mets in the minor leagues.Flores, a popular figure at Citi Field since mistakenly believing he had been traded last July, said that he had not talked to Collins about the effect Reyes’s arrival will have on his role with the team, cutting off the question before it could be finished.AdvertisementCollins indicated that Flores will still get plenty of playing time. Collins suggested that Reyes could occasionally play shortstop to spell Asdrubal Cabrera, and even see time in center field.As for Reyes, he said he was ready to help wherever needed.“When you go to your house and you go home, it’s no matter where you sleep — in the kitchen, bathroom — it’s no matter, you’re going to feel comfortable,” Reyes said, providing an instant metaphor for the fact that he will be playing more than one position. “This is my home.”In a pregame news conference, Reyes repeatedly referred to the Mets in a family-like manner, and put his arm around staff members, smiling. But if the Mets are his home, he arrived after a five-year absence to a clubhouse with almost entirely new inhabitants.Only Wright and Lucas Duda were on the 2011 team, and Duda, too, is on the disabled list. Reyes said he saw Wright earlier Tuesday and called him last week for advice about playing third base.Reyes, who now sports a full beard and has cut the dreadlocks that became his trademark with the Mets, seemed to get along with Flores before the game. They are next to each other in the locker room.The only time Reyes’s smile disappeared was when he was asked at the news conference about domestic abuse, which led him to express remorse for his actions for the second time in nine days.“I’m sorry for what happened, Reyes said. “Every human being makes a mistake. People deserve a second chance in life.”Reyes’s second chance began Tuesday night, with intrigue sure to follow.INSIDE PITCHYOENIS CESPEDES was voted in as a starting outfielder for the National League for the All-Star Game on July 12 in San Diego. Cespedes, named to his second All-Star team, will be joined by JEURYS FAMILIA and NOAH SYNDERGAARD, who will be making their first appearances.A version of this article appears in print on July 6, 2016, on Page B9 of the New York edition with the headline: Once Again, Intrigue Accompanies Reyes.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.