
On Pro Basketball By                     
 HARVEY ARATON
 
JULY 4, 2016
Jerry West and the fraternity of California N.B.A. championship ring bearers — Bay Area chapter — win again.Twenty years after Shaquille O’Neal used the stage of the 1996 Atlanta Summer Olympics to disclose his intentions of leaving landlocked Orlando for West’s Lakers in beach-laden Los Angeles, Oklahoma City’s Kevin Durant chose the Fourth of July for his announcement that he planned to sign as a free agent with the Golden State Warriors.The league’s collective head exploded on Monday with the realization that the persistent but mind-boggling speculation of Durant’s winding up in California was true. For the sake of 20-year symmetry, West, now a 78-year-old Warriors executive, reportedly called Durant to punctuate the team’s weekend pitch.In destroying the blueprint of the Thunder’s talented general manager, Sam Presti, Durant wrote on Derek Jeter’s website The Players’ Tribune, of which Durant is a deputy publisher, “I will miss Oklahoma City, and the role I have had in building this remarkable team.”AdvertisementThe Thunder could have been even more remarkable, possibly champions, had Durant performed better against the very same Warriors in Games 6 and 7 of this season’s Western Conference finals.AdvertisementIf you can’t beat ’em, befriend ’em. In the era of the N.B.A.’s elite bonding abroad during Olympic and world championship tournaments, Durant became best buds with Stephen Curry and Andre Iguodala, both of whom attended the Warriors’ meeting with Durant in the Hamptons.What about his supposedly brotherly relationship with his Thunder co-star Russell Westbrook? Durant apparently decided he could live without Westbrook’s solo theatrics and could genuinely be interested in curtailing his own.He wrote that he was going to a place that “offers the greatest potential for my contribution and personal growth.”Translation: to a team with as much of a freewheeling approach as the Thunder’s, but with considerably more connectivity among its headliners — at least until the last three games of last month’s finals.As for Westbrook, what choice does Presti have but to trade him if he can’t persuade him to sign a long-term deal before he reaches free agency after next season? Westbrook is from Southern California. The Lakers have a core of young talent that could contribute to a potential Presti rebuild.Durant’s departure is unfortunate for Presti and a city that has zealously supported its team since it moved there in 2008. But if the franchise could jilt basketball-loving Seattle, let’s spare Durant any kneejerk criticism for leaving a place “that raised me,” as he wrote, and not long after gushing with affection for it in a Sports Illustrated article.Players earn and deserve their freedom of movement. It’s business. And despite the cogent argument that the formation of so-called super teams at the expense of diligently constructed outfits like the Thunder is damaging to the league’s competitive balance, the most recent finals television ratings — the highest since Michael Jordan’s last Chicago title run in 1998 — practically scream that it’s also good business.AdvertisementAs a ratings coup, this is to the N.B.A. what Trump is to CNN. The minute that Durant’s five-paragraph dispatch was posted, an irresistible story line materialized.If you think there was pressure on the Warriors to authenticate their 73-win regular season in the finals, wait until the playoffs of 2017. Durant has become LeBron James after his 2010 decision to leave Cleveland, and the Warriors have become the Miami Heat, only deeper in talent and far more credentialed, with an all-or-nothing mandate, ridicule to follow should they fail.The Warriors obviously become heavy 2016-17 favorites, but before we concede the title to them, let’s see what the makeup of the entire roster is and how the chemistry works.Get the big sports news, highlights and analysis from Times journalists, with distinctive takes on games and some behind-the-scenes surprises, delivered to your inbox every week.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.Golden State’s offense seemed unstoppable until James and the Cavaliers solved the Curry conundrum with aggressive perimeter defense. The Warriors scored 89 points at home in Game 7.Games must be played, but rather than deride Durant for taking what would appear to be the most convenient path to an initial N.B.A. title, let’s applaud the league for having its best players outgrow over the last decade or so the unintended, unfortunate consequences of the Michael Jordan era.By the turn of the century, no two (much less three or four) stars could coexist in one city. The best players deigned to have their own teams and could be happy only as the Jordans of their fiefs.Allen Iverson couldn’t share with anyone in Philadelphia. Charlotte wasn’t big enough for Alonzo Mourning and Larry Johnson. In Minnesota, Stephon Marbury couldn’t handle making less money than Kevin Garnett. In Toronto, Tracy McGrady wanted no part of being Scottie Pippen to Vince Carter’s Jordan.Even in Los Angeles, while winning three straight titles with the Lakers, O’Neal and Kobe Bryant could not peacefully coexist. It wasn’t the best of N.B.A. times, but now the brand names are drawn to one another, sharing the burden of expectation along with the ball.AdvertisementDon’t think such an attitudinal evolution didn’t factor into the league’s growth in popularity and the enormous television revenue increases that stretched the salary cap and allowed the Warriors to pursue Durant.Yes, the free-agent groveling — part of the off-season marketing — can be tough to stomach. O’Neal helped make it the spectacle it has become.In Atlanta, the Lakers called a news conference before the start of the ’96 Games — and a day after the crash of T.W.A. Flight 800 out of Kennedy Airport in New York killed all 230 aboard — to announce a $121 million deal.Tone-deaf to the catastrophe, O’Neal said: “I’m tired of hearing about money, money, money, money, money. I just want to play the game, drink Pepsi, wear Reebok.”He drew the intended laughs, but West provided the more contextual quotation.“I remember being drafted by the Minnesota Lakers and thinking, ‘I don’t want to go somewhere cold,’” he said. “Then I was in Rome, Italy, playing in the Olympics, and I read that the Lakers had moved to L.A. I can’t tell you how happy I was.”The abandonment of small markets for sexier markets is not universal, as the San Antonio Spurs have long demonstrated. At the league’s draft lottery in May, Commissioner Adam Silver cited technology and social media as reasons the difference in market size “between Oklahoma City and, say, Chicago has become somewhat immaterial.”In the case of the Thunder, Silver spoke too soon, though Durant’s jump to the Warriors is more about the roster he is joining than it is about location.That said, Durant also wrote about moving to “a new city and community which offers the greatest potential for my contribution and personal growth.”AdvertisementHe is 27, with more money from salary and endorsements than he can count no matter where he plays. Given those circumstances, where would you live?Durant, who agreed to a two-year, $54.3 million deal with an opt-out after the first year, will most likely sign a longer-term contract with the Warriors after next season. If he should absolutely hate playing for them, he could always go home again, like James.Just don’t count on that aspect of the story repeating itself. It turns out that Durant was, all season long, California scheming, on such a winter’s day. The net result for him and, in all likelihood, Westbrook: O.K.C. ya.A version of this article appears in print on July 5, 2016, on Page B7 of the New York edition with the headline: More Than Simply a California Rush.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.See More »