By BEN ROTHENBERGJULY 2, 2016
LONDON — Maria Sakkari of Greece had dreamed of playing Venus Williams, a five-time Wimbledon champion.“She’s a legend,” Sakkari, 20, said. “Facing her on the other side of the net, you feel proud of yourself that you made it to play against her. It’s a really nice experience.”That wish came true for Sakkari on Thursday in a second-round match, but with a different backdrop than Sakkari had expected: They played on Court No. 18, which is the sixth-largest venue at Wimbledon, with a capacity of 782, or 5 percent of Centre Court.“I was surprised — not because of me, because of her,” Sakkari said of Williams. “I think she has to play every match on a bigger court.”AdvertisementBut the eighth-ranked Williams — who has many times been relegated to courts beyond the two principal venues, Centre Court and Court No. 1 — deflected an assertion that her exile to Court No. 18 had been disrespectful.“I’m not so much into disrespect; I’m willing to play anywhere, any time, of course,” Williams said. “I was happy to be on the schedule.”But then she pivoted.“But I think if all players have to play outside, all players should have to play outside,” Williams said. “There shouldn’t be exceptions or any inequality to it.”Get the big sports news, highlights and analysis from Times journalists, with distinctive takes on games and some behind-the-scenes surprises, delivered to your inbox every week.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.Williams seemed to be emphasizing the word “all,” alluding to the fact that the top seeds and past champions on the men’s side have rarely been relegated to courts beyond the tournament’s largest ones. The seven-time champion Roger Federer has not played outside of the two biggest courts since he won his first title in 2003, and the two-time champion Rafael Nadal has not played on an outer court since 2004, four years before he won at Wimbledon. Novak Djokovic and Andy Murray have also not played on outer courts since they have become top players.This year’s tournament has been complicated by heavy rain, which forced organizers to plan for play on the middle Sunday, which has traditionally been a day of rest. Because of the backlog, top players have been spread across the grounds more often than usual, but men have maintained the majority of the matches on the main courts.Advertisement“It’s because of the weather, but it stinks,” Martina Navratilova wrote on Twitter, referring to Williams’s placement on Court No. 18. “No more of that nonsense.”Williams has been a defender of women’s tennis at Wimbledon, most notably in securing equal prize money in 2007, 44 years after that milestone had been achieved at the United States Open.She and other leaders in women’s tennis thought that they had achieved a breakthrough on court placements at Wimbledon two years ago when women’s matches were given equal or greater time on the largest courts early in the tournament. But the next year, the old patterns returned.After the setback, Williams said Wimbledon organizers should continue to see total equality as a goal.“I’m sure that the WTA supervisors have done their best to try to make the schedule equal,” she said. “But also the All England Club has to have a culture where they want to have equality as well. They need to want to pursue that. I would love to see it where we don’t have to talk about this any more in the press conference.”Representatives of the All England Club had no comment about Williams’s remarks after emphasizing that she had initially said she had no objections to playing on Court No. 18.Other top female players who have been scheduled on Court No. 18, including the two-time champion Petra Kvitova and the 2016 Australian Open champion Angelique Kerber, echoed Williams in accepting their placements.Not all players have been as amenable, however. Jelena Jankovic complained about playing on Court No. 18 in 2008, when she was seeded second, and joked that she had to take a helicopter to the court. She reiterated during the first week this year that relegating top players to smaller courts showed a lack of respect.Advertisement“To put top seeds and top players that have done well in this tournament and been champions — which is not easy to do — I think they should have that privilege, and that honor, to be on the big courts,” Jankovic said. “It’s quite disrespectful to put someone who is No. 2 or 3 in the world to have them playing somewhere in the backyard.”The WTA chief executive, Steve Simon, cited the weather as a challenge to scheduling but did not dismiss Williams’s call for progress on the two main courts.“We saw improvement in this area early in the event, and the WTA will continue to discuss scheduling with the All England Lawn Tennis Club to continue achieving this goal,” he said. “As Venus stated, as long as there is an equal approach to scheduling for both the men and the women’s matches, the players are willing to play anywhere.”Perceptions of preference have also extended to television. Wimbledon’s host broadcaster, the BBC, received a complaint after last year’s tournament claiming that it had been biased against women’s tennis, with men’s matches receiving 76 percent of total coverage. The BBC rejected the complaint, saying that there was “no evidence of editorial bias” and that “all decisions around which games will be shown are based on editorial judgment.”On Friday, Williams added praise for the tournament’s heritage of men and women competing together. That combination, largely unique to tennis among major sports, has become one of the sport’s greatest strengths.“The All England Club is an amazing place, with such a wonderful history of women playing alongside the men since the 1800s,” Williams said. “So much has happened here. I just want to see continual positive things happen for the women here.”Williams said the equality she has striven for at Wimbledon reflected larger issues in the world.“You see the struggle in other sports outside of women’s tennis,” she said. “You see the struggle in the secular world. So what we’re doing here parallels everything in life. There is always some sort of inequality, but there’s also people that want to stand up and speak their voice and fight for what’s right.”Despite her frustrations, Williams said she had maintained a positive outlook toward the tournament.“I’m always an optimist about everything,” she said. “I think people around the world love Wimbledon. The players love Wimbledon. It’s a wonderful place. So you feel positive about being here. There’s so many positives. To focus on one thing that’s not as positive is not our focus; the focus is to make everything perfect.”A version of this article appears in print on July 3, 2016, on Page SP8 of the New York edition with the headline: A Five-Time Champion Calls for Total Equality From Court to Court.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.