AdvertisementSupported byBy The Associated PressChandler Parsons, Al Jefferson, Dwight Howard and Evan Turner are among the N.B.A. veterans who were reported Friday to be switching teams as free agency got underway.The Memphis Grizzlies landed Parsons, according to a post on one of Parsons’s social media accounts. “This is a perfect fit for me and I can’t wait to get started!!” Parsons wrote on Instagram under a picture of him posing with David Fizdale, the Grizzlies’ new coach, and a No. 25 Memphis jersey.The deal cannot be signed until Thursday. Terms were not disclosed, although multiple news media outlets reported that the agreement was for a four-year maximum contract worth $94 million.Parsons averaged 16.7 points and 5.7 rebounds for the Dallas Mavericks last season.Jefferson, 31, a center, agreed to terms with the Indiana Pacers on a three-year deal worth $30 million, according to multiple news media reports. Jefferson averaged 12 points and 6.4 rebounds in 47 games for the Charlotte Hornets last season.Howard, according to several reports, has agreed to join the Atlanta Hawks on a three-year contract worth $70.5 million. He will be returning to his hometown after three seasons in Houston, where he scored 13.7 points a game last season.Turner agreed to terms with the Portland Trail Blazers on a four-year, $70 million contract. His agent, Kevin Bradbury, confirmed the deal first reported by Yahoo Sports. Turner, a 6-foot-7 wing who was drafted No. 2 over all by the Philadelphia 76ers in 2010, spent the last two seasons with the Celtics. Last season, he averaged 10.5 points, 4.9 rebounds and 4.4 assists.Multiple news outlets also reported that the 76ers had agreed to terms with guard Jerryd Bayless on a three-year deal worth $27 million. Bayless, 27, averaged 10.4 points and 3.1 assists for the Milwaukee Bucks last season.The Milwaukee Bucks agreed to terms on a four-year, $38.4 million offer sheet for Matthew Dellavedova, a restricted free agent point guard, a person with knowledge of the offer told The Associated Press. If the Cleveland Cavaliers do not match the offer, Dellavedova will go to Milwaukee.Among the prominent free agents who apparently decided to stay put were point guard Mike Conley of the Grizzlies, the shooting guards Bradley Beal of the Washington Wizards, DeMar DeRozan of the Toronto Raptors, Nicolas Batum of the Hornets and Keith Bazemore of the Hawks, and centers Andre Drummond of the Detroit Pistons and Hassan Whiteside of the Miami Heat.The richest reported deal was Conley’s. He was said to have agreed in principle to a five-year, $153 million deal to stay with Memphis. In nine years with the Grizzlies, he has averaged 13.6 points and 5.6 assists.Batum, Beal, DeRozan and Drummond were all reported to have agreed to five-year deals worth $120 million to $130 million. Bazemore, The A.P. was told, will get $70 million over four years.Whiteside accepted a four-year offer to stay with the Miami Heat. The deal as structured now calls for Whiteside to earn $98 million, a person familiar with the terms told The A.P. Whiteside averaged 14.2 points, 11.8 rebounds and a league-best 3.7 blocked shots per game. He made about $980,000 last season.The highly coveted free agent Kevin Durant met with the Golden State Warriors in the Hamptons. Besides the team’s owner, general manager and coach, the Warriors’ All-Star guards, Stephen Curry and Klay Thompson, were said to have met with Durant. ESPN reported that Durant had met later with a similar delegation from the Los Angeles Clippers.Advertisement