By SAM BORDENJULY 1, 2016
ANNECY-LE-VIEUX, France — The list of endearing quirks connected to the Iceland men’s soccer team is maddeningly, frustratingly, delightfully long. Try to pick a favorite: Is it the coach who is also a dentist? Is it the announcer whose television calls sound as if he has been lighted on fire? Is it the 10 percent — and no, that is not an exaggeration — of Iceland’s residents who have come to France to cheer for their team at this summer’s European Championships?All are worthy contenders — as is, it should be said, the goalkeeper who used to direct music videos — but regardless of which absurdity strikes anyone’s particular fancy, the sum of these parts has produced one of the more remarkable international sports stories in recent memory.Iceland, whose national population of about 330,000 makes it smaller than more than 50 American cities, qualified for the Euros (which was startling), advanced out of the group stage (which was surprising), beat England in the round of 16 (which was astonishing) and now, in Sunday’s quarterfinal at the national stadium just outside Paris, will try to eliminate the host, France (which would be, frankly, ridiculous).“We are living a dream,” said Gudmundur Benediktsson, a former national team player who does play-by-play for the team’s television broadcasts. “The whole country is living a dream. And we don’t want to wake up.”AdvertisementBenediktsson has done his part to contribute to the global mania. After each of the most thrilling moments from the tournament, his calls — which aggressively straddle the line between passionately frenzied and worryingly hysterical — have been shared widely on the internet and praised (or parodied) on late-night talk shows in a variety of languages.When Iceland scored a late goal in its final group-stage match to set up a round-of-16 game against England, Benediktsson’s howls were so high-pitched and frantic that it sounded as if a wolverine had broken into the broadcast box and taken over the microphone. When Iceland then beat England, 2-1, to reach the final eight of the tournament, his verbal stylings included whooping, hollering and, ultimately, an extraordinary juxtaposition of political and sporting current events.“We are never going home! Did you see that?” he crowed, before adding, in reference to England’s recent vote to withdraw from the European Union: “You can go home. You can go out of Europe. You can go wherever the hell you want!”AdvertisementIn a telephone interview last week from the Netherlands, where he spent a few days relaxing with his family, Benediktsson said he was uncomfortable with his slice of fame. “Many people have called to check to make sure I am O.K., because I sounded like I might collapse,” he said. “But I am fine. I don’t like this focus on me. I actually don’t really like the sound of my voice on television.”Benediktsson said he would prefer that the players and coaches receive the attention, though he need not worry: They are getting plenty. On Thursday, the team’s training session at its base camp here, in southeastern France near the Swiss border, was attended by more than 50 members of the news media; before its first game, there were only a dozen or so.Accolades have come from everywhere. Iceland’s government is expected to award the players and coaches the equivalent of a knighthood. Fans in other Scandinavian countries have adopted the team as their own. And Hafthor Bjornsson, the Icelandic professional strongman who is best known for playing the Mountain on “Game of Thrones,” has supported the team on social media, posting a picture to his 536,000 Instagram followers that showed his dog watching the match against England.Iceland defender Kari Arnason said Thursday that he and his teammates were doing their best to stay focused on the France match but were not ignorant of their growing celebrity. Each night, Arnason said, the players spend a few minutes before bed scrolling through Twitter and other websites, laughing about the jokes, comments and compliments that Icelandic soccer has suddenly inspired.“It gives us a little feeling for this new limelight,” he said.Iceland’s rise to the upper reaches of European soccer has been deliberate, but its current run is astounding all the same, if only because its history as a soccer nation is as more of a punching bag than any sort of knockout artist.AdvertisementWhile Iceland’s women’s team qualified for the last two Euros, the men’s team has been on a slower build. As recently as 2007, the men’s team lost to Liechtenstein, the principality wedged between Switzerland and Austria, which has a population of 37,000. The score was not close, either: 3-0, a margin that would come to represent both Liechtenstein’s sole victory for about two years, and a nadir for Icelandic soccer.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.“It was a nightmare, that game,” Geir Thorsteinsson, the president of Iceland’s soccer federation, said in an interview. “The minister of sport was also there and had arranged for us to be at a reception with Liechtenstein officials afterward, and I remember just feeling so ashamed.”Iceland’s financial crisis hit the next year, relegating the fate of the national soccer team far down the country’s list of priorities, but it was not long afterward that soccer’s uptick began.Several factors are cited as critical to Iceland’s growth. One is the country’s commitment to quality coaching, with hundreds of coaches — even for teams as young as under 9 — certified at one of Europe’s highest levels. Another is facilities, as Iceland invested in numerous indoor, full-size soccer field houses that allow clubs to offer year-round and nearly daylong access for teams of all ages.The close-knit nature of Icelandic players — one oft-cited statistic points out that the 22,000 registered soccer players in Iceland are fewer than the total in Rhode Island — is another important factor. So is continuity.Lars Lagerback, a successful veteran Swedish coach, was hired to coach the senior national team in 2011, and one of his assistants, Heimir Hallgrimsson (he is the dentist), was made co-coach in 2013 so as to smooth the transition when Lagerback steps down, as planned, after the Euros. Several members of the current squad were teammates at the 2011 European under-21 championships, when Iceland stunned Germany, 4-1, and the core of the team nearly qualified for the 2014 World Cup. When Iceland just missed out in a playoff, the team regrouped and then ripped through Euros qualification with victories over the Netherlands (twice), Turkey and the Czech Republic.Now the team is in France, and it has not lost. It tied Portugal and Hungary and beat Austria in the group stage, then pulled off the upset against England.One consequence of all this success is that the Icelandic fan base is growing exponentially. An estimated 30,000 fans arrived from Iceland at the start of the tournament, and Magnus Mar Einarsson, a top soccer journalist in Iceland, said many more were trying to reach Paris ahead of Sunday’s game, with reports of fans buying flights to Spain, Italy and Belgium, and then making their way to France from there, because of the paucity of direct routes.After each game, the players and fans in the stadium have taken part in what is essentially a syncopated, overhead slow clap with chanting — Arnason called it “a Viking quest kind of thing that the fans came up with and is pretty cool,” though it may have its roots in Scotland — which only adds to the atmosphere. Back home, residents have packed bars and public spaces, and 99.8 percent of televisions in Iceland were reportedly tuned to the England game.Sunday’s match will be the team’s most difficult test yet. France has a glittering lineup of stars and a strong history in tournaments it hosts, having won the 1998 World Cup and the 1984 Euros. Yet it has been inconsistent at times here, needing a second-half comeback to beat Ireland in the round of 16.AdvertisementIceland is respectful of France’s stature, but not deferential.“Maybe it comes to an end, but I think we can win on Sunday,” said Thorsteinsson, the federation president. “Yes, I think we can win on Sunday. Why not?”A version of this article appears in print on July 3, 2016, on Page SP1 of the New York edition with the headline: Tiny. Quirky. Iceland  Enthralls a Continent.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.See More »