
On Baseball By                     
 TYLER KEPNER
 
NOV. 21, 2016
There are 19 new names on the Hall of Fame ballot, released Monday and landing soon in the mailboxes of more than 400 veteran baseball writers. There are also 15 holdovers still seeking the magic threshold — 75 percent of the vote — needed for election.Three candidates — Jeff Bagwell (71.6 percent), Tim Raines (69.8) and Trevor Hoffman (67.3) — passed the two-thirds barrier in the last vote, with Cooperstown now in sight. Twelve others, including Barry Bonds and Roger Clemens, reside in an odd kind of purgatory: Their careers long over, they remain under consideration as the writers take their time.Most of the new 19 will not survive for another ballot because candidates need to receive 5 percent of the vote to remain. Last year, 12 first-timers missed the 5 percent cut, with seven failing to collect a single vote. Still, even if they do not get a plaque, all of the newcomers, in their own way, made an impression on the baseball landscape.CASEY BLAKE There was a little bit of Blake in the Indians’ moment of triumph in the American League Championship Series last month: The player who caught the final out was Carlos Santana, a slugging first baseman who was a Class A catcher when Cleveland acquired him from the Los Angeles Dodgers for Blake in a 2008 trade. The loser in the A.L.C.S.? The Toronto Blue Jays, Blake’s first major league team.PAT BURRELL In 27 World Series at-bats for Philadelphia and San Francisco, Burrell had just one hit — but he made it count. After going hitless in his first 13 at-bats against Tampa Bay in the 2008 Series, Burrell doubled to start the winning rally in the Phillies’ clincher. He was 0 for 13 again two years later, for the Giants against Texas, but earned a second championship ring.AdvertisementORLANDO CABRERA Twenty players in major league history were born in Colombia, and together they have 20,384 at-bats. More than 77 percent of those at-bats are on this ballot, between Edgar Renteria and Cabrera. One of Cabrera’s at-bats concluded David Cone’s perfect game at Yankee Stadium in 1999, when he popped up to Scott Brosius in foul territory, bringing Cone to his knees in celebration.AdvertisementMIKE CAMERON When Cameron slammed four home runs in one game, for Seattle against the Chicago White Sox on May 2, 2002, he became just the second player in 16 seasons to accomplish the feat. It happened again just three weeks later, by Shawn Green of the Dodgers, but it was not the start of a trend. In the 14 years that have followed, only two others (Carlos Delgado and Josh Hamilton) have pulled it off. Hitting four homers in a game has happened only 16 times, making it rarer than a perfect game, which has happened 23 times.J. D. DREW What is it with the Indians and Game 6 grand slams? This year, Addison Russell hit one for the Chicago Cubs in Game 6 of the World Series. In 2007, Drew hit one for Boston in Game 6 of the A.L.C.S. Each time, the grand slam sent the Indians on their way to the second of three straight losses to end the series after they had held a three-games-to-one lead.VLADIMIR GUERRERO We do not have to dive too deeply into the statistics to show how dangerous Guerrero was with the bat. He hit .318 with 449 career home runs. Just five players in major league history did better in both categories, and you have probably heard of them: Babe Ruth, Jimmie Foxx, Ted Williams, Lou Gehrig and Stan Musial. And none of those players had as many stolen bases as Guerrero’s 181.CARLOS GUILLEN The Mariners have won only three playoff series in their 40 seasons, and two ended with hits by players on this Hall of Fame ballot. We all remember Edgar Martinez’s double at the Kingdome to eliminate the Yankees in 1995. Less celebrated — but still pretty cool — was Guillen’s bunt single that bounced the White Sox from a division series five years later at Safeco Field. A Hall of Famer scored on each hit: Ken Griffey Jr. in 1995 and Rickey Henderson in 2000.DERREK LEE Anthony Rizzo is not the only first baseman traded by the San Diego Padres as a rookie to an eventual World Series winner. Before they gave Rizzo to the Cubs for Andrew Cashner in 2012, the Padres traded a young Lee to the Marlins in 1997. Then, at least, the Padres received Kevin Brown, who helped them win a pennant in his only year in San Diego. But it still had to hurt to see Lee celebrate a title with the Marlins in 2003 and then win a batting crown with the Cubs two years later.MELVIN MORA In 2001, Mora and his wife, Gisel, became the parents of quintuplets. How small were the children at birth? Mora told The New York Times in 2002 that he could slide his 2000 Mets National League championship ring (size 11) up each baby’s arm to the shoulder. Happily, all the babies grew up strong; they flanked their father at Camden Yards when he threw out a first pitch in 2014.MAGGLIO ORDONEZ Ordonez’s 2007 season is one of the greatest overlooked performances in recent memory. Ordonez, who had swatted a pennant-clinching home run for the Detroit Tigers the previous fall, batted .363 with 28 homers and 139 R.B.I. Just one other player since 1937 has done better in all three Triple Crown categories in the same season: Todd Helton of Colorado in 2000. Helton did not win the Triple Crown, either.AdvertisementJORGE POSADA There is so much that could be said about Posada, but here is an oddity. The first time he was on base in the majors, he was there as a pinch-runner in the 12th inning of a playoff game. Buck Showalter had inserted Posada for Wade Boggs in Game 2 of a 1995 division series against Seattle in the Bronx. With two outs and the Yankees down by a run, Posada scored from second on a double by Ruben Sierra to tie the game. He went on to play almost 2,000 more games and pinch-run just two more times.MANNY RAMIREZ Because of his two suspensions for performance-enhancing drugs, Ramirez is highly unlikely to get much support for the Hall of Fame. But it is wild to think how different history would be if the Yankees had drafted him from nearby George Washington High School in 1991. They picked first that year and took pitcher Brien Taylor, who got hurt and never made the majors. Ramirez went 13th to Cleveland and hit 55 of his 555 career home runs against the Yankees.EDGAR RENTERIA How amazing to think that the same player could get a hit to end Game 7 of one World Series (for the Marlins in 1997), make the last out of another World Series (for St. Louis against Boston in 2004) and win the Most Valuable Player Award in yet another World Series (for San Francisco in 2010). Pretty strong career besides all that, too.Get the big sports news, highlights and analysis from Times journalists, with distinctive takes on games and some behind-the-scenes surprises, delivered to your inbox every week.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.ARTHUR RHODES He went out as a World Series champion at age 42 with the Cardinals in 2011. The year before, with Cincinnati, he made the only All-Star team of his 20-year career. But in New York, at least, it is hard to forget Rhodes’s six A.L.C.S. games for Seattle against the Yankees a decade earlier: four innings, 10 hits, four walks, eight runs and two homers. The Yankees, needless to say, won both series.IVAN RODRIGUEZ It would be funny to think of the Marlins’ having two Hall of Fame catchers who played a total of one year and one week with the team. Mike Piazza, who passed through Florida in May 1998, reached Cooperstown last year. Rodriguez made 14 All-Star teams and won 13 Gold Gloves with the Rangers and the Tigers, but he won his only championship in 2003, his lone season with the Marlins.FREDDY SANCHEZ If you get the feeling that those champion Giants of 2010 were a hodgepodge of position players bunched around Buster Posey, you are right. Burrell, Renteria and Freddy Sanchez — a batting champion for Pittsburgh — spent much more time with other teams, as did Aubrey Huff, Cody Ross and Juan Uribe. But they came together in one magical postseason to support a dominant pitching staff and win the first of three San Francisco titles.MATT STAIRS It will not happen, but it would be fun to gaze upon a Stairs plaque in Cooperstown, if only to see 12 teams (13 if you include both the Washington Nationals and their ancestors, the Montreal Expos) etched in gold, along with Stairs’s inimitable nickname: the Wonder Hamster.JASON VARITEK “Evaluating a catcher is like buying a submarine,” Varitek’s agent, Scott Boras, once said. “You have to look way under the water to find out what’s going on.” Varitek was a switch-hitting All-Star with power, but that underwater stuff — intense game-planning and impeccable leadership — might have mattered most across his 15 seasons in Boston.TIM WAKEFIELD As the Yankees pummeled the Red Sox in Game 3 of the 2004 A.L.C.S., on their way to a 19-8 victory and a three-games-to-none series lead, it was natural to assume that Boston’s season would soon be over. Then Wakefield told the Red Sox’ manager, Terry Francona, that he wanted to forgo his start the next night to pitch in relief right then. “That’s when it kicked in for me that this isn’t over,” Francona said last spring, remembering the moment with a mix of fondness and awe. “Our wheels were already spinning. He was going to save the bullpen because he knew we were going to need those guys to pitch if we were going to win. And when I saw him do that, I was like, ‘O.K., he ain’t quitting.’ It really helped me a lot — not just with the bullpen but just with the idea that they want to keep playing.” Those Red Sox kept on playing, all right, right through the end of a championship run.A version of this article appears in print on November 22, 2016, on Page B9 of the New York edition with the headline: For First-Timers on Hall’s Ballot, Stories May Top Statistics.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.See More »