By BILLY WITZMARCH 11, 2016
TAMPA, Fla. —  Goose Gossage still wears his fearsome mustache — it is just white now — and carries himself around the Yankees’ clubhouse during spring training with the same body language that made him one of baseball’s more intimidating presences during the late 1970s and early ’80s.But on Friday, one day after an expletive-peppered screed about everything Gossage thought was wrong with baseball, he was called into the principal’s office — getting a talking-to from General Manager Brian Cashman and Manager Joe Girardi.“Everything is good,” Gossage, a training-camp instructor, said Friday. “I lost my mind for a minute. You’re talking to an old-school guy. There are things I have a hard time with.”Gossage, in an interview with ESPN.com, railed against hitters who flip their bats after a home run, singling out Toronto’s Jose Bautista and the Mets’ Yoenis Cespedes. He called Bautista a “disgrace to the game.”AdvertisementGossage also ripped fans who cheered Milwaukee’s Ryan Braun on his return from a suspension for using performance-enhancing drugs, criticized rule changes that he said had softened the game and bemoaned the preponderance of “nerds” in front offices.AdvertisementIt was the last comment that may have stung the Yankees most, as they make widespread use of their analytics department.“If problems exist, you run to the problem,” Cashman said when asked why he thought it necessary to meet with Gossage.The Yankees have long made use of their former players, bringing some back to work as instructors during spring training. Among those who are here are Willie Randolph, Reggie Jackson and Ron Guidry, as well as the former manager Stump Merrill.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.Girardi said his discussion with Gossage had not been uncomfortable. His relationship with Gossage dates to 1988, when Gossage, then with the Chicago Cubs, gave Girardi, then a Class A catcher, a ride home after a spring-training workout.“The thing about Goose — he’s very passionate about the game and loves it,” Girardi said. “Goose wants to see the game always be great, but we just tried to point out some things that we do and how the game has changed.”Among those was Cashman pointing out that batters used to wear caps to the plate, then switched to helmets and now wear helmets with flaps.“I tried to give him our perspective on some of the things that go on that we see on an everyday basis, whether it’s the safety of players, the perception of analytics in the game and how we use them and how we’ve integrated everything, and it’s just another tool,” Cashman said.Gossage said that while he appreciated the conversation, he had no regrets.“No, not really,” he said. “All the things I said about Bautista just came to my mind, and I got it off my chest.”INSIDE PITCHBrett Gardner, who has been held back because of a bone bruise on his wrist dating to last year’s wild-card loss, is on track to play next Wednesday.We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.