By THE ASSOCIATED PRESSMARCH 11, 2016
Mark Sanchez is getting a change of scenery and a new task: replacing Peyton Manning.Instead of being buried deep in Philadelphia’s depth chart, Sanchez has a chance to lead Denver’s defense of its Super Bowl title.He proved early in his career that he could take a team with a great defense on a deep playoff run, and he will be asked to do the same in Denver if he emerges as the starter.The Broncos acquired Sanchez, a seven-year veteran, from the Eagles on Friday, a move John Elway, Denver’s general manager, called the first step toward replacing Manning.The Broncos were left without an experienced quarterback this week when Manning, a five-time most valuable player, retired and Brock Osweiler signed with Houston as a free agent. So they have turned to Sanchez, who was acquired for a conditional 2017 draft pick.Advertisement“He brings veteran leadership & will compete,” Elway wrote on Twitter. “This is the 1st step in our process.”Sanchez, 29, is due $4.5 million next season in the final year of his contract.He spent his first five N.F.L. seasons with the Jets, helping them to the A.F.C. championship game in his first two years by winning four road playoff games. But Sanchez, the fifth overall pick in the 2009 draft, lost his job with the Jets and played the last two seasons with the Eagles, starting 10 games and going 4-6 filling in for Nick Foles and later Sam Bradford.Sanchez has a 37-35 record as a starter in his seven seasons since leaving Southern California. He and Trevor Siemian, who took one snap last year as a rookie, are the only quarterbacks on Denver’s roster.The Broncos had hoped to hand things over to Osweiler, Manning’s longtime apprentice. But they were outbid by the Texans, who signed Osweiler to a four-year, $72 million contract Thursday. That deal includes $37 million in guarantees for Osweiler, who sustained four injuries in seven career starts, all in 2015.Sanchez became expendable when Philadelphia’s new coach, Doug Pederson, lured the longtime Chiefs backup Chase Daniel to the Eagles for $21 million over three years. Pederson said Bradford, who signed a two-year, $36 million deal this month, would remain his starter.AdvertisementSanchez will have to win the starting job in Denver, and Elway is not done addressing the Broncos’ needs at quarterback. He will probably obtain another experienced passer and will almost certainly take a quarterback in next month’s draft.The Broncos won the Super Bowl despite having the league’s second-lowest cumulative passer rating, behind only the Rams.BUCS ADD TO DEFENSE The four-time Pro Bowl cornerback Brent Grimes and the former Giants defensive end Robert Ayers Jr. have agreed to contracts with the Tampa Bay Buccaneers in free agency.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.Grimes agreed to a two-year, $13.5 million deal, while Ayers landed a three-year, $21 million contract.The Bucs addressed a need to bolster a defense that allowed opposing quarterbacks to complete 70 percent of their passes and throw for 31 touchdowns last season.Grimes spent the past three seasons with the Dolphins. He has 26 interceptions over nine seasons. Ayers had a career-best nine and a half sacks with the Giants in 2015.PATRIOTS SEEK BILLS RECEIVER The Buffalo Bills are in jeopardy of losing receiver Chris Hogan to the Patriots, their A.F.C. East rivals, after Hogan signed New England’s three-year, $12 million offer sheet.Hogan is a restricted free agent whose rights were retained by the Bills on Monday, when they tendered him an N.F.L.-minimum $1.67 million contract. The Bills have five days to match the Patriots’ offer, which will be difficult because Buffalo has little room left under the salary cap. Hogan had Bills 36 catches for 450 yards and two touchdowns last season.COLTS GET BACKUP QUARTERBACK The Indianapolis Colts got their backup quarterback by signing Scott Tolzien.AdvertisementIndianapolis needed a backup after deciding not to re-sign Matt Hasselbeck, 40, who retired, and releasing Ryan Lindley in February and Josh Freeman earlier this month.Tolzien backed up the Green Packers’ Aaron Rodgers the past three seasons.PACKERS RE-SIGN PERRY The Green Bay Packers have re-signed linebacker Nick Perry.Green Bay picked Perry in the first round of the 2012 draft out of Southern California. He has played in 46 games with 16 starts over four seasons and has 130 tackles, 12 ½ sacks, five forced fumbles and a fumble recovery. Last season, he had a team-high three and a half sacks in the playoffs, tying Clay Matthews for the franchise record for a single postseason.A FIRST FOR REDSKINS The Washington Redskins have signed defensive end Kendall Reyes, their first free-agent addition of the off-season.Reyes, 26, picked in the second round of the 2012 draft by the San Diego Chargers, has 126 tackles, 13 ½ sacks and an interception over four seasons.A version of this article appears in print on March 12, 2016, on Page D4 of the New York edition with the headline: Sanchez Gets Shot at Replacing Manning.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.