By BILLY WITZAPRIL 30, 2017
When a team surprisingly has the best record in baseball, a backup catcher and a backup shortstop playing like All-Stars, and a recent rally from eight runs down for a win, a manager might have a little hubris.Yankees Manager Joe Girardi had such a team entering Sunday’s game against the Baltimore Orioles. So, after the Yankees had staged another late rally to force extra innings, he contemplated his thin bullpen and rolled his managerial dice.Girardi brought in closer Aroldis Chapman to pitch the 10th inning, but instead of taking reliever Bryan Mitchell, who had pitched the ninth, out of the game, he put Mitchell at first base — a position he had not played since high school.The move was highly entertaining — “I was just praying for him,” Mitchell’s fellow reliever Dellin Betances said — and it served its purpose, allowing Girardi to put Mitchell back on the mound later.AdvertisementBut Mitchell, who dropped a pop-up at first base, was not much better on the mound when he returned, surrendering three runs as the Yankees lost, 7-4, to the Orioles in 11 innings at Yankee Stadium.AdvertisementUntil then, the Yankees had appeared on the verge of another rousing comeback, tying the score in the ninth on a two-out, two-run single by Didi Gregorius. They then loaded the bases in the 10th with one out, but Orioles catcher Welington Castillo deftly scooped a one-hop throw from shortstop J. J. Hardy and tagged Austin Romine out at the plate. Aaron Judge struck out to end the inning.It may have been a disappointing way to end April, but the Yankees have few complaints after beginning the season with a raft of young talent and a host of questions in what was largely viewed as a transitional season. Even with the loss, they remain in first place in the American League East, tied with the Orioles, with whom they share the second-best record in the majors at 15-8.“I think you’d sign up for that,” Girardi said.Girardi has built a reputation in 10 seasons with the Yankees as a by-the-binder manager. He delves deeply into scouting reports and often has considered all his moves before the game even starts. But this move, he had not.Realizing that Chapman would be the fifth reliever he used on Sunday, and with Adam Warren and Tommy Layne — his only other relievers — heavily taxed on Saturday, Girardi kept Mitchell in the game at first base, a move that also forced him to lose the designated hitter, Matt Holliday.“It’s a little unorthodox, but I’m trying to win the game,” Girardi said. “It’s a unique portion of the game where I’m short on pitchers, I’ve got a strikeout pitcher on the mound that I feel good about. The chances of him handling a ball are probably not too good. Now, if you’ve got a ground-ball pitcher and a bunch of left-handers coming up, it’s probably a different story.”Get the big sports news, highlights and analysis from Times journalists, with distinctive takes on games and some behind-the-scenes surprises, delivered to your inbox every week.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.Chicago Cubs Manager Joe Maddon gained some notoriety last season for playing the left-handed relief pitcher Travis Wood in the outfield in order to bring in a right-handed reliever and then return Wood to the mound. But it is a rare strategy.It was the first time a Yankees pitcher had played another position since Aug. 18, 1983, when Manager Billy Martin put pitcher Ron Guidry in center field (and the left-handed first baseman Don Mattingly at second base) for one out in the resumption of the renowned pine-tar game involving Kansas City’s George Brett.Advertisement(Brett had hit a go-ahead home run that was nullified in a game on July 24 because of excess pine tar on his bat. But instead of Brett making the final out, the Yankees’ apparent win was overturned after the Royals protested, and the teams finished the game a month later.)The Mets also played pitchers in the field. After a brawl with the Cincinnati Reds in 1986, they did not have enough position players. So relievers Jesse Orosco and Roger McDowell alternated between the outfield and the mound for several innings, based on whether it was a right-handed or left-handed hitter.When Mitchell, who had pitched a scoreless ninth inning, took the field in the 10th inning on Sunday with a first baseman’s glove borrowed from Greg Bird, left fielder Brett Gardner had one thought. “Don’t hit it to him,” Gardner said.The Yankees would not be so lucky. The first hitter, Castillo, hit a pop-up that Mitchell missed in foul territory. He was charged with an error, and Castillo then hit a single.“I guess I should have expected the first one to find me,” Mitchell said. “It’s something abnormal to me, but I know I can catch a fly ball. That was pretty intense.”One out later, Jonathan Schoop hit another pop-up along the first-base line.This one Mitchell squeezed tightly, drawing a cheer from the crowd that made Mitchell and Chapman smile.“That was pretty funny,” Mitchell said of the fans’ reaction. “I was laughing to myself.”Mitchell’s turn at first was not the only late-inning drama.Just before Gregorius tied the game in the ninth, Orioles Manager Buck Showalter was ejected after he stormed out of the dugout to protest a balk called against pitcher Darren O’Day.Then, in the bottom of the 10th, the Yankees had their missed opportunity with the bases loaded. Starlin Castro, who had sent Friday’s game into extra innings with a ninth-inning homer, hit a slow roller to shortstop. Hardy made an off-balance throw that short-hopped Castillo, but his scoop allowed him to tag Romine. That set up another moment for Judge, who finished April with 10 homers, to be the hero, but reliever Logan Verrett struck him out to leave the last of the Yankees’ 16 runners on base.AdvertisementIt turned out to be the last chance for the Yankees, who may not have won the game but seemed to exhaust all their options trying.A version of this article appears in print on May 1, 2017, on Page D4 of the New York edition with the headline: Girardi Stashes a Pitcher at First Base, a Novel but Ineffective Ploy.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.