AdvertisementSupported byMets 3, Brewers 1By Seth BerkmanKirk Nieuwenhuis has seen Noah Syndergaard’s maturation for longer than most, beginning with their time as teammates at Class AAA Las Vegas in 2014.Last season with the Mets, Nieuwenhuis noticed that Syndergaard had turned a corner mentally, evolving into a complex psychological force on the mound, creating a lethal mixture when combined with his 6-foot-6 frame and physical talent. In his exceptional rookie season in 2015, he struck out 10 or more batters five times.In the sixth inning on Sunday, having already struck out twice against Syndergaard, Nieuwenhuis, now a starting outfielder for the Milwaukee Brewers, was lost against his former teammate. Despite their history together, even he did not have a CliffsNotes version of how to read Syndergaard.Syndergaard started him off with two 90-mile-per-hour changeups, of which Nieuwenhuis caught only air. Syndergaard then unfurled a 98-m.p.h. fastball, leaving Nieuwenhuis frozen, with his bat on his shoulder.“He mixes it up too much,” Nieuwenhuis said. “You can’t really sit on anything.”The strikeout was Syndergaard’s 10th of the game, and it represented the third time he had reached double digits this season. He collected one more strikeout and allowed only an unearned run in seven innings, quieting the Brewers’ lineup and leading the Mets to a 3-1 victory that completed a three-game sweep at Citi Field.“The amount of growth that I’ve had in the span of one year is night and day,” Syndergaard said.Michael Conforto hit a solo home run into the visiting bullpen in the first inning and scored a go-ahead run on a single by Asdrubal Cabrera in the fourth. Facing a full count, Cabrera waited on a 77-m.p.h. curveball from Chase Anderson and drove it to right field, bringing home Yoenis Cespedes as well.In the background of the story lines dominating the Mets’ offense — Cespedes’s 14 home runs, which is tied for the major league lead; Conforto’s budding bat; as well as the injured backs of David Wright and Lucas Duda — Cabrera has been one of the team’s most consistent players. He is hitting .278 with 15 runs batted in, stabilizing a shortstop position that had been in flux since Jose Reyes left the team after the 2011 season.“He’s meant a lot to us,” Mets Manager Terry Collins said, adding that Cabrera had occasionally played through a bothersome knee. “He’s been great on both sides of the ball.”In the ninth, Cabrera helped turn a game-ending double play, as Jeurys Familia picked up his 15th save in 15 opportunities.Familia’s appearance was surprising, after he pitched in the first two games of the series. Because of the frequent use of the bullpen, Collins was willing to extend Syndergaard to 115 pitches, if needed.The Brewers scored the unearned run in the first inning, after Wright misplayed a ground ball that allowed Scooter Gennett to reach base, but Syndergaard soon settled in, striking out seven of eight batters in a stretch that began in the second inning.“He wasn’t getting his slider over,” Collins said. “When he started to get it over, it changed the whole game.”Syndergaard entered the seventh having thrown 96 pitches, and Collins’s strategy to squeeze one more inning out of him initially appeared unwise.The Brewers led off with two singles, and Syndergaard was showing signs of fatigue, bouncing pitches well in front of home plate. But with Hernan Perez on third base, Alex Presley tried to advance to second on a wild pitch and was thrown out by catcher Rene Rivera.That seemed to calm Syndergaard, who threw 109 pitches, a season high. He fought back to strike out Ramon Flores. Aaron Hill then grounded out to shortstop to end the inning.“He did a great job,” Collins said of Syndergaard. “When you looked up and he got you through the seventh inning, I saluted him.”Finishing with six hits allowed and no walks, Syndergaard improved to 5-2 and lowered his E.R.A. to 1.94. Having struck out 10 against the Washington Nationals last Tuesday, in a 2-0 win, Syndergaard became the fourth pitcher since 1913 to have consecutive double-digit strikeout games with no walks and no earned runs.The Brewers were an appetizer served at a needed time, after the Mets dropped the next two games to the first-place Nationals after Syndergaard’s gem last week. On Monday, they begin a three-game series in Washington.Bartolo Colon is scheduled to pitch the opening game against the Nationals’ Gio Gonzalez, but the focus will be on Tuesday’s game as Matt Harvey makes his first start since being shelled by the Nationals on Thursday in one of the worst outings of his career.After Harvey threw a simulated game Saturday at Citi Field, Collins said he and Harvey were pleased with the results. Because of the seriousness placed on the practice, and the number of pitches Harvey threw, Collins chose to give him an extra day to rest, even though Harvey had thrown only 61 pitches in his past start.Collins did not place extra emphasis on the Nationals series, given other issues facing the team. Duda, who has missed four of the past six games with back soreness, will have tests re-evaluated by the team doctor David Altchek. Collins expected to receive a diagnosis Monday morning.“I’m real concerned, there’s no question,” he said.The Mets currently trail Washington by a game and a half. Even though Syndergaard will not start in the series, players left for the trip feeling optimistic after he shut down the Brewers.“I think it’s nice to build a little momentum into that series,” Wright said. “I think our confidence is high right now.”Advertisement