By THE ASSOCIATED PRESSMAY 22, 2016
TORONTO — DeMar DeRozan scored 32 points, and Bismack Biyombo set a Toronto playoff record with 26 rebounds as the Raptors beat Cleveland, 99-84, on Saturday night in Game 3 of the Eastern Conference finals. The loss was the first of this postseason for the Cavaliers, who lead the best-of-seven series by two games to one.Kyle Lowry scored 20 points, Cory Joseph added 14, and Patrick Patterson and DeMarre Carroll had 10 points apiece for the Raptors. Toronto lost the first two games in Cleveland by a combined 50 points.In Toronto, where “We the North” is a Raptors rallying cry, a capacity crowd dressed in red and white T-shirts helped the team improve to 7-2 at home in these playoffs. Game 4 is Monday night at Air Canada Centre.LeBron James scored 24 points, and J. R. Smith had 22 for the Cavaliers. Cleveland won its first 10 playoff games and was trying to match the Los Angeles Lakers’ record of 11 straight victories to begin a postseason. The Lakers did it in 1989 and again in 2001.Get the big sports news, highlights and analysis from Times journalists, with distinctive takes on games and some behind-the-scenes surprises, delivered to your inbox every week.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.Kyrie Irving scored 13 points, and Channing Frye had 11 for Cleveland. The Cavaliers were held below 100 points for the first time in these playoffs.AdvertisementIt was a rough night for Cavaliers forward Kevin Love, who scored 3 points and made one of nine field-goal attempts. James also had five assists, moving past Jason Kidd and into third place on the N.B.A.’s career playoff list.AdvertisementWith his team ahead by 8, Biyombo scored 6 straight points in the final quarter to put the Raptors up, 91-77, at 3 minutes 38 seconds.DeRozan scored 12 points in the first period, but his buzzer-beating 3-pointer was waved off after a video review. Lowry scored 8 points despite picking up his second foul at 5:40 as Toronto led, 27-24, after the opening quarter. It was the first time in nine quarters this series that the Raptors had outscored the Cavaliers.James went down clutching his face after being accidentally elbowed by Jason Thompson during a scuffle at center court late in the second. Thompson and Joseph were given technicals on the play. James recovered to make a 3-pointer in the final seconds, but Cleveland trailed, 60-47, at halftime.DeRozan scored 10 in the third quarter as the Raptors led by 80-70 heading into the fourth.A version of this article appears in print on May 22, 2016, on Page SP8 of the New York edition with the headline: Raptors  Hand Cavs First Loss in Playoffs.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.