SEPT. 28, 2017
To the Sports Editor:Re “Investigation Nets Charges of Illegality in Recruiting,” Sept. 27: The corruption that is alleged in this article should come as no surprise to followers of college sports. As a financial adviser who has sought business relationships with college athletes becoming professional, I can attest to the many gatekeepers that stand between me and the prospective athlete client. Those “trusted advisers” — parents, agents, relatives, spiritual advisers, coaches, friends and others — see the future wealth of the athlete they attach themselves to.I can hear the outcry from supporters of paying student-athletes to play. The theory is that this will reduce the number of N.C.A.A. rules and legal infractions and that it will eliminate the perception that the athletes are being taken advantage of by the current scholarship system.Paying college athletes will not make a material change to these illicit activities. It may reduce the draconian amateurism rules that limit an N.C.A.A. athlete’s ability to benefit from his or her name, number, likeness and skill. It will not remove the fact that elite student athletes are potential moneymaking machines that will attract nefarious actors looking to profit from their future success. Money corrupts.André MirkineWestport, Conn.The writer is a member of the Sports Lawyers Association and a founder of the Sports Financial Advisors Association.AdvertisementTo the Sports Editor:Re “Safest Bet in Sports: Men Complaining About a Female Announcer’s Voice,” Sept. 18: The discussion about sports announcing written by Julie DiCaro is partly wrong.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.I am an 81-year-old female Denver Broncos football fan. I am also becoming hard of hearing, losing the ability to hear low-pitched sounds in one ear. But I cannot tolerate higher-pitched sounds, though they do enhance my ability to understand. So I am recently unable to listen to certain female announcers who run shows on cable news. Not all, but I do change channels for that reason.AdvertisementI didn’t hear “Monday Night Football” in the opening week, so I’m writing without knowing the true truth, but I know many people younger than I have impaired hearing from listening to very loud music at concerts and through earphones. And I know it is true that some higher-pitched speech is irritating. That isn’t prejudice-based. There were two announcers for the Broncos’ opener. One had an annoying-to-me voice. He was an announcer whose voice I didn’t recognize, and I can’t name him. I hope it won’t be his regular gig; I watch that team every week.Linda JohnsonSalt Lake CityTo the Sports Editor:One need only to listen to the majority of male N.F.L. broadcasters, with their endless blathering, self-congratulatory insights and meaningless stories of days gone by while plays are unfolding, to understand that the majority of the complaints about Beth Mowins announcing were strictly driven by misguided chauvinistic attitudes. Women definitely have a place in football broadcast booths. Take a look in the stands during a game and you will see thousands of rabid football fans who don’t wear jock straps. I found Mowins’s command of her job refreshing and not at all shrill to my ears. Rarely nowadays can I say that about the men who hog the airwaves.Roger S. BeadleChico, Calif.A version of this letter appears in print on October 1, 2017, on Page SP9 of the New York edition with the headline: Corruption Endemic in College Sports.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.