By VICTOR MATHERMARCH 11, 2016
Two years after drafting him in the first round, the Cleveland Browns cut Johnny Manziel on Friday, in the wake of his many problems both on and off the field.The first freshman to win the Heisman Trophy, Manziel was a colorful and record-breaking quarterback at Texas A&M, where he was nicknamed Johnny Football. Drafted at No. 22 over all by the Browns, he was welcomed as a savior in Cleveland, where losing is a longtime habit. But he soon began making headlines of the wrong kind.Manziel’s penchant for partying, often caught on video, did not endear him to management or to most fans, and his play on the field, when he got there, did not make up for it.Get the big sports news, highlights and analysis from Times journalists, with distinctive takes on games and some behind-the-scenes surprises, delivered to your inbox every week.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.In January, the police in Fort Worth used a helicopter to search for Manziel after a woman describing herself as his ex-girlfriend said she was worried after they had been in an altercation. In October, near Cleveland, Manziel was spotted fighting with a woman as they drove. He admitted to having drunk alcohol earlier in the day.AdvertisementManziel spent two months in a rehab center for undisclosed reasons last winter.It was not a surprise that he was cut, especially after Sashi Brown, the team’s executive vice president for football operations, blasted him in February, saying, “Johnny’s continual involvement in incidents” that run counter to team expectations “undermines the hard work of his teammates and the reputation of our organization.”His playing time in his two seasons was limited. The backup to Brian Hoyer in his rookie season, he started twice. Last season, he was the backup to Josh McCown and started six games. His career record is 2-6.AdvertisementAt 23, he has time to establish an N.F.L. career, but it remains to be seen if any team will decide to take a chance on him.A version of this article appears in print on March 12, 2016, on Page D3 of the New York edition with the headline: Browns Cut Manziel After Two Seasons of Trouble.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.