By ANDREW KEHMARCH 11, 2016
LOS ANGELES —  There was singing inside the Cleveland Cavaliers’ locker room late Thursday night.As the players were shedding their uniforms and dipping their feet into buckets of ice, Kyrie Irving, James Jones and Jordan McRae trilled a dawdling rendition of “The Star-Spangled Banner,” uncoiling the lines with waggish emotion as their teammates looked on and laughed.The Cavaliers have been craving this sort of harmony. They defeated the Los Angeles Lakers at Staples Center on Thursday to improve their record to 46-18 and keep a foothold atop the Eastern Conference. Yet they remain one of the more unfulfilled, angst-ridden first-place teams in recent memory.The standards they have set for themselves this season have been demandingly high — lofty enough to match their league-high payroll. For the season to be deemed a success, it very likely must end with a championship trophy.AdvertisementTo be sure, the potential ceiling of their talent-laden roster has seemed high as well. But the worry appears to be that it will never be high enough — not when the specter of the Golden State Warriors, who defeated the Cavaliers in the finals last year, menaces any team that considers itself a contender.AdvertisementThe Cavaliers, then, want to be better. They wish they were improving faster.“We have 18 games left, and we’ve got to start getting ready,” said Tyronn Lue, the team’s coach. “We’re trying to run plays on the floor with guys not knowing them still. That’s tough to swallow, especially when you’re doing them every day in shoot-around and practice. We’ve got to start picking things up a lot faster.”Lue was echoing sentiments that have proliferated around the Cavaliers locker room over the last few weeks.After the Cavaliers stumbled to a surprise loss to a severely depleted Memphis Grizzlies team at home on Monday, LeBron James said the team would not be ready for the playoffs if they started the next day. James characterized his team that night as one that was “still learning.”It was a surprising description of a first-place team with championship ambitions.Any anxiety that may exist around the Cavaliers organization, though, was not palpable inside the locker room on Thursday. They had notched their second win in a row in the second game of a difficult four-game road trip. They did so in a buzzy arena, where fans were treated to a throwback shootout between James and Kobe Bryant, who will retire upon the conclusion of the season.After the game, James sauntered around the room wearing a white towel and flip-flops. He peeked over the shoulder of a team staff member, who was looking at a picture from the game on his Instagram feed on his phone.In the picture, James was airborne, with the basketball cradled perilously in his left palm, his body contorted away from the rim. It was the most exciting play of the game: Streaming forward on a fast break, J. R. Smith had lobbed the ball to James off the backboard, but the pass went slightly awry. James dunked it anyway, reaching back behind his head to snatch the ball before slamming it in with his left hand.“That’s ridiculous,” James said, staring at the screen. “I got to get that blown up in my house.”AdvertisementJames was walking around aimlessly, still fixated on the picture. “That’s one of the best photos I’ve ever seen,” he said. “Who captured that?”Finally, James made a move for the showers.“They say some of the worst lobs make the best dunks,” he said, turning to Smith. “You made the photo, Swish.”If the Cavaliers have been subjected to heightened scrutiny this season, James has been at the root of it. Bryant’s retirement will confirm the ascent of James as the game’s foremost dignitary. Championship rings feel like a birthright for players of his caliber, but James is stuck for the moment at two, and the Warriors’ emergence as the league’s best team has complicated his pursuit of more.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.Over the last few weeks, James has been uploading cryptic posts to his social media accounts — he has almost 29 million followers on Twitter and almost 19 million on Instagram — with vague messages that read like fortune cookies.On March 6, he wrote on Twitter: “It’s this simple. U can’t accomplished the dream if everyone isn’t dreaming the same thing everyday. Nightmares follow.”Later that day, he wrote: “Structure and Consistency creates Perfection. U shortcut, u come up short! Straight Up.”James has declined to explain these posts and others, inviting people to use their imagination. Some naturally thought the worst: that he might be unhappy with his current situation. He told reporters that his Twitter posts were not about his teammates, but he did not elaborate, so questions remain.“I got a beautiful mind, and I want to use it sometimes in a social manner,” James said about his messages this week.The Cavaliers finished Thursday two and a half games ahead of the Toronto Raptors in the conference standings. But a good record was never going to be enough to temper the intense scrutiny.AdvertisementThe same pressure drove the Cavaliers to make a midseason coaching change, firing David Blatt when the team was 30-11 and atop the conference. David Griffin, the team’s general manager, spoke then about forming winning principles, spirit and culture.Lue said he was still honing his rotation. He wanted his players to find a rhythm before the postseason. And amid everything else, the Cavaliers would like to give their players opportunities to rest before the playoffs.“We have a long way to go,” Lue said Thursday. “We have a tough Eastern Conference. The playoffs, everyone’s saying we’re going to walk through it, but it’s not going to be that easy. We’ve got to continue to get better each and every night, continue to grow, continue to compete for 48 minutes, and then we’ll see what happens.”The question remains whether any team in the East can challenge the Warriors.Early Thursday night, Byron Scott, the Lakers’ coach, shook his head and let out a quiet laugh. He and his players were four days removed from an unexpected home victory over the Warriors, and a reporter wondered whether there was some key to unlock the league’s best team.Scott did not need much time to ponder the question.“I just don’t see anybody really beating them in seven games,” he said. “To me, you’ve got to hope they have four subpar games, and you’ve got to have four really good ones.”Such sustained ineffectiveness, from players like Stephen Curry and Klay Thompson, just does not seem possible, he added. Scott conceded that teams like the Cavaliers, San Antonio Spurs, Oklahoma City Thunder and Los Angeles Clippers might have some chance to topple the Warriors in the postseason.But he said, “To me, that chance is not like 50-50, either. They’re that good.”For the Cavaliers, these were jarring, unmelodious sentiments.A version of this article appears in print on March 12, 2016, on Page D1 of the New York edition with the headline: Cavaliers Are in First, With Need to Improve .  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.