By AGENCE FRANCE-PRESSEAPRIL 29, 2017
STUTTGART, Germany — Maria Sharapova lost in the semifinals of the Porsche Grand Prix on Saturday, her contentious comeback from a 15-month doping ban ending in defeat to one of her biggest critics.Sharapova, a five-time Grand Slam winner and a former world No. 1 who tested positive for meldonium at last year’s Australian Open, fell to Kristina Mladenovic, 3-6, 7-5, 6-4.“I’m not angry,” Sharapova said. “I’d have loved to have used the opportunity when I was ahead in the second set, so I had a bit of a letdown, which allowed her to get back in the match, gain confidence and play well.”Mladenovic has been a vocal critic of Sharapova’s return to tennis, and on the eve of their semifinal, she accused her of getting “extra help” because she had been handed wild cards to play at tournaments in Stuttgart, Madrid and Rome.AdvertisementSharapova did not blame her fitness level for her defeat but said she needed match practice after her enforced break.Advertisement“If at the start of the week I’d said I’d be in this position, I’d be pretty happy with that,” she said. “The way I played, I was really happy with that. You are never sure what level you are going to come onto the court with, but I feel this is a great base with which I started here.”Sharapova will learn on May 16 whether she will be given a wild card for the main draw at Roland Garros.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.Mladenovic was complimentary of Sharapova after their semifinal. “She’s a tough player and was very aggressive from the first ball,” Mladenovic said after the match, which lasted 2 hours 38 minutes. “I was struggling early on but just stuck in there and fought, so I am very happy that it paid off.”Sharapova easily won the first set, which lasted just 35 minutes. But Mladenovic, ranked 19th in the world, rallied from a 2-0 deficit in the second, holding her serve and breaking Sharapova in what turned into a battle of nerves.Mladenovic showed the first signs of cracking when what should have been a simple return spiraled harmlessly off her racket as she served with the advantage at 5-5. But she held her composure and went ahead, 6-5, after fending off three break points.Mladenovic took a commanding 5-2 lead in the final set, but Sharapova rallied to pull it back to 5-4. Mladenovic steadied her nerves and converted her first match point to secure her first career victory over Sharapova.Mladenovic will now face Laura Siegemund — a wild-card entrant who beat fourth-seeded Simona Halep by 6-4, 7-5 — in Sunday’s final.A version of this article appears in print on April 30, 2017, on Page SP8 of the New York edition with the headline: Sharapova Falls to One of Her Loudest Critics.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.