By MELISSA HOPPERTMAY 22, 2016
BALTIMORE — The sky was still dark, and the rain was still pelting Pimlico Race Course, but by daybreak on Sunday, Team Nyquist had made up its mind: Its previously undefeated colt would head to Belmont Park for a rematch with Exaggerator, who a day earlier had vanquished his nemesis in the slop to win the Preakness Stakes.“Even the great Secretariat got beat,” Nyquist’s trainer, Doug O’Neill, said. “They’re not machines, as much as he would seem like a machine, being undefeated and doing everything like a superhorse.”Over in Exaggerator’s barn, the mood could not have been brighter. Keith Desormeaux, who trains Exaggerator, even arrived early for his morning news conference.There were, after all, many reasons to be happy. With Desormeaux’s brother Kent on Exaggerator’s back, the colt had finally reached the winner’s circle after having lost all four of his previous meetings against Nyquist, including a second-place finish in the Kentucky Derby. Now, Keith Desormeaux was full of energy.Advertisement“The dream, honestly, is just having a horse that is consistent and has the ability to compete at this level,” he said. “We do our best, honestly, to prepare and hope and make sure that we’ve done all we can to get the horse to the race in the best shape.Advertisement“Goodness, the actual feeling of winning, honestly, is still sinking in. I’ve been pretty good with these things all week, but I’m at a loss for words. I’m still processing it all.”Exaggerator, who had previously won two graded stakes on wet tracks, including the Grade I Santa Anita Derby on April 9, benefited from a sloppy track on Saturday, and by Nyquist’s having to duel with Uncle Lino through the fastest opening quarter-mile in Preakness history, at 22.38 seconds.“I wanted him to have a good, clean trip, free-running,” O’Neill said of Nyquist. “And the fast pace would be blamed on me, because I just didn’t want any traffic trouble going into the first turn.”After that, all Exaggerator had to do was sit back and wait for Nyquist to tire. Another strong closer, Cherry Wine, passed Nyquist as well and finished second, three and a half lengths back.“I was confident at the top of the stretch when he was moving up to the leaders without being asked,” Desormeaux said. “Kent was still sitting like it was in morning exercise. When he asked Exaggerator for his best, there had to be much left in the tank.”It was also a very good day for the Stronach Group, which owns Pimlico, and the Maryland Jockey Club. After talk of moving the Preakness to Laurel Park in Laurel, Md., cast an early pall over Preakness week, officials said a record crowd of 135,256 had attended the 14-race Preakness Day program, which generated a record handle of $94,127,434. NBC posted a 6.2 overnight rating, up 7 percent from 5.8 from 2015.Sal Sinatra, the president and general manager of the Maryland Jockey Club, said no decisions on the future of the Preakness would be made until the Maryland Stadium Authority completed a study to determine the viability of keeping the second leg of the Triple Crown at Pimlico, the nation’s second-oldest track. The study is expected to take a year and a half, he said.AdvertisementIn addition to Exaggerator and Nyquist, the probables for the Belmont Stakes are Cherry Wine and his stablemate Brody’s Cause (seventh in the Derby); Lani (fifth in the Preakness and ninth in the Derby); Suddenbreakingnews (fifth in the Derby); and Destin (sixth in the Derby).Get the big sports news, highlights and analysis from Times journalists, with distinctive takes on games and some behind-the-scenes surprises, delivered to your inbox every week.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.Exaggerator will be given a few days to recover at Pimlico before shipping to Belmont Park in Elmont, N.Y., for the mile-and-a-half Belmont on June 11. Nyquist will head there Monday.“We were saying last night, the motto is, ‘A new streak begins in three weeks,’ ” O’Neill said. “So it’s to get us motivated, as humans. I’m still very proud, but I was definitely visualizing a Triple Crown winner. That’s for sure.”Desormeaux could not be happier about playing spoiler. For him, he said, the pressure was already minimal, and now that Exaggerator had defeated his rival, there was even less.“I’m just an old country boy working in the trenches these last 30 years, and now we’re competing on the highest level,” he said. “My emotions are more toward gratitude and the satisfaction of getting to this level.“The rivalry or the fun, it’s there, but it doesn’t matter who is in the race. It’s the fact that we’re competing at this level.”A version of this article appears in print on May 23, 2016, on Page D5 of the New York edition with the headline: Belmont Looms as Rubber Match, With Nyquist and Exaggerator Committed to Run.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.