By CHRIS ADAMSKIMAY 23, 2016
PITTSBURGH — Two days after taking a puck to the face before the start of a game, Tyler Johnson took a puck to his back to end one.Jason Garrison’s wrist shot deflected off Johnson as he stood in the slot facing the net, and the puck flew into the net 53 seconds into overtime to pull the Tampa Bay Lightning to within a win of their second consecutive Stanley Cup finals with a 4-3 win in Game 5 of the Eastern Conference finals Sunday night.Johnson quipped that he thought Garrison was “going for my head again, so I just turned around.”“I got lucky; I guess it hit me,” Johnson said. “I wasn’t really sure if it hit me or not — I was just excited when I saw it in back of the net.”Tampa Bay leads the best-of-seven series, three games to two, and has a chance to close out the series in Game 6 Tuesday night at Amalie Arena in Tampa.AdvertisementNikita Kucherov’s second goal of the game tied it with 3 minutes 16 seconds left in regulation, and Alex Killorn also scored for Tampa Bay, which rode the momentum of Game 4’s home victory Friday.AdvertisementJohnson was bleeding before faceoff of that contest after a teammate’s shot hit him during warm-ups. He played in the game anyway, with a protective grille over his face — one that was absent Sunday.Johnson’s injuries, he noted casually, were some stitches and some missing teeth. “We will know more when everything settles down, but no, I don’t want to play with anything on my face,” he said. “That was an easy decision for me. As soon as they let me make the decision, I made it.”Johnson was seemingly in the middle of everything Sunday — taking two penalties, delivering four hits, attempting a team-high-tying eight shots and assisting on Kucherov’s late tying goal before his lower back was the final thing to touch the puck an instant before it went past Penguins goalie Marc-Andre Fleury for the winner.“No shot’s a bad shot in overtime,” Garrison said. “So we will take the outcome of that.”Tampa Bay’s 21-year-old goalie, Andrei Vasilevskiy, made 31 saves in making his fourth consecutive start filling in for the injured Vezina Trophy finalist Ben Bishop, but Penguins Coach Mike Sullivan opted for the veteran Fleury over his 21-year-old goalie, Matt Murray, for the first time this postseason.Get the big sports news, highlights and analysis from Times journalists, with distinctive takes on games and some behind-the-scenes surprises, delivered to your inbox every week.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.Fleury, a Stanley Cup winner in 2009, appeared a bit rusty in making his first start since he sustained a concussion on March 31. Murrary’s solid play in the first round against the Rangers compelled Sullivan to stick with him even as Fleury was cleared to return. Fleury finally came on for the third period of Game 4 on Friday.Fleury acknowledged that he still wasn’t feeling his best. “Still, I have been practicing a lot, so I should have been better,” he said.Fleury had stopped the first 11 shots he faced during the initial period and a half, making some quality stops particularly during the first period as Tampa Bay was controlling play.AdvertisementBut Killorn and Kucherov scored 70 seconds apart late in the second period to tie the game, 2-2. Although Chris Kunitz restored the Penguins’ lead less than five minutes later, Kucherov’s second goal of the game, and his N.H.L.-leading 11th of the playoffs, again pulled Tampa Bay even. It came on a wraparound late in the third and less than a minute after a Ryan Callahan shot beat Fleury but clanged off the corner of the net.Just as big was Johnson’s goal, which was the fourth among 14 shots on goal to get past Fleury in the game’s final 27 minutes.“I think we left him kind of hanging a bit,” Penguins defenseman Olli Maatta said of Fleury. “We have to be better in front of him. He’s awesome up there, and he always gives us a chance to win.”Sullivan would not commit to who will start in goal Tuesday as the Penguins face elimination for the first time in these playoffs.The Lightning won despite trailing for much of the game and not holding a lead for any of it, until the very end.“I get to watch this team 100-plus times a year, and it’s a lot of fun to be their coach,” Tampa Bay Coach Jon Cooper said. “I’m not saying they don’t give me ulcers, but they just have a quiet calm about them. Even when sitting there down, 2-0, it was just no panic, nothing going on on the bench other than ‘Let’s get the next one.’“We’ve been in this situation too many times, and it’s a 60-minute game, and it doesn’t matter. We just felt like ‘We’re in this game;’ it was just a confidence level. And we got rewarded.”A version of this article appears in print on May 23, 2016, on Page D4 of the New York edition with the headline: Lightning Close In on Return to Finals.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.