
On Horse Racing By                     
 JOE DRAPE
 
MAY 20, 2016
BALTIMORE — The Preakness Stakes is the easy leg of the Triple Crown, the one that 10 of the last 19 Kentucky Derby winners have rolled through triumphant to earn a ticket to New York and a date with destiny. Their owners and trainers treat this scuffed-up old track like a summer home — feasting on crab cakes and fried chicken as they await Saturday, surrendering to its shirt-sleeves-and-jeans embrace.There are no swarming crowds in the mornings as there are in Kentucky before the Derby, no jangly nerves haunting the owners and trainers about whether their horses will live up to the expectations of America’s greatest race.No, the mornings here blossom languidly to the chirping of birds and the thump, thump, thump of feed buckets. If owners and trainers treat this like camp, their horses revel in what are essentially spa days. The timed breezes and stout gallops are in the rearview mirror; the horses saunter onto the track to stretch their legs, and the riders reassure them that the heavy lifting is done.The Big Horse especially has little to do but to stay loose and be admired by rival horsemen. This year his name is Nyquist, and he has been as perfect as racehorses come. The colt has won all of his races — eight of them, and easily — and has scared off all but two rivals from the Derby.Only a fool would pick against the 3-to-5 Nyquist. Meet him: His name is atop the story.Before American Pharoah swept the Derby, the Preakness and the Belmont Stakes last year to become the 12th Triple Crown champion ever, and the first in 37 years, Nyquist’s name and accomplishments would have been on the tip of the tongue of every self-respecting horse player and horse lover.AdvertisementBut instead of eagerly asking, “Is he the one?” to end decades of thwarted charges into the history books, the question becomes, “Is he another one?” and is asked more with a shrug. It is more than plausible: Affirmed, after all, swept the series in 1978, a year after Seattle Slew.AdvertisementStill, no one really knows how to act or what to think of that possibility. It has elicited mixed signals from the serene barns. Those in the Nyquist camp, led by the trainer Doug O’Neill, act as if they are already halfway to New York — as if the final mile of their journey were the mile and a half of the Belmont Stakes.“Everybody is smiling, happy and optimistic for tomorrow,” said O’Neill, who carried himself with the same certainty in Kentucky before the Derby.No one is quarreling with him much, either. Bob Baffert, the trainer of American Pharoah, is here with one of his second-team colts: Collected, who was 10 to 1 in the morning line. Baffert, taking to the parlance of Las Vegas, acknowledged that he might have been the headliner last year but is merely a lounge act this year.Get the big sports news, highlights and analysis from Times journalists, with distinctive takes on games and some behind-the-scenes surprises, delivered to your inbox every week.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.“The only way you beat Nyquist is if he doesn’t bring his A game, but crazy things happen in these races,” Baffert said.There is a healthy amount of support coalescing around the Derby runner-up, Exaggerator (3 to 1), to rain on Nyquist’s parade — largely because rain is expected to fall hard on Pimlico Race Course. Exaggerator has shown a penchant for transforming into a Jet Ski on sloppy or muddy tracks, having won twice on such surfaces — including the best performance of his life last month in the Santa Anita Derby.But how can you ignore the fact that Exaggerator has been unable to finish ahead of Nyquist in four previous races? Exaggerator’s trainer, Keith Desormeaux, has refused to take the bait. He has had nothing but admiring words for Nyquist and, rightfully, reminded everyone that there is no shame in running second.“I’m cashing checks for my owners,” he said.But beyond the rain, Desormeaux also sees a silver lining in how the race could play out. Nyquist did run fast early in Kentucky, but on Saturday he is likely to have to fend off early challenges from as many as four horses: Uncle Lino (20 to 1), Laoban (30 to 1), Stradivari (8 to 1) and Collected.“There’s plenty of speed, and we’re obviously coming off the pace,” Desormeaux said.When and how Exaggerator might open up his late speed on Nyquist will be up to the trainer’s brother Kent, a Hall of Fame jockey, who twice before took the first two-thirds of the Triple Crown, aboard Real Quiet in 1998 and Big Brown in 2008.Advertisement“I want to get my picture taken in the sun,” he said.So it’s not only a sport for fools. Dreamers, too, are welcome.The On Horse Racing column on Saturday, about Nyquist’s pursuit of a Triple Crown, misstated, in some editions, the significance of American Pharoah’s Triple Crown victory in 2015. He was the 12th Triple Crown champion ever and the first in 37 years, not the 12th Triple Crown champion in 37 years.A version of this article appears in print on May 21, 2016, on Page D1 of the New York edition with the headline: No Crown Weighs Heavy Yet.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.See More »