By SETH BERKMANAPRIL 29, 2017
FLORHAM PARK, N.J. — As the Jets entered this year’s N.F.L. draft, they sought an array of young players to rebuild a team that had missed the playoffs for six consecutive seasons and that had recently stripped its roster of expensive cornerstones like center Nick Mangold, wide receiver Brandon Marshall and cornerback Darrelle Revis.Although the Jets needed a lot of help at various positions, they appeared mostly set at wide receiver — where a flock of youthful options surrounded the veteran Eric Decker.However, the Jets used two of their draft slots to take receivers, a decision that made more sense after they finished drafting and announced that one member of that promising flock, Devin Smith, would not be available this season.Smith, a second-round pick in 2015, tore his anterior cruciate ligament, General Manager Mike Maccagnan said. The Jets became aware of the problem at the start of their off-season training activities this month, when Smith “experienced a situation with his knee,” Maccagnan said. Smith underwent a magnetic resonance imaging examination that confirmed the injury, Maccagnan said.AdvertisementHe did not explain why the Jets had not disclosed the injury before. It was revealed only as Maccagnan answered a question about why the Jets had used a fourth-round pick (141st over all) on Saturday to take Chad Hansen, a wide receiver from California.AdvertisementThat was the second straight pick the Jets had used on a receiver. They selected ArDarius Stewart, a wide receiver from Alabama, in the third round (No. 79) on Friday.“We actually think we have a good group of young receivers, plus Eric,” Maccagnan said, calling Smith’s injury “unfortunate” and “a setback.” “I think going into it, we thought, ‘Hey, let’s make this thing more competitive.’”The injury puts into question the future of Smith, a prospect whom the Jets heralded as having big-play ability coming out of Ohio State. Smith has torn the same ligament before, during a game in December 2015.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.The Jets did a lot of bargaining during the three days of the draft, making five trades to amass a total of nine picks after entering the draft with seven. They also gained a fifth-round pick in next year’s draft from the Dallas Cowboys.After Hansen, the Jets used one fifth-round pick on Jordan Leggett (No. 150), a tight end from Clemson with excellent hands, and another on Dylan Donahue (No. 181), a linebacker from West Georgia. Donahue’s father, Mitch Donahue, played in the N.F.L. as a defensive end from 1991 to 1994.In the sixth round, the Jets picked Elijah McGuire (No. 188), a running back from Louisiana-Lafayette. With their final two picks, they took cornerbacks who could fill the hole left by Revis’s departure. Jeremy Clark, from Michigan, was taken 197th over all. Seven slots later, the Jets took Derrick Jones from Mississippi.For the first time in five years, the Jets did not draft a quarterback. They appear set to enter the season with Josh McCown, who will be 38 in July, atop their depth chart at the position.As Maccagnan took questions on Saturday, he avoided directly discussing the future of defensive lineman Sheldon Richardson, whose behavior off the field has increasingly overshadowed his performance on it. Richardson served a one-game suspension last season under the league’s personal-conduct policy after pleading guilty to resisting arrest in connection with what the police described as a high-speed chase in St. Charles County, Mo.Maccagnan pointed out that Richardson was still under contract but said: “There’s a whole off-season ahead of us here. I think we’ll see how it unfolds going forward.”A version of this article appears in print on April 30, 2017, on Page SP3 of the New York edition with the headline: With Key Pieces of Last Year’s Team Gone, Jets Are Laying a New Foundation.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.