AdvertisementSupported byBy Richard GoldsteinBill Gadsby was 12 years old and crossing the Atlantic with his mother on the British ocean liner Athenia at the outset of World War II when it was torpedoed and sunk by a German submarine. They spent several hours in a lifeboat before being rescued.At 14, he was walking in his native Calgary, Alberta, when a large piece of concrete fell from the facing of a four-story building and grazed his shirt.When he was 25, he contracted polio.He was, in short, a survivor — and so he remained as a star defenseman in the rough and tough Original Six era of the National Hockey League, when skaters went without helmets and goalies shunned masks. Gadsby incurred some 640 stitches, many in his face, along with broken legs, ribs and thumbs and a broken nose, all souvenirs of mayhem on ice.His credo, as he wrote in his 2003 memoir, “The Grateful Gadsby,” was: “If I have a pulse, I believe I should play.”Gadsby died on Thursday in Farmington Hills, Mich., his wife, Edna, said. He was 88. He had been in failing health and had fallen twice in the last week.He was as indefatigable as he was seemingly indestructible. A hockey Hall of Famer, he endured for 20 seasons in the N.H.L., playing defense with the Chicago Black Hawks, the Rangers and the Detroit Red Wings.Playing in the N.H.L. from 1946 to 1966, he was adept at rushing with the puck, delivering fearsome checks and blocking shots.Gadsby set a league record for assists by a defenseman — 46 — for the 1958-59 Rangers, and was a three-time runner-up for the Norris Trophy as the N.H.L.’s leading defenseman. He was also the first N.H.L. defenseman to record at least 500 points.When he retired, he was the league’s career leader for a defenseman in games (1,248 in the regular season), points (568) and penalty minutes (1,539). He was selected as a first- or second-team All-Star seven times and was inducted into the Hockey Hall of Fame in 1970.One laurel eluded him. Gadsby was one of the N.H.L.’s finest players never to hoist the Stanley Cup. He got to the finals three times with the Red Wings, but they were beaten twice by the Toronto Maple Leafs and then by the Montreal Canadiens.William Alexander Gadsby was born in Alberta on Aug. 8, 1927. He learned to skate on frozen ponds and told his father, Bill Sr., that his sole ambition was to be a hockey player.Before he could enter the junior ranks, he survived a catastrophe that seared him throughout his life. When a U-boat torpedoed the Athenia, bound from Britain to Montreal, on Sept. 3, 1939, Bill and his mother, who were returning to Canada after visiting relatives in England, made it to a lifeboat and were picked up by a freighter off the Irish coast.“I can still hear voices yelling, ‘Women and children first!’ ” Gadsby told The Chicago Sun-Times in 2005.More than 100 of the Athenia’s 1,400 passengers and crew died in the attack.After playing junior and minor league hockey, Gadsby was called up by the Black Hawks in 1946 and became a mainstay on defense and their captain. When he was stricken with polio at their 1952 training camp, he narrowly averted paralysis. He recovered quickly and played for the entire season. But Gadsby’s Black Hawks reached the playoffs only twice.In November 1954, he was traded to the Rangers and went on to have his best seasons with them, playing alongside his fellow future Hall of Famers Gump Worsley in goal, Andy Bathgate at right wing and Harry Howell on defense. His Ranger teams made the playoffs three times but were never among the N.H.L.’s strong teams. (Bathgate died last month.)Gadsby was long remembered for a legal but crushing open-ice check he put on Toronto defenseman Tim Horton at Maple Leaf Gardens in March 1955 while a Ranger. Horton sustained a broken jaw and right leg and was knocked unconscious.“It scared the hell out of me, seeing the blood coming out of Tim’s mouth and ear,” Gadsby told The Montreal Gazette in November 2012. “I thought he was dead. Thank God it wasn’t a dirty check.”Gadsby was traded to the Red Wings in February 1960 in a multiplayer deal that was to send their star defenseman Red Kelly to the Rangers, but Kelly refused to report to them and the deal was canceled. Gadsby was finally sent to Detroit in June 1961.He retired with 130 goals and 438 assists in 1,248 regular-season games.Gadsby was named the Red Wings’ coach for the 1968-69 season. He took them to a winning record, but they failed to make the playoffs. When the Wings got off to a 2-0 start the next season, their owner congratulated him.“We were 8-1 in the exhibition games, and won the first two in the regular season,” Gadsby told The Toronto Star in 2000. “Bruce Norris came into the dressing room, put his arm around me and told me I was doing a hell of a job. Next day he fired me. I never have figured out why.”After leaving the pro game, Gadsby worked at a crane company and owned a hockey school in the Detroit area.In addition to his wife, Gadsby, who lived in Southfield, Mich., is survived by their daughters Brenda Golembiewski, Judy Gadsby, Donna Malott and Sandy Groth, nine grandchildren and 11 great-grandchildren.Gadsby played before the big-money era, but he did find a way to earn some compensation from the scars he incurred.“My dear wife, Edna, kept a log of how many times I was hurt,” he once told the Hockey Hall of Fame. “When a local insurance man started offering players stitch insurance, I signed up immediately. Under terms of the $100 policy, I would receive $5 for every stitch I received that season.”Soon afterward he incurred a cut that required 30 stitches in his lower lip.“I had to laugh at the poor agent,” he said. “In less than two weeks I had paid for the policy. I had gotten back all my money, plus a $50 profit. I think they stopped offering that policy not long after that.”Advertisement