By SCOTT CACCIOLAMARCH 10, 2016
OAKLAND, Calif. —  A few years ago, back when he was working as a television analyst, Steve Kerr spent some time before a game catching up with Chris Bosh.At the time, Bosh was in the midst of four straight appearances in the N.B.A. finals with the Miami Heat, a stretch that had turned the team’s most insignificant games into charged events. Bosh told Kerr that the experience had given him an appreciation for what Kerr and his former teammates had done during their trophy-collecting run with the Chicago Bulls.“When you do it year after year, every game is such a big game,” said Kerr, now in his second season as coach of the Golden State Warriors. “The wear and tear emotionally of having to get up for games — it’s all a part of it, but it’s a privilege. It’s way better than the alternative.”About an hour after Kerr shared this story, his players took the floor here at Oracle Arena on Wednesday for the 63rd game of their season, against the Utah Jazz. The Warriors were coming off a baffling loss to the Los Angeles Lakers on Sunday and a disjointed win against the Orlando Magic on Monday, and Kerr was eager to see them smooth some of their rough edges.AdvertisementWith few exceptions, the Warriors have been strangers to adversity this season, and maybe their greatest danger at this late stage is settling into a slumber ahead of the playoffs. They have made something difficult — the grind of 82 games against other highly paid professionals — look effortless. But Kerr has noticed the slow leak of some bad habits.AdvertisementThey were on display, for at least a couple of minutes, against the Jazz. The Warriors committed turnovers on two of their first three possessions before Stephen Curry punctuated the fourth by tossing a behind-the-back pass to Draymond Green for a fast-break dunk.The entire sequence typified much of Golden State’s play in recent days — a mix of the sloppy and the sublime. Kerr would prefer to keep things more basic.“It’s tricky, and it’s something we talk about quite a bit,” said Kerr, whose team went on to win, 115-94. “We have a great home crowd here, and we have guys who want to put on a show, and they should. That’s a big part of what makes it fun. What I’m trying to convince them of is, the simple leads to the spectacular.”Get the big sports news, highlights and analysis from Times journalists, with distinctive takes on games and some behind-the-scenes surprises, delivered to your inbox every week.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.He added: “If they make three or four passes, just moving on and moving on and moving on because the guy is open, that usually leads to the lob dunk, or the open 3 that brings the house down. When you force the issue and try to create the spectacular early in the possession, it’s usually a turnover.”These are all relative criticisms, of course. The Warriors are 57-6. They break records, or at least approach them, on a regular basis. On Monday, they set a league record by winning their 45th straight game at home. On Wednesday, they nudged the mark to 46 by obliterating an opponent that is probably bound for the playoffs.Who can stop these guys? Perhaps only themselves, and that is what Kerr appears to guard against most. The usual standards do not apply to this team. Judging the Warriors’ level of play based solely on wins and losses is useless. They are too talented, too cohesive. So Kerr sifts through the small stuff to make a larger point.“We’re trying to make sure that our habits are good, because those carry over,” he said. “If you don’t box out with 10 games left in the season, you’re not going to box out in the finals. Might cost you a game. Might cost you a championship.”AdvertisementHe was much more pleased with the team’s effort against the Jazz. The Warriors collected 36 assists on 48 field goals. They shot 57.1 percent from the field. Klay Thompson made five 3-pointers. The team’s reserves scored 53 points. And Curry banked in a 55-footer to close the first half. Yawn.“That’s not a surprise anymore,” Green said about Curry’s shot.Above all, the Warriors cut down on their mistakes. After committing 20 turnovers against the Lakers and 24 against the Magic, Golden State had 15 against the Jazz — six of them in the fourth quarter, with the game already a blowout and with most of the starters on the bench.“I told the guys after the game, ‘That looks more like us,’ ” Kerr said. “That’s the best game we’ve played in a while because of the balance, because of the ball movement and the shot distribution.”Believe it or not, the Warriors will probably commit more lapses this season. They may even lose again. Kerr acknowledged that his motivational messages to the team carried more weight last season, back when he was among the few people in the organization with a championship pedigree. Now, most of his players have rings of their own.So he has to be creative, he said, and find new ways to push and prod. The challenge continues for a team that is not perfect, despite the way it looks.A version of this article appears in print on March 11, 2016, on Page B12 of the New York edition with the headline: A Coach Remains Vigilant, Wary Even of Success.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.