
On Baseball By                     
 TYLER KEPNER
 
MARCH 9, 2016
GLENDALE, Ariz. — Sometime around Christmas, Chicago White Sox General Manager Rick Hahn called his new catcher, Alex Avila, to ask about a player Hahn was interested in signing.“Where are you?” Hahn asked.“Oh, I’m with my folks,” Avila replied.“All right,” Hahn said, laughing nervously. “Could you go into another room?”Avila’s father, Al, is the general manager of the Detroit Tigers, a rival of the White Sox in the American League Central. From his major league debut in 2009, Avila had played only for the Tigers. Now, his loyalties are elsewhere.“It’s been a family affair for six years,” Al Avila said in Florida last month, with a smile. “Now they’re going to go to Chicago. You’ve got family wearing Chicago White Sox stuff, which is really making me angry. But what are you going to do?”AdvertisementFunny question. In theory, Al Avila could have done something about it. But in his first winter as the Tigers’ general manager — after 13 years as the top assistant to Dave Dombrowski, who was fired last August — Avila let his son leave as a free agent.Limited to 67 games last season because of a knee injury, Avila hit .191 and earned $5.4 million. The rookie catcher James McCann played 114 games and hit .264 — at one-tenth the salary. Avila signed with Chicago for $2.5 million, and McCann is now the Tigers’ starter. To Alex Avila, the logic was obvious.“If you’re a team that feels like they can get similar production for less money, that’s just smart business,” he said. “That’s how you build a team. Having watched my dad for many years, and my grandfather for many years, I kind of understand how a front office works. So none of that surprised me at all. That’s kind of like the cycle of life.”The Avila family is quite familiar with the value of baseball players. Ralph Avila — Alex’s grandfather and Al’s father — signed Ramon and Pedro Martinez, Raul Mondesi and Jose Offerman as a pioneering scout for the Dodgers. Al Avila helped sign Livan Hernandez and Miguel Cabrera as a scouting executive for the Marlins.Given his background, his position on the field and his strong communication skills, Alex Avila would seem to have plenty of options when his playing career ends: scout, executive, manager, broadcaster. But he said he was not close to considering them. At 29, Avila intends to play for a while.AdvertisementAvila won a Silver Slugger Award and started for the American League in the 2011 All-Star Game, hitting .295 with 19 homers for the season. But he sustained a concussion during each of the next three seasons, before last year’s knee trouble. His averages from 2012 to 2015 were .243, .227, .218 and .191.Yet Avila still managed a .339 on-base percentage last season — the major league average was .317 — and said it was easy to maintain his plate discipline.“It’s something that you learn from being a kid: Swing at strikes,” Avila said. “Anytime I see something out of the hand as a ball, I’m taking it. There’s times when the game situation dictates you go out of the zone, but to be honest with you, it’s just a reaction. I’m hoping I’m still able to get on base, but at the same time get a few more hits this year.”Avila said his postconcussion symptoms had never been serious; he has heard stories of vertigo and nausea in others, but he has been lucky. And while the knee injury ruined last season, he has never needed surgery. The White Sox expect him to share the catching role with another veteran, Dioner Navarro, and noticed his skill in guiding Justin Verlander and Max Scherzer to Cy Young Awards with Detroit.Get the big sports news, highlights and analysis from Times journalists, with distinctive takes on games and some behind-the-scenes surprises, delivered to your inbox every week.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.“He’s comfortable with premium stuff, which we feel we have on our staff as well,” Hahn said. “We felt a lot of his issues in recent years were related to physical issues, which seem to be behind him.”The White Sox finished 76-86 last season, but their left-handed starters stood out: Chris Sale set a club strikeout record, with 274; Jose Quintana had a 3.36 E.R.A.; and the rookie Carlos Rodon struck out 139 in 1391/3 innings. Shaky defense and the worst offense in the A.L. doomed the team.Now the White Sox have added veterans at four positions besides catcher: Todd Frazier at third base, Brett Lawrie at second, Jimmy Rollins at shortstop and Austin Jackson in center field. The White Sox are trying again to contend, with Sale, Quintana and the slugging first baseman Jose Abreu on reasonable contracts.“You either take advantage of that, or you should probably trade them and get as many prospects as you can, unload ’em and take everybody’s farm system,” Manager Robin Ventura said. “I think we’re at a point where we knew we had some pieces in place. So far, I like the feel in camp. We’re much more equipped this year to compete.”Last season, the White Sox finished ahead of only one other team in the A.L. Central: the Tigers, who reloaded with pitcher Jordan Zimmermann and outfielder Justin Upton. Alex Avila could have guessed that his father would act aggressively on the market — the Tigers always do — but he did not sound overly impressed.Advertisement“The trash talking started between the two of us,” he said. “I made sure the first day I was handing out some White Sox hats to some cousins. It’ll be fun.”A version of this article appears in print on March 11, 2016, on Page B10 of the New York edition with the headline: A ‘Family Affair’ Becomes a Division Rivalry .  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.See More »