By ZACH SCHONBRUNMAY 20, 2016
Terry Collins pounded his forefinger against the tabletop that served as a lectern during his news conference Friday afternoon and curled his lip into a sneer.“It will happen again,” Collins said. “I told him that today. What he heard last October, he will hear that again this summer.”He was referring to cheers, not the boos that trailed the cratering Matt Harvey and his 5.77 E.R.A. off the mound Thursday night and into an uncertain future. Collins, as fiery as the occasionally combustible Mets manager could get three hours before the start of a weekend series with the Milwaukee Brewers, felt that he needed to clarify some lingering questions.For one thing, Collins said Harvey would stay in the rotation and remain lined up to pitch again next week in Washington, against the division-leading Nationals. Harvey’s starting date, though, may be subject to change. Any notions of a trip to the disabled list, a skipped start, or even a demotion, were dismissed.AdvertisementThe Mets have not been particularly good lately, and Harvey’s baffling and precipitous decline has only worsened matters. After losing six of seven games, the Mets rebounded Friday night to slip past the Brewers, 3-2, at Citi Field.AdvertisementAnother struggling player, outfielder Michael Conforto, came through with a two-run homer to left field, putting the Mets ahead by a run in the sixth inning. It was enough to help Steven Matz jump to a 6-1 record, with Jeurys Familia nailing down his 14th save.“We needed this bad,” Collins said.Matz skipped a start last weekend in Colorado and received a cortisone shot Monday to relieve some left forearm stiffness, and the smooth left-hander was generally sharp Friday, his first game since May 9. He threw first-pitch strikes to 17 of the 23 batters he faced, never once shook off his catcher, Rene Rivera, and, as is his wont, worked quickly and efficiently.Matz said the battery of tests on his arm — including a magnetic resonance imaging test, an X-ray and a CT scan — had relieved him of any fears that he might have a threatening injury.“That was the peace of mind I needed,” Matz said.There was a hiccup in the first inning, after Matz allowed the leadoff batter, Jonathan Villar, to open the game with a single. With two outs in the inning, Matz left a 2-2 fastball over the plate to the cleanup hitter Chris Carter, who slammed it over the center-field wall for his 13th homer of the season.But after the home run, Matz retired the next 15 batters in a row — six via strikeout — to keep the Mets within striking distance. He threw seven innings, allowing three hits, two runs and no walks, while striking out eight.Get the big sports news, highlights and analysis from Times journalists, with distinctive takes on games and some behind-the-scenes surprises, delivered to your inbox every week.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.After giving back a run in the second on an R.B.I. groundout by Rivera, Brewers starter Wily Peralta also settled down, at one point retiring 10 batters in a row.But by the sixth, Peralta seemed to run out of gas. He surrendered a right-field single to Asdrubal Cabrera before Conforto blasted his homer to the other side.AdvertisementConforto had entered the game 8 for his last 48, with only three R.B.I. in the last 14 games. He said part of his problem had been chasing pitches out of the strike zone.“It’s been very frustrating,” Conforto said. “Everyone has slumps. But the first one at this level, it’s tough.”A strong drive to left on a ball that was moving away was a good sign for Conforto.“It was a little bit of a sigh of relief,” he said. “It relaxes everything.”Collins would like to see a similar breakthrough with Harvey, who had been nearly infallible on the mound in his major league career — until now.Collins said he and a group of team officials and coaches met with Harvey early Friday to discuss steps to help him get moving in the right direction. His abysmal performance Thursday against Washington — nine runs allowed in two and two-thirds innings — seemed to sap the former ace of his confidence. But Collins was encouraged by Harvey’s attitude the next day.“This guy wants to pitch, he wants to fight through it,” Collins said. “He isn’t going to run and hide. He wants to get out there.”Though it is certainly understandable that the player wanted to play, the Mets’ brain trust needed to agree on the best course of action. Several options were considered. After some discussion, Collins said they had concluded that Harvey needed to pitch through his struggles against major league competition. His bullpen sessions between starts have been superb, eliminating the concern that he is limited by an injury.“We know he’s healthy,” Collins said. “We’ve just got to get through this confidence issue to trust his stuff.”And he will pitch again against the Nationals next week, Collins said.INSIDE PITCHDavid Wright (back) did not play Friday, a scheduled day off. Manager Terry Collins said he thought Wright’s sore back would fare better playing in Saturday’s afternoon game.A version of this article appears in print on May 21, 2016, on Page D3 of the New York edition with the headline: Matz Looks Vulnerable Early in Return to Mound but Settles In for Win.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.