By DAVID POLLAKMAY 20, 2016
SAN JOSE, Calif. — It can take a while to get past the eccentricities.There is the scraggly beard and the flowing hair, occasionally wound in a man bun. The elaborate tattoos have turned his body into a canvas. His attire features loud suits and a camouflage backpack. He makes no attempt to hide the gap in his smile once occupied by three front teeth. Then there are the 150 snakes he formerly kept in the basement.But while all of that has made defenseman Brent Burns far and away the most colorful character in the N.H.L., it is his uncommon skill set on the ice that is a major reason the San Jose Sharks hold a 2-1 edge going into Saturday’s Game 4 of the Western Conference finals against the St. Louis Blues.“I don’t just think he’s the most dominant defenseman, I think he’s the most dominant player in the league plain and simple,” said his teammate Joe Thornton. “He’s so big, so strong, he just does it all.”With six goals and 12 assists, Burns is the top-scoring defenseman in the playoffs. His 18 points were second to his teammate Logan Couture’s 20 among all skaters through Thursday night’s games.AdvertisementBurns, a 31-year-old Ontario native, did not want to dwell Friday on what others see as his quirkiness. “That’s just how I deal with stress,” he said. Instead, he preferred to put into perspective what his team has accomplished as it sits two victories away from its first appearance in the Stanley Cup finals.Advertisement“People always talk about not getting over the hurdle, but that hurdle is pretty big and it’s pretty hard to get to,” Burns said. “It’s special being in the battle.”Get the big sports news, highlights and analysis from Times journalists, with distinctive takes on games and some behind-the-scenes surprises, delivered to your inbox every week.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.Burns’s offensive talent has been on display for years, but there was a question as to which position was his strongest. The year after he was the 2003 first-round draft pick of the Minnesota Wild, he played forward for Canada in the world junior championship. With the Wild, however, he was back on defense.When the Sharks acquired Burns from Minnesota on June 24, 2011, San Jose’s general manager, Doug Wilson, described Burns as a future anchor for the team’s blue line. Burns, however, seemed to have trouble adjusting to the San Jose system, and when he struggled upon returning from an injury in March 2013, the coach at the time, Todd McLellan, moved him to forward.Burns scored 22 goals as a power forward the next season, but Wilson announced before the 2014-15 season that Burns would be back on the blue line full time. When McLellan was replaced as coach by Peter DeBoer last summer, there was no doubt about where Burns would play.“I think it was great with Pete coming in and just saying, ‘Hey, he’s a d-man,’” Burns said on April 30, the day after it was disclosed he was one of three finalists for the Norris Trophy given to the top N.H.L. defenseman.This season, Burns has been consistently solid at both ends of the ice. Offensively, he set franchise records for goals (27), assists (48) and points (75) by a defenseman. Defensively, he seemed more confident in his own zone than he had in his previous four seasons with the Sharks.Wilson made a second move last summer that helped Burns blossom with the signing of the veteran defenseman Paul Martin as a free agent. More of a stay-at-home player, Martin has a style and personality that made him a good partner to the more freewheeling Burns.The St. Louis Blues recognize the challenge that Burns presents to them at both ends of the ice, and what they need to do if they are to come from behind and win three of the next four games to eliminate the Sharks.Advertisement“It’s just more of being aware of where he is because he’s a very active player offensively,” St. Louis defenseman Kevin Shattenkirk said. “Defensively, I think he’s someone that we want to try and play hard. We want to put him in uncomfortable situations. It worked in Game 1, and that’s the kind of pressure we have to put on him.”A version of this article appears in print on May 21, 2016, on Page D4 of the New York edition with the headline: A Quirky Shark Rises in the Playoffs.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.