AdvertisementSupported byOn Pro FootballBy Bill PenningtonIn January, days after a third successive Giants season ended with another losing record, John Mara, a Giants co-owner, said his team’s defensive roster lacked talent. Then Mara pointedly said it was General Manager Jerry Reese’s responsibility to fix the disaster the defense had become.Reese’s job with the Giants might depend on it.On Wednesday, as the N.F.L.’s off-season free-agency period opened, Reese went on a shopping spree unprecedented in team history. If Reese is going out as the Giants’ general manager, he is doing it with fistfuls of dollars flung across the free-agent market.In a 24-hour period beginning with the signing of defensive end Jason Pierre-Paul on Tuesday, Reese committed about $204 million in contracts for defensive players, with $114 million of that sum guaranteed to be paid out. The new Giants are the former Miami Dolphins defensive end Olivier Vernon, who is viewed as a rising edge-of-the-formation star; Damon Harrison, a bulky tackle and staple of the Jets’ highly effective run-stopping defense last season; and the Rams’ Janoris Jenkins, perhaps the top cornerback available this off-season. Jenkins’s arrival makes it likely that the Giants will not re-sign Prince Amukamara, their first-round draft pick in 2011 who struggled to avoid injuries in his five seasons with the Giants.On Wednesday night, wide receiver Victor Cruz used his Instagram account to confirm that he had renegotiated his hefty contract to remain with the Giants for at least another season. Cruz, 29, has not played since October 2014, when he tore the patellar tendon in his right knee.If healthy, Cruz could be a key component as a counterpart to the Pro Bowl wide receiver Odell Beckham Jr. But the Giants needed Cruz to accept a considerable pay cut to remain with the team. Cruz’s new base salary will be $1.3 million, with playing-time incentives that could increase his pay to $5.5 million, according to a report in The Record of Hackensack, N.J. Cruz, who appears to be recovering from his recent knee and leg injuries, was set to make $7.9 million this season and count $9.9 million against the salary cap. He has finished the last three seasons on injured reserve.Reese and Mara, who signs off on major purchases, did not spend without forethought Wednesday; each of the team’s acquisitions were players the Giants had identified as priorities at their positions. And Reese has significantly upgraded the skill level on the defensive unit by adding three relatively young players, in addition to retaining Pierre-Paul.The flashiest signing was Vernon, and the Giants had to outbid the Jacksonville Jaguars for him. The contract the Giants eventually agreed to give Vernon was the largest in the history of the league for a defensive end: five years and $85 million, with $52.5 million guaranteed.Vernon, 25, never missed a game in four seasons with the Dolphins and was a disruptive presence in opposing backfields last season, frequently pressuring the quarterback and recording seven and a half sacks. Vernon has 29 career sacks, including 11 ½ in 2013, his second season in the league.Jenkins, 27, is an aggressive, confident, top-level cornerback who missed only four games in his four years with the Rams and had 10 career interceptions and five interception returns for touchdowns. Jenkins received a five-year deal worth $62.5 million that includes $29 million in guaranteed money — a big number for a cornerback who, at least initially, will be considered the team’s No. 2 pass defender behind Dominique Rodgers-Cromartie.Jenkins’s contract makes him the second-highest-paid cornerback in the league, behind the Jets’ Darrelle Revis.Harrison, who is 6 feet 4 and 350 pounds, will team with the sturdy and dependable defensive tackle Jonathan Hankins, who is 6-2 and 320 pounds. Harrison, whose nickname is Snacks, and Hankins could be a formidable pair up the middle for the Giants. The Giants have a sense of urgency when it comes to improving the defensive line over all, which explains why they gave Harrison a five-year, $46.5 million contract with $24 million guaranteed.It was a contract that the Jets, who are more constrained by the salary cap and who have other free agents to sign, could not be reasonably expected to match, even though Harrison, 27, helped the Jets’ defense give up the second-fewest rushing yards in the N.F.L. last season.In the end, the Giants appear to have substantially overpaid for their three new players, and perhaps even for Pierre-Paul, who could still be severely limited if his damaged right hand is not significantly improved by off-season surgery. But the Giants had ample salary-cap space, and they have been a mediocre team since at least 2013.It was expected that the Giants would be assertive buyers in the free-agent market. Clearly, what they did was identify three players they valued more than any others, and they let no other team outspend them for those players.It could be a wise strategy, or it could expose many other holes on the team that were left unaddressed.The Giants have remaining salary-cap space, and they will need it since they still need a safety, another cornerback, a couple of linebackers and at least one offensive lineman. They also need ample help at tight end, although Reese never — ever — seems to consider that position a priority.But the Giants are not likely done acquiring new players, even on defense, which could still be the focus of the team’s college draft selections this spring.In January, when Mara was talking about what ailed his team, Reese was obviously listening.Advertisement