By DAVID WALDSTEINMARCH 9, 2016
PORT ST. LUCIE, Fla. —  There are few general managers in baseball who would not readily trade their starting rotations for the Mets’ low-cost, high-powered staff.They may not acknowledge it publicly, but the Mets have exactly what teams crave: a crop of young, talented players whom they control contractually for years. “Everybody aspires to that,” Brian Cashman, the Yankees’ general manager, noted Wednesday.With Matt Harvey, Noah Syndergaard, Zack Wheeler, Steven Matz and Jacob deGrom, who started Wednesday’s game against the Yankees, the Mets are the envy of almost every team.But Cashman, while sitting in the visitors’ clubhouse at the Mets’ spring training ballpark, also pointed out that the Meets needed remarkable patience to assemble that quintet. It is a level of patience the Yankees are never afforded.AdvertisementThere are different roads up the mountain of success, Cashman said, and he is not allowed to take the winding road the Mets took.Advertisement“At the end of the day, I know they are happy to be sitting where they are now, no doubt about it,” Cashman said. “They walked through fire to get there.”By fire, Cashman meant that the Mets spent six years in a wilderness of losses in an empty stadium. But they used shrewd draft picks to get Harvey, Matz and deGrom (all drafted by Omar Minaya, the former general manager, and his staff) and traded their best players — like Carlos Beltran and R. A. Dickey — to get Wheeler and Syndergaard, smart trades executed by Sandy Alderson, the current general manager, and his staff.But the Yankees are proud of their starters, too, as well as their back-of-the-bullpen threesome of Aroldis Chapman, Andrew Miller and Dellin Betances.“You look at our staff, and our staff is pretty young, too,” Yankees Manager Joe Girardi said. “And we’ve pitched really well in spring training.”A day when the Yankees and Mets were in direct, on-field competition evoked such comparisons. The Mets started deGrom, the 27-year-old right-hander who won the 2014 National League Rookie of the Year award. The Yankees responded with the 29-year-old right-hander Ivan Nova, who threw three scoreless innings.After Nova left the game, the Yankees summoned James Kaprielian, the hard-throwing prospect whom they selected in the first round of last year’s amateur draft. He could be a gem in the mold of the Mets’ young starters.Kaprielian, a right-hander, was dominant in his first inning, getting Yoenis Cespedes and Lucas Duda to ground out and striking out Neil Walker. In his second inning of work, Kaprielian’s youth began to show. He walked two, surrendered four hits and four runs (two earned), and managed to get only two outs.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.He impressed, nonetheless.“He has great stuff,” said Mets Manager Terry Collins, who has shepherded the remarkable young rotation that Mets fans boast about.AdvertisementCollins said that after Kaprielian threw about three pitches, the bench coach Dick Scott mentioned that he was the Yankees’ top pick in the June draft (16th over all).“Yeah, I can see that,” Collins said, noting how Kaprielian’s 95 mile-per-hour fastball and movement stood out. “I can scout those guys.”The Yankees are envisioning a staff in a year or so that will include Kaprielian, who turned 22 last week; Luis Severino, who turned 22 last month; Masahiro Tanaka, who is 27; Michael Pineda, who turned 27 in January; and Nathan Eovaldi, who has five seasons in the big leagues and turned 26 last month.The average age of that group is less than 25 years, which would actually be younger than the Mets’ staff (if that is how each staff is eventually composed). For the Mets, Matz turns 25 in May; Syndergaard is 23; deGrom 27; Wheeler 25; and Harvey will be 27 on March 27. Their average age on opening day will be a touch over 25 years.At least to start the season, both teams can also rely on an established veteran: Bartolo Colon for the Mets — at least until Wheeler comes back after Tommy John surgery — and C. C. Sabathia for the Yankees.Colon, 42, made his major league debut a month after Kaprielian turned 3.Almost two decades later, Kaprielian worked out alongside Harvey at the center run by their agent, Scott Boras. Kaprielian, who went to U.C.L.A., said he admired Harvey and all the members of the Mets’ dynamic staff, and that his goal was to get where they had already been.“I look up to those guys,” Kaprielian said. “They are good pitchers. They know what they are doing. Although they are so young, they act like they’ve done it for a long time now. They are poised and have maturity on the mound. They are all competitors, which is fun to watch. Hopefully, if I keep working, one day I will be able to put myself in a situation like those guys.”The Yankees are counting on that; they would have a talented and inexpensive player at their disposal for several years.“We need to continue to assemble young, controllable, high-ceiling assets,” Cashman said.Every team aspires to that.An earlier version of this article misstated the number of runs that Yankees pitcher James Kaprielian gave up in a spring training game against the Mets on Wednesday. He gave up four runs (two earned), not two runs.We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.