By BILLY WITZMAY 21, 2016
OAKLAND, Calif. — When Yankees General Manager Brian Cashman was looking for a second baseman last July, he had an offer to consider from Oakland for Ben Zobrist. Cashman’s counterpart, Billy Beane, wanted two players: reliever Adam Warren and the minor league second baseman Rob Refsnyder.Cashman considered the proposal, but in the end said no. Zobrist was headed to free agency, and Cashman decided that the price was too steep for a short-term rental.Eventually, Beane sent Zobrist to Kansas City, where he helped the Royals win the World Series, for a pair of minor league pitchers.Over the winter, Cashman used Warren as a bargaining chip to trade up at second base, which had been a vortex since Robinson Cano left as a free agent after the 2013 season. Cashman acquired Starlin Castro.AdvertisementAlthough that trade has looked like a shrewd decision, holding on to Refsnyder proved to be valuable on Saturday, as he doubled in two runs in the Yankees’ 5-1 victory over the Athletics. It was Refsnyder’s first appearance since being recalled from the minors on Tuesday.AdvertisementThe victory was the season-high fourth in a row for the Yankees, who climbed out of last place in the American League East for the first time in 27 days, passing the Toronto Blue Jays. Masahiro Tanaka rebounded from two shaky outings by scattering five hits over seven innings, delivering the fourth consecutive strong start for the Yankees. Nathan Eovaldi, Ivan Nova, C. C. Sabathia and Tanaka have each allowed one run and worked at least six innings.“Everything starts with pitching,” Manager Joe Girardi said.The Yankees provided all the help Tanaka needed with a four-run fourth, which was capped by Refsnyder’s drive into the gap in right-center field.The baseball world seems to have as many connective threads as the seams on a ball. Refsnyder’s hit came off one of the players the Athletics eventually acquired for Zobrist, the left-handed pitcher Sean Manaea, who was taken 34th over all in the 2013 draft, after the Yankees chose outfielder Aaron Judge and pitcher Ian Clarkin with the preceding picks.(Zobrist, coincidentally, was playing across the bay on Saturday with Warren, as the Chicago Cubs, whom Zobrist signed with, were playing against the San Francisco Giants.)The Yankees’ trade for Castro, a three-time All-Star, affected Refsnyder, who until then had been a contender to start for them at second base. Though he had a solid spring at the plate, hitting .259, the Yankees sent him to the minors to learn to play third base and to get more work in right field, a position he played while leading the University of Arizona to the 2012 College World Series before shifting to second base.Get the big sports news, highlights and analysis from Times journalists, with distinctive takes on games and some behind-the-scenes surprises, delivered to your inbox every week.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.Though Refsnyder hit .379 as the starting second baseman over the final two weeks of last season — a performance that earned him a start in the wild-card playoff game — the Yankees organization has debated where to play him, and whether Castro, a converted shortstop, will play other positions besides second.“He had an opportunity before we acquired Starlin to be our everyday second baseman,” Girardi said during the week, “but events happened that changed your mind on how they can help you. Every player you have in your system I think you evaluate how he can help us. There were different views with what we should do with him.”AdvertisementRefsnyder, who was brought up to give the Yankees an added right-handed bat, lined out and grounded out before being lifted for a defensive replacement in right field. He may not be with the team for long, as Alex Rodriguez will most likely return from the disabled list on Tuesday when the Yankees return home to play Toronto. And Refsnyder’s seeming competitor for a utility spot, Ronald Torreyes, delivered a two-run triple Friday, then singled, walked and scored a run Saturday while playing shortstop.The possibility of Refsnyder’s remaining with the Yankees was a subject that Girardi would not discuss — and that Refsnyder had little interest in entertaining.“That’s not really my job,” he said. “My job is to prepare and help the team out any way I can. That’s what I focus on every time.”Nick Goody, who played with Refsnyder in the minors, threw two scoreless innings in relief of Tanaka. Last season, Goody was in a position similar to Refsnyder’s, shuttling between Scranton/Wilkes-Barre and the Yankees.“Nothing’s guaranteed,” Goody said. “Anybody can go up and down. But from last year, he proved that he can be here, compete here and play here. Opportunities just come with time.”Refsnyder delivered on his opportunity after the Yankees had built a 2-0 lead against Manaea, who had retired the first nine hitters he faced. Refsnyder fouled off three consecutive 3-2 pitches before driving the 10th pitch from Manaea to right-center to give the Yankees a 4-0 lead.“Predominantly on righties, he was fastball-changeup,” Refsnyder said of Manaea, whom he had never faced, “so you can’t really sell out too much on the fastball or you’re just going to swing over the top of a changeup. I was just kind of just letting him take the inner half, and I fought off a couple of pitches and hopefully get a pitch out over the middle.”After sitting for four days, Refsnyder acknowledged that it was nice to take advantage of an opportunity — something he is well aware may not come often.INSIDE PITCHThe Yankees had to deal with plumbing trouble, an occasional hazard at the Oakland stadium. Pipes leaked in the bathroom in the visitors’ dugout, leaving maintenance workers to bail water out of the dugout during batting practice and forcing them to close the bathroom during the game.Advertisement“You had to run upstairs if you wanted to use it,” Manager Joe Girardi said. “It kept the bullpen guys loose.”A version of this article appears in print on May 22, 2016, on Page SP3 of the New York edition with the headline: Tanaka and a Newcomer’s Timely Hit Lift the Yankees Out of the Basement.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.