By TOM SPOUSTAMAY 19, 2016
TAMPA, Fla. — The chances of scoring were heavily in the Pittsburgh Penguins’ favor Wednesday night, what with the extra ice opened up by a four-on-three advantage and the refocused Sidney Crosby awaiting the puck in his sweet spot near the left face-off circle.Crosby’s play this postseason has been flashy and frustrating, even as the Penguins rolled into the Eastern Conference finals against the Tampa Bay Lightning.Sure, he has made the occasional breathtaking move and startling backward pass between his legs directly to the tape of a teammate’s stick.But Crosby, now 28 and in his 11th N.H.L. season, is still all about production, if not domination. And as he took a pass from Evgeni Malkin and blasted a shot past goalie Andrei Vasilevskiy in the third period of Game 3 against the Lightning, it illustrated how Crosby and the Penguins had kicked into a higher gear in their 4-2 victory at Amalie Arena.AdvertisementPittsburgh took a two-games-to-one series lead and regained home ice advantage heading into Game 4 on Friday night.“I think we played a pretty simple game,” Crosby said. “We haven’t tried too many set plays. We just try to keep it simple as best we can.”AdvertisementPittsburgh has “really been strong on the puck,” Crosby said, “and it’s worked for us.”Crosby’s goal put the Penguins ahead, 3-1, midway through the third. It was his second goal against Tampa Bay, after his overtime winner in Game 2. He now has five goals in the playoffs, along with eight assists, and should his arc continue upward the Lightning might be facing elimination earlier than expected.Indeed, the Penguins’ depth and speed suddenly clicked again in the same way they had when Pittsburgh ousted  the Rangers in five games and the Washington Capitals in six. The third line of Phil Kessel, Carl Hagelin and Nick Bonino helped ignite the Penguins with a combined five points. Kessel and Hagelin each notched a goal and an assist, and Bonino added an assist.Hagelin’s goal off a rebound of a Kessel shot with 10 seconds left in the second period broke a scoreless tie and might have swung momentum of the series to Pittsburgh. The Penguins had outshot the Lightning, 21-6, in the second period en route to 48 total shots against Vasilevskiy, the backup to the injured Ben Bishop, whose status for the series still remains questionable.“We knew he played great,” Hagelin said of Vasilevskiy. “But we knew that if we kept pressuring him, that if we shoot 48 shots, we know that sooner or later it’s going to go in.”Vasilevskiy’s confidence had seemed to grow with every puck that bounced off his chest, but he has now faced an onslaught of 89 shots in the last two games (Tampa Bay has been outshot, 124-69, in the series).Get the big sports news, highlights and analysis from Times journalists, with distinctive takes on games and some behind-the-scenes surprises, delivered to your inbox every week.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.“You see a second period like that where we generate a lot of chances and we play with a lot of speed, and to be able to do that, every line has to be able to go out and do that, and that’s what we did here tonight,” Crosby said. “That’s the way we know we have success. So we’ve got to find ways to be able to get to that kind of game.”AdvertisementAs they did against the Islanders in the previous round, the Lightning have experienced major defensive lapses, increasing the pressure on Vasilevskiy.“It’s unacceptable,” Lightning Coach Jon Cooper said. “I feel bad for the kid — that he’s keeping us in there and we can’t find a way to bail him out. But it doesn’t matter who was in net. We could have had Bishop and Vasy playing at the same time, and they still might’ve squeaked a couple in.”Bishop, injured in Game 1, skated again Thursday but did not participate in team practice. He and the team’s captain, center Steven Stamkos, remained doubtful for Game 4, Cooper said.And now Tampa Bay must deal with a re-energized Crosby, who accounted for eight shots in Game 3, setting the bar higher from his six shots in Game 2. He has adjusted to playing more with Malkin, too, as Coach Mike Sullivan continues to tweak his lines in search of the right chemistry for a run to the Stanley Cup finals.“We’re just trying to make sure that when we’re out there, that we create things,” Crosby said of being paired with Malkin. “The more that we play together here the last couple of games, we get a little bit more comfortable.“It probably hasn’t been that much as far as leading up to the last couple of games. We haven’t played together a lot. So I think we’re starting to get a better feel for one another out there and getting some chances. So I think he’s just got to keep doing the same thing. As a line, when we’re together, we’ve got to find ways to create.”A version of this article appears in print on May 20, 2016, on Page B11 of the New York edition with the headline: Crosby and Penguins Are Clicking Heading Into Game 4 Against the Lightning.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.