By THE ASSOCIATED PRESSMARCH 8, 2016
Kenneth Faried had 24 points and 10 rebounds Tuesday night as the Denver Nuggets beat the visiting Knicks, 110-94. The victory was the Nuggets’ eighth straight against the Knicks at Pepsi Center.The Knicks’ Carmelo Anthony finished with 30 points against his former team. He is now 0-3 when playing at his old home since being traded to the Knicks in February 2011.Kristaps Porzingis was limited to 6 points in his return after missing a game with a bruised left leg. The Knicks were dealt a blow before the game when forward Lance Thomas hurt his left knee in warm-ups.Center Nikola Jokic scored 8 of his 20 points in the fourth quarter for the Nuggets, who had six players score in double figures.AdvertisementThe Knicks cut the deficit to 89-82 with 6 minutes 42 seconds left on a layup by Porzingis. But the Knicks could never get any closer.AdvertisementD. J. Augustin all but sealed the win with a 5-point burst in a 34-second span that extended Denver’s lead to 100-87.Axel Toupane, whom the Nuggets signed to a 10-day contract last week, scored his first N.B.A. basket on a dunk in the third quarter. He also had a pivotal 3-point play early in the fourth.The game had an odd start, as Denver scoring the opening 8 points before the Knicks got 8 straight to tie the game.With Jokic leading the way in the second quarter, the Nuggets went on an 18-2 run to build an early 15-point lead.The loss was not a good start to a six-game trip for the Knicks, their longest since the 2005-6 season. The Knicks president Phil Jackson accompanied the team to Toronto.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.“It’s always great to have him around,” the interim coach Kurt Rambis said.Rambis said he thought Jackson would be on the entire trip, especially considering that the Knicks stop in Los Angeles to play the Lakers on Sunday in Kobe Bryant’s farewell season.SPURS 116, TIMBERWOLVES 91 LaMarcus Aldridge had 29 points and 7 rebounds to help San Antonio bounce back from a rare loss with a road victory.The Spurs (54-10) led by as many as 26 points in a game they played without Tim Duncan, Tony Parker, Manu Ginobili and Coach Gregg Popovich.AdvertisementAndrew Wiggins had 23 points and 8 rebounds for Minnesota, and Karl-Anthony Towns had 19 points and 9 boards.HAWKS 91 JAZZ 84 Jeff Teague had 24 points and 6 assists to lead Atlanta to victory in Utah.The Hawks moved to one and a half games behind the Miami Heat for the No. 4 spot in the Eastern Conference.WIZARDS GUARD EJECTED Washington guard Alan Anderson was ejected in the first quarter of the Wizards’ game at Portland after he elbowed the Trailblazers’ Gerald Henderson in the face.The two players scuffled and had to be separated by their teammates.PELICANS LOSE GORDON New Orleans guard Eric Gordon had surgery to repair his fractured right ring finger and will miss the rest of the season, the Pelicans said.Gordon’s injury occurred on Saturday night in a loss to Utah, the second time this season he injured the finger.A version of this article appears in print on March 9, 2016, on Page B16 of the New York edition with the headline: Nuggets Turn Back Knicks, Long Frustrated in Denver .  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.