By ALLAN KREDAMARCH 8, 2016
Sidney Crosby had a chance before Tuesday’s game to contemplate the new venue for the invariably intense games between his Penguins and the Islanders.Five months into the season, Pittsburgh was finally making a trip to Brooklyn, and Crosby said he was impressed by the fresh surroundings at Barclays Center.Once the game began, however, things did not appear all that different from the teams’ old battles at Nassau Coliseum. The contest had a playoff feeling from the moment that Crosby and the Islanders’ captain, John Tavares, met for the opening face-off, and Crosby, never exactly a favorite of Islanders fans, was the target of the usual assortment of derisive chants.The vitriol flowed throughout, and the atmosphere remained electric. Travis Hamonic and the Penguins’ Evgeni Malkin fought in front of the Islanders’ net in the first period. Players hacked and slashed at one another, with officials choosing not to call every apparent infraction.AdvertisementAfter Anders Lee scored a power-play goal 8 minutes 55 seconds into the third period, he and Penguins defenseman Kris Letang exchanged vicious whacks in front of the net.AdvertisementBut it was Lee who had the last laugh as his goal proved decisive in a 2-1 victory that allowed the Islanders (37-20-7) to keep pace with the second-place Rangers and move to 5 points ahead of the Penguins (34-24-8) in the Metropolitan Division.“We were resilient against a real good hockey team,” Islanders Coach Jack Capuano said. “We were playing against world-class guys.”Wearing their alternate black jerseys, the Islanders came out fast and furious against the Penguins and kept the pace quick throughout. The game picked up additional drama as Islanders goaltender Jaroslav Halak was forced to leave at 15:38 of the third period. Halak, who appeared to have sustained a lower-body injury, was replaced by Thomas Greiss.Penguins forward Phil Kessel had a golden opportunity in the game’s waning seconds, but Greiss was bailed out as Hamonic blocked the shot.“Our execution wasn’t quite there,” Crosby said. “I thought our work ethic was there; it was just a matter of execution.”Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.Before the game, Crosby, who is 28 but already in his 11th N.H.L. season, recalled the taut 2013 first-round playoff series in which the Penguins outlasted the Islanders in six games, picking up two overtime wins on Long Island.“They didn’t like me there?” Crosby said with a laugh of mock indignation. “You know what, it was a tough place to play. And that playoff series, that was one of the loudest buildings I’ve played in.”Crosby again drew his share of boos Tuesday, as did Penguins goaltender Marc-Andre Fleury. But Tavares prompted the loudest reaction from the crowd early on, rifling home a power-play goal at 8:04 of the opening period and generating a particularly hearty rendition of the “Yes, Yes, Yes” chant that follows Islanders goals at Barclays Center.AdvertisementTavares’s score, his 24th of the season, came with Crosby’s linemate Patric Hornqvist in the penalty box.Letang tied the score at 13:13 of the first, with Crosby earning an assist for his 92nd career point against the Islanders — his highest total against any team.With sterling play from Crosby and Malkin, Pittsburgh has risen steadily in the standings. After losing their first four games under Mike Sullivan, who became their coach on Dec. 12, the Penguins have gone 19-10-5 to vault into playoff position.Still, the Islanders had impressive runs of their own. They were returning from a seven-game trip in which they recorded six wins, including a third straight win over the Rangers on Sunday, and Tuesday’s victory was their 20th in 32 home games in their inaugural season in Brooklyn.The result also left the Islanders 5-1-0 in their last six games against Pittsburgh and 13-5-3 against division opponents this season.“It takes 82 games to get into the playoffs,” Tavares said. “One point decided home ice for us last year. We’re fighting to get home ice. Each game is crucial. Each point is crucial.”A version of this article appears in print on March 9, 2016, on Page B15 of the New York edition with the headline: Islanders Spoil First Trip to Brooklyn by Penguins.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.