By WALLACE MATTHEWSJULY 19, 2017
The enigma that is Yoenis Cespedes was on full display at Citi Field on Wednesday night.Cespedes, the Mets’ left fielder, who had batted .195 and driven in just one run in the first 10 games of July, was 2 for 2 with two R.B.I. before the Mets’ 7-3 win over the St. Louis Cardinals was two innings old.There he was in the first inning, looking hale and even speedy as he sprinted home from first on a double by Lucas Duda. In the third, Cespedes showed a glimpse of the Gold Glove form he displayed in 2015, running down a Tommy Pham line drive into the left-center-field gap.But there was also the moment right after Cespedes legged out a second-inning double. He suddenly hunched over at second base, causing Manager Terry Collins and the team trainer to sprint out to his aid, no doubt expecting the worst from a player who has already missed 37 games with a hamstring strain this season. The pause in the action unexpectedly became a light moment when Cespedes removed his cap, revealing a head of newly dyed blue hair.And there was the shallow flare that looked very much like a routine fly when it left the bat of Magneuris Sierra in the third, only to drop at Cespedes’s feet for a single after what looked like a halfhearted effort.AdvertisementFor Collins, though, the play was not particularly bothersome.“I can stomach anything,” he said. “You have to be able to, to do this job.”AdvertisementCollins, who has managed Cespedes for nearly two and a half seasons, seems to have learned to go with the flow.“Hey, whatever sparks him,” Collins said when asked his opinion of Cespedes’s new hair color. “Whatever gets him going, I’m all in on it. He hit the ball hard tonight. I hope he comes in with a different color tomorrow.”Collins tried a more conventional motivational tactic with Cespedes, moving him down to the cleanup spot for the first time this season. Collins batted Jay Bruce third in the order to try to jump-start his sluggish bat.The lineup shift paid off almost instantly.With Bruce hitting ahead of him and another left-handed batter, Lucas Duda, behind him, Cespedes flourished against St. Louis starter Mike Leake. Cespedes singled in Asdrubal Cabrera for the game’s opening run in the first, and he doubled in the second, scoring Cabrera again, to increase the Mets’ lead to 5-0.Get the big sports news, highlights and analysis from Times journalists, with distinctive takes on games and some behind-the-scenes surprises, delivered to your inbox every week.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.But the mood was tempered by the sight of Cespedes briefly doubled over at second, drawing Collins and the trainer Rey Ramirez from the dugout. After a somewhat long conversation, it was determined that Cespedes was fit to stay in the game. He wound up scoring easily from second on a two-run single by Jose Reyes.“He had just run hard, and there was no air out there tonight,” Collins said. “So he was having a little trouble catching his breath.”Collins also found a diplomatic way to describe Cespedes’s failure to try to catch Sierra’s ball, ascribing it to a combination of Cespedes’s conserving his troublesome legs and avoiding diving for the ball, which nearly caused him to injure himself Friday night.Advertisement“I think he knows what he can catch and what he can’t, and I think he’s trying to make sure nothing happens so he stays on the field,” Collins said. “It looks like he doesn’t go after them hard, but I think he’s got a pretty good feel for it. He knows how he feels better than anybody.”Cespedes was not in a talkative mood after the game, appearing at his locker with a bright red nylon cap over his hair. He was not amused by questions about his choice of hair color.Asked when he had done it, he answered in Spanish, “Today.”He was asked why he did it. “Because I wanted to,” he said. “Anything else?”Cespedes was then asked if he had any regrets about signing a four-year, $110 million deal to play for a team that appears to have little chance of making the playoffs — despite the win, the Mets remain in fourth place in the National League East and behind five teams in the race for the second wild-card spot — on a roster that could look very different following the July 31 trading deadline.“Obviously things haven’t been going great for me,” he said. “But I’m not going to get discouraged or work any less hard.”Collins, however, preferred to see the victory, and Cespedes’s modest offensive resurgence, as a sign that things might be about to change for his team.“Yeah, it’s been a rough year, and we’ve played some ugly games,” he said. “But tonight, we got some big hits, we got a well-pitched game, and maybe we break out tomorrow or the next five days. And I’ll tell you what, if we get red-hot, I bet you’ll see some more blue hair in that room, too.”INSIDE PITCHSecond baseman Neil Walker, on the disabled list since June 15 with a left hamstring tear, has been taking batting practice and engaging in running drills and is expected to begin a rehabilitation assignment this weekend. Terry Collins said he hoped Walker would be able to rejoin the team as soon as Monday.A version of this article appears in print on July 20, 2017, on Page B11 of the New York edition with the headline: Cespedes Shows Signs of Life in Mets Win.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.