JUNE 25, 2016
The Russian sports minister, Vitaly Mutko, said “up to 67 athletes” had applied to the International Association of Athletics Federations, track and field’s world governing body, for exemption from the ban on the Russian team at the Rio Olympics.The I.A.A.F. last week upheld its overall ban on the Russian team — imposed in November over widespread doping — but allowed an exemption for athletes who can show they were reliably drug tested outside their home country.Those who appear to fit the I.A.A.F.’s criteria include the 800-meter runner Yulia Stepanova, who fled Russia after testifying on doping matters, and the long jumper Darya Klishina, who is based in the United States.Sprinter Infected With Zika The Jamaican sprinter Kemar Bailey-Cole said he had been infected with the Zika virus but would participate in his country’s Olympic trials next week. Bailey-Cole, 24, won a gold medal in the 100-meter relay at the London Olympics in 2012.AdvertisementThe White Sox tied a team record with seven home runs, all solo shots, but the Toronto Blue Jays held on to win at Chicago, 10-8. Brett Lawrie became the first White Sox player since Ron Santo in 1974 to hit inside-the-park and over-the-wall homers in the same game.AdvertisementCollege World Series Tyler Chadwick homered and doubled as surprising Coastal Carolina reached the finals in its first College World Series appearance with a 7-5 victory over Texas Christian in Omaha.Get the big sports news, highlights and analysis from Times journalists, with distinctive takes on games and some behind-the-scenes surprises, delivered to your inbox every week.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.Arizona beat Oklahoma State, 5-1, behind seven innings of four-hit ball from Bobby Dalbec to advance to its first finals since 2012, when it won the national championship.The best-of-three series begins Monday.Around the Majors Chris Carter hit a three-run homer as the host Milwaukee Brewers handed the Washington Nationals their seventh straight loss, 6-5.  Kevin Gausman earned his first win in 13 starts this season as the host Baltimore Orioles beat the Tampa Bay Rays, 5-0, in the opener of a doubleheader.  Tony Wolters hit his first major league home run and drove in four runs, helping the host Colorado Rockies beat the Arizona Diamondbacks, 11-6.Frank Lampard scored a disputed first-half goal as visiting New York City F.C. beat the Seattle Sounders, 2-0.In the 38th minute, R. J. Allen lofted the ball toward the 6-yard box, and Lampard chested it hard to the ground. Goalkeeper Stefan Frei immediately gestured that the ball had gone in off Lampard’s arm, but the referee Alan Kelly ruled it was a goal. Ronald Matarrita added an insurance tally in the 87th minute for N.Y.C.F.C. (6-5-6).Red Bulls 1, Crew 1 Ola Kamara scored late in stoppage time to give the host Columbus Crew a draw with the Red Bulls.The Red Bulls (7-8-2) scored in the 52nd minute when Alex Muyl ran down a long ball on the right sideline and sent a perfect cross into the box, and Bradley Wright-Phillips headed it in for his ninth goal of the season.The P.G.A. Tour announced that the Greenbrier Classic scheduled for next month had been canceled because of devastating floods in West Virginia. The tournament had been scheduled for July 7 through July 10 at the Greenbrier Resort in White Sulphur Springs, which was inundated after heavy storms rolled into the state.AdvertisementAround Golf Lydia Ko eagled the 18th to tie the Pinnacle Country Club course record at nine-under-par 62 and take a share of the lead in the L.P.G.A.’s NW Arkansas Championship in Rogers, Ark.  Billy Hurley III shot a four-under 67 to take a two-stroke lead over Ernie Els in the Quicken Loans National in Bethesda, Md.  Jean-Francois Remesy had two eagles and finished with an eight-under 64 to take the lead in the P.G.A. Tour Champions’ inaugural American Family Insurance Championship in Madison, Wis.A version of this article appears in print on June 26, 2016, on Page SP9 of the New York edition with the headline: Russian Athletes File for Olympic Exemption.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.