By REBECCA R. RUIZAUG. 30, 2016
With the Rio Olympics having barely concluded, antidoping authorities from 17 countries met in Copenhagen this week and pushed ahead with a series of proposals, including one that would prohibit any antidoping employee from having an overlapping leadership role in international sports.That would “prevent the inherent conflict of interest that exists when a sports organization is tasked with both promoting and policing itself,” the authorities said, indirectly criticizing global sports’ top antidoping official, who is also a top Olympic official.The officials — representing countries including Australia, Canada and the United States — also called for term limits for antidoping officials; increased funding for the World Anti-Doping Agency, from a source other than the International Olympic Committee; and additional sanctions for Russia in the wake of revelations of state-sponsored doping.“We hope this is a constructive contribution to the reform that is needed,” said Joseph de Pencier, the founding chief executive of the Institute of National Anti-Doping Organizations and among those at the Copenhagen meeting.Advertisement“I don’t think we ever imagined you could have a state-run doping program that would subvert antidoping controls,” Mr. de Pencier said in a telephone interview on Tuesday. “We’ve got to detect it, deter it and sanction it — so it doesn’t ruin sport.”AdvertisementExpressing support for a continuing investigation into Russian doping, the officials at the Copenhagen session requested reparations for athletes who had been harmed by doping violations and compensation for Russian whistle-blowers who have fled the country.The I.O.C., WADA and individual sports organizations have the authority to act on the recommendations that come out of the Copenhagen meeting. The I.O.C. has scheduled a summit meeting for Oct. 8 in Switzerland that will focus on improving the global antidoping system. World antidoping officials are expected to meet in September and November.Mr. de Pencier said antidoping officials wanted to emphasize support for WADA, which was heavily criticized by Olympic committee members in Rio de Janeiro this month, while making clear that significant aspects of its structure and governance needed to change.In shaping their proposed reforms this week, the array of antidoping officials — many of whom had banded together earlier in the summer to agitate for barring Russia from the Olympics — said they hoped to “restore confidence in the integrity of international sport, which has been deeply damaged, and ensure that the disturbing events of recent years are not repeated.”Get the big sports news, highlights and analysis from Times journalists, with distinctive takes on games and some behind-the-scenes surprises, delivered to your inbox every week.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.An inquiry seeking to determine which Russian athletes may have benefited from the nation’s doping system is underway, and the president of the I.O.C., Thomas Bach, said in Rio this month that, once that inquiry has concluded, the committee would have to consider “disqualification, reallocation of medals, exclusion from future Games.”At least 15 Russian medalists from the Sochi Games doped throughout the competition, Russia’s former antidoping lab chief said last spring. As of this month, the athletes in question have retained those medals.Russian whistle-blowers, meanwhile, have expressed concerns for their safety. “It seems WADA told us be safe, and let the cheaters win,” said Vitaly Stepanov, a former employee of Russia’s antidoping agency who left Russia in 2014 after he and his wife, Yuliya, a middle-distance runner, made their knowledge of Russia’s doping system public.AdvertisementThe I.O.C. denied Mrs. Stepanova entry to the Rio Games, overruling track and field officials who had voted to include her as a neutral competitor rather than one representing Russia.Mrs. Stepanova said this month that she thought the Olympic officials’ decision would have a chilling effect on other whistle-blowers. “If you open your mouth, you will never be an Olympic athlete,” she said.In their Copenhagen proposal, the antidoping officials asked the I.O.C. and Russia to “do everything in their power to protect and ensure safety, security and a sustainable future” for the Stepanovs and other whistle-blowers.In Rio this month, Mr. Bach said the Olympic committee was “not responsible for dangers to which Mrs. Stepanova may be exposed,” adding, “We nevertheless expressed our appreciation for her great contribution to the fight against doping.”Travis Tygart, the president of the United States Anti-Doping agency and among the officials who participated in this week’s meeting, said a rule prohibiting overlapping leadership positions in sports and antidoping organizations was one of the most important reforms that could be enacted. It is aimed at divorcing sports leadership — and possible financial interests in sports competitions — from the people responsible for rooting out drug violations that are capable of tarnishing those competitions.This week’s proposal would forbid employees or decision-makers of any antidoping agency to have simultaneous policy-making ties to the I.O.C. or any other sports organization.The current top global official in the fight against doping — Craig Reedie, president of the WADA — is also an executive board member of the I.O.C.“We have to remove the conflict of interest,” Mr. Tygart said, “and ensure that the fox is no longer allowed to guard the hen house.”A version of this article appears in print on August 31, 2016, on Page B13 of the New York edition with the headline: Antidoping Authorities From 17 Nations Push for a Series of Reforms.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.