By THE ASSOCIATED PRESSAUG. 30, 2016
EDEN PRAIRIE, Minn. — Minnesota Vikings quarterback Teddy Bridgewater is expected to miss at least the next season while recovering from a dislocated left knee and torn anterior cruciate ligament after a freak practice injury on Tuesday.Bridgewater was taken by ambulance to a hospital after crumpling to the turf during practice, and the team announced hours later that his knee also had “other structural damage.” Bridgewater will be scheduled for an operation in the coming days, but team officials said he had no nerve or arterial damage and was expected to make a full recovery after a “significant” rehabilitation.“Teddy has already displayed the attitude needed to overcome this injury and attack his rehab,” said Eric Sugarman, the director of sports medicine and the head athletic trainer for the Vikings.Bridgewater sustained the injury while dropping back to pass. No one made contact with him, but it was so jolting that Coach Mike Zimmer immediately ended practice. Players were visibly distraught as they left the field, some shouting expletives and others kneeling in prayer. Moments later, an ambulance took Bridgewater to the hospital.AdvertisementIt was a somber scene for a shaken franchise, one that reported to training camp with designs on a Super Bowl run.Advertisement“Sometimes the worst things happen to the best,” Vikings receiver Jarius Wright posted on Twitter. “God has a plan.”About two and a half hours after the injury, Zimmer expressed concern for Bridgewater, one of the team’s most popular players, while trying to keep the rest of his team from losing focus and confidence as it prepares for its preseason finale against the Los Angeles Rams on Thursday night and the season opener at Tennessee on Sept. 11.Get the big sports news, highlights and analysis from Times journalists, with distinctive takes on games and some behind-the-scenes surprises, delivered to your inbox every week.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.“I’m not going to let this team feel sorry for itself,” Zimmer said before the full details of Bridgewater’s injury were known. “We’re going to grieve today and be upset about it. It’s more about our feelings for Teddy and him as a person and getting better than it is about anything else. Teddy’s a great kid, and he’ll be back as soon as he possibly can if it is real bad. But we’re going to keep fighting.”The depth chart behind Bridewater is shallow. Shaun Hill is the primary backup, but he is 36 years old and has played only sparingly over the last five years. Taylor Heinicke, last year’s No. 3 quarterback, has been out all preseason with an injury, and the undrafted rookie Joel Stave has struggled.Hill started eight games for the Rams in 2014, throwing eight touchdown passes and seven interceptions. Other than that, he has thrown 23 passes since 2010.“I have confidence in Shaun,” Zimmer said. “I think he’s played great this preseason. He’s been in two-minute drills. He’s done a phenomenal job.”The Vikings were counting on Bridgewater, who was drafted in the first round in 2014, to take major steps forward after a promising start to his career. He helped lead the Vikings to the N.F.C. North championship last season as more of a game manager, but Zimmer and the offensive coordinator, Norv Turner, had said they expected him to be much more of a playmaker in 2016.AdvertisementBridgewater missed the second preseason game with a sore shoulder, but he was sharp Sunday against San Diego. He went 12 for 16 for 161 yards and a touchdown in two quarters of work.Zimmer said he had had preliminary discussions with General Manager Rick Spielman about adding another quarterback if necessary, but the injury most likely will put even more emphasis on Adrian Peterson and the running game.“We’re not going to stick our heads in the sand,” Zimmer said. “We’re going to figure out a way.”A version of this article appears in print on August 31, 2016, on Page B11 of the New York edition with the headline: Vikings Quarterback Lost for Year With Knee Injury.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.