By ADAM SCHUPAKJULY 19, 2017
Something has got to give at the 146th British Open at Royal Birkdale.Eight of the nine previous Opens at the course have been won by multiple-major champions. But the last seven majors, going back to 2015, were won by a first-time major winner. Meanwhile, the world’s top-ranked player, Dustin Johnson, missed the cut at the U.S. Open at Erin Hills, Rory McIlroy has missed three straight cuts and several other top-ranked players are searching for their “A” game.Count the defending British Open champion Henrik Stenson among those who have been in a funk, too.But here are five who could be hoisting the Claret Jug at the end:Johnny Miller, who won the 1976 British Open at Royal Birkdale, said Matsuyama, ranked No. 2 in the world, is one star whose game is shining. Matsuyama won twice earlier this season, and finished second at the U.S. Open. “I think he’s the best player right now,” Miller said. “Tournament in and tournament out, his bad shots are really good, which is what you need at Birkdale. And I think he’s ready to win.”Ranked No. 3 in the world, Spieth won the Travelers Championship, his last start, in dramatic fashion: holing a bunker shot for birdie to prevail in a playoff over Daniel Berger. It was his 10th PGA Tour title, as he is just over a month shy of his 24th birthday. Spieth has made the cut in all four of his previous starts at the British Open, including a tie for fourth in 2015. His improved ball-striking this season, his reliable short game and his will to win should serve him well at a course that plays to his strengths.Expect to see countless replays of then-17-year-old Rose holing a 45-yard pitch at the 72nd hole at Royal Birkdale in 1998. He finished as low amateur, tying for fourth at that Open, and subsequently turned pro. Now 36, he is the top-ranked Englishman at No. 12 in the world, but he has just one top-10 finish at the British since. The 2013 U.S. Open champion — who won the Olympic gold medal last year, and lost to Sergio García in a playoff at the Masters in April — would love nothing more than to be the first Englishman to win the Claret Jug since Nick Faldo in 1992. He is in good form. A tie for fourth at the Irish Open was his fifth top-four finish of 2017.Rose will have competition from Fleetwood (ranked No. 14 in the world) for the hearts and minds of English fans. He grew up minutes from Birkdale, and plans to sleep in his own bed during the tournament. He is trying to become the first Englishman since Tony Jacklin in 1969 to win the Open on home soil — the event alternates between English and Scottish courses. “I think very few people get the chance to have a home crowd that’s massively in your favor and play a tournament where, however many people will be watching me, will all want me to do well,” Fleetwood said. He is arguably on the hottest streak in golf. He has finished in the top 10 in his last four starts, including a fourth at the U.S. Open and a victory at the Open de France. “I’m clearly — I don’t have to say it really — but I’m on the form of my life,” Fleetwood said.With apologies to Rickie Fowler, the “best player never to win a major” is only 22 and hails from Spain. Rahm, No. 7 in the world, showed at the Irish Open that he possesses a complete game, winning by six shots and shattering the tournament scoring record with a 24-under. His Achilles’ heel is a short fuse, but he proved he can maintain his cool in Northern Ireland when a rules issue stemming from a ball-marking dispute did not stop his momentum.A version of this article appears in print on July 20, 2017, in The International New York Times.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.See More »