By THE ASSOCIATED PRESSDEC. 4, 2016
Oklahoma City’s Russell Westbrook became the first player in more than 25 years to record five consecutive triple-doubles in a 101-92 win over visiting New Orleans on Sunday.Westbrook finished with 28 points, 17 rebounds and 12 assists for his 10th triple-double of the season and the 47th of his career.“I don’t want to get in a conversation of if I’m going to do it every night,” Westbrook said. “I just go out and compete at a high level every night, like I’ve been doing since I’ve been in the N.B.A.”The Thunder have won all five games during Westbrook’s triple-double stretch. He is the first to accomplish the feat in five consecutive games since Michael Jordan had seven straight in 1989.AdvertisementEnes Kanter had 17 points and 10 rebounds and Victor Oladipo added 15 points for the Thunder.Anthony Davis, the N.B.A.’s leading scorer, had 37 points and 15 rebounds for the Pelicans. Buddy Hield, who led nearby Oklahoma to the Final Four last season, scored 16 points in his first game back in the state.AdvertisementMAGIC TOP PISTONS Serge Ibaka scored 21 points and blocked 4 shots, helping Orlando win at Detroit, 98-92, and ending the Pistons’ three-game winning streak. Nikola Vucevic added 16 points and 8 rebounds for the Magic.Pistons guard Reggie Jackson made his season debut after missing Detroit’s first 21 games with knee tendinitis. He had 18 points in 23 minutes.Danny DeKeyser scored 1 minute 2 seconds into overtime to give the Detroit Red Wings a 4-3 victory over the host Islanders.Anders Lee, Johnny Boychuk and Josh Bailey scored for the Islanders, who had won a season-high three straight games. Jaroslav Halak finished with 30 saves.Mike Green scored twice and Henrik Zetterberg had a goal and assist for Detroit, which improved to 4-1-2 in its last seven games.Detroit center Frans Nielsen had an assist while facing his former team for the first time since leaving the Islanders for a six-year, $31.5 million deal last summer. Nielsen was selected by the Islanders in 2002 draft had 119 goals and 230 assists over 10 seasons with the team.FLYERS’ STREAK AT 5 Wayne Simmonds has two power-play goals and Philadelphia won its fifth straight game, 4-2, at Nashville. It was only the Predators’ second regulation loss in 12 home games.AdvertisementLiverpool gave up three goals in the final 20 minutes at Bournemouth and lost, 4-3, for its first defeat since Aug. 20.Nathan Ake pounced on the ball after it was bobbled by Liverpool goalkeeper Loris Karius and put in the game-winner in the third minute of injury time.Ake’s goal came after Bournemouth scored twice in two minutes — the 76th minute by the substitute Ryan Fraser and the 78th by Steve Cook — to tie the match after falling behind, 3-1.Get the big sports news, highlights and analysis from Times journalists, with distinctive takes on games and some behind-the-scenes surprises, delivered to your inbox every week.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.MATCH HALTED A Belgian league match between the bitter rivals Charleroi and Standard Liege was halted after fans set off fireworks and threw objects onto the field.The referee, Serge Gumienny, ended the match in the 81st minute with visiting Standard Liege leading, 3-1, after fan conduct had interrupted play a third time. Gumienny said that he could no longer guarantee players’ security.TROJANS TRIUMPH Katie Johnson broke a tie in the 75th minute and Southern California won the N.C.A.A. women’s soccer title over top-ranked West Virginia, 3-1, in San Jose, Calif. The Trojans, who entered the game seeded second, also won the title in 2007.AROUND SOCCER Manchester United’s Marouane Fellaini came on as a substitute and promptly made a clumsy challenge for a penalty in the 89th minute that gave host Everton a 1-1 draw.  Alassane Pléa and Younès Belhanda scored off assists from Dante in the first half as Nice beat visiting Toulouse, 3-0, to reclaim the top spot in the French league.  Kevin Strootman and Radja Nainggolan scored as Roma beat Lazio, 2-0, in a Rome derby that many of Roma’s fans skipped in protest of security barriers installed in their end of Stadio Olimpico.  Hamburger SV beat Darmstadt, 2-0, for its first German league win of the season.Sophomore Kenny Williams III had 14 of his career-high 19 points in the opening five minutes and No. 3 North Carolina routed visiting Radford, 95-50, to bounce back from an upset loss.AdvertisementThe Tar Heels were coming off a loss at No. 13 Indiana on Wednesday but had no trouble with Radford, even after point guard Joel Berry II sprained his ankle in the second half. Berry, who is averaging 16 points per game, did not return after heading to the locker room with 17:36 left.HOT START CONTINUES V. J. Beachem scored 19 points and Notre Dame matched its best start under Coach Mike Brey, beating North Carolina A&T, 107-53.Matt Ryan knocked down five 3-pointers to finish with 17 points, and Matt Farrell added 15 points for the Irish, who scored more than 100 points for the first time this season and have now won their first eight games.DUKE WOMEN UPEND GAMECOCKS Host Duke made its case that it again belongs among the elite of women’s basketball, beating No. 3 South Carolina, 74-63.Rebecca Greenwell scored 7 of her 29 points in the final five and a half minutes and Oderah Chidom added 15 points to help the Blue Devils to their first victory over a top-three opponent since they beat No. 3 Ohio State in 2009.ANOTHER UPSET Lakota Beatty scored 20 points, Maria Martianez had 18 points with 13 rebounds and visiting Oral Roberts mounted an 18-0 run in the fourth quarter to shock No. 12 Oklahoma, 74-67.Jaye Marie Green sank a 20-foot birdie putt to win the L.P.G.A. qualifying tournament for the second time in Daytona Beach, Fla.Green became the first player to win the event twice since it moved to Daytona Beach in 1991. She won with a record score of 29 under par in 2013.AdvertisementGreen finished one stroke ahead of Olafia Kristinsdottir, the first player from Iceland to earn a tour card. The next 18 players also earned full tour cards.A RUNAWAY WIN Brandon Stone won the Alfred Dunhill Championship in Malelane, South Africa, by seven shots to capture his second European Tour title.Stone had entered the final round with a three-stroke lead, then fired a five-under 67 despite carding two bogeys.A version of this article appears in print on December 5, 2016, on Page D7 of the New York edition with the headline: Westbrook’s Remarkable Streak Reaches Five.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.