By PAT BORZIJULY 18, 2017
MINNEAPOLIS — The smile and the confident walk are still there. Aaron Judge navigated the Yankees’ clubhouse and the team’s batting practice on Tuesday with no visible sign of anxiety, even though he had managed only one infield single in 21 at-bats since the All-Star break — the first rough stretch of his remarkably dominant season.As he prepared to take on the Minnesota Twins at Target Field, he warmly greeted teammates and club personnel. On the field, between turns in the batting cage, he signed autographs for several young fans gathered near the Twins’ dugout.Why stress? The 6-foot 7-inch Judge went into the game still leading the major leagues with 30 home runs, and he ranked among the American League leaders in most major offensive categories. And this slump, after all, was nothing like what he went through in August and September last season, when he batted .179 in his first 27 games as a Yankee.“Everything’s going to work out,” Judge said, flashing that ready grin. “It’s baseball. This is a crazy game we play. You’re going to have those times you can’t get out, and those times where you can do everything right and the ball does not fall.”AdvertisementYankees Manager Joe Girardi planned to give Judge a day off Wednesday, but wanted him in the lineup Tuesday against the crafty 44-year-old Bartolo Colon, the former Met and Yankee making his Twins debut. Judge and the Yankees broke their respective hitting slumps, chasing Colon in a five-run fifth on the way to a 6-3 victory. Judge went 2 for 4 with an R.B.I., singling in the go-ahead run in the fifth.AdvertisementColon baffled the Yankees the first time through the order as the Twins established a 3-1 lead, but that fell apart the second time through. Pulled by Twins Manager Paul Molitor when the first three Yankees reached base in the fifth, Colon was charged with four runs (one scoring after he left) on eight hits.He struck out Judge in the first, leaving him looking at a late-breaking, 86-m.p.h. fastball that extended Judge’s slump to 1-for-22. But three innings later Judge smashed an infield single off the glove of shortstop Jorge Polanco, and he was standing on deck in the fifth when Gary Sanchez doubled in two runs. That tied the score at 3-3 and chased Colon.Molitor brought in the hard-throwing right-hander Ryan Pressly to face Judge, who grounded a sharp single through the middle to score Sanchez. Two batters later, Didi Gregorius pulled a two-run homer over the right-field wall.The Yankees hadn’t scored more than four runs in a game since the All-Star break, and hadn’t pushed across six since July 5, a 7-6 loss to the Toronto Blue Jays at Yankee Stadium.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.Judge’s slump certainly did not help during that stretch. In a season in which Judge has had so much success and so few struggles — he has already broken Joe DiMaggio’s club record for home runs by a rookie — even a five-game stretch without a multihit game or a gargantuan homer raised eyebrows.Coming off his first All-Star appearance, which began with his convincing triumph in the Home Run Derby, Judge went 1 for 18 against the Boston Red Sox over the weekend. Then, on Monday night here, he was 0 for 3 in a 4-2 loss to the Twins. Judge hit one ball hard, a line drive that was snagged by center fielder Zack Granite.Before the game on Tuesday, Judge talked about his downturn with more bemusement than concern.“I’ve had stretches like this even this year,” he said. He noted an 0 for 4 with four strikeouts on May 21 on the road against Tampa Bay, followed by an 0 for 3 the next day against Kansas City at Yankee Stadium. Judge then went 4 for 9 in the next three games.“It’s just trusting the process that got me where I am,” he said. “If I start making little changes here and there, it may be a quick fix, but in the long haul it won’t help me out.”AdvertisementNone of Judge’s teammates seemed overly concerned. And had Boston’s Jackie Bradley Jr. not robbed Judge of a two-run homer on Sunday night, leaping at the bullpen fence in Fenway Park’s famed center-field triangle, there might not be a slump to talk about.“He set a really high standard for himself, and for other people,” Matt Holliday said before the game. “He’s fine with it. He’s handled it really well, and he’s a very mature kid. I don’t think it’s a problem at all.”It wasn’t.“Baseball’s fickle, man,” third baseman Chase Headley added. “When things go your way, they can snowball. When they don’t go your way, they can snowball.”INSIDE PITCHThe Yankees acquired third baseman Todd Frazier and relievers David Robertson and Tommy Kahnle from the Chicago White Sox in a trade late Tuesday, the Yankees announced. The Yankees sent reliever Tyler Clippard and several minor leaguers: outfielders Tito Polo and Blake Rutherford and the left-handed pitcher Ian Clarkin. Frazier, 31, could fill in at first base, or play at third with Chase Headley moving to first.A version of this article appears in print on July 19, 2017, on Page B13 of the New York edition with the headline: Judge Snaps Out of a 1-for-22 Slump and Smacks Two Hits as the Yankees Win.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.