AdvertisementSupported bySports BriefingBy The Associated PressTiger Woods has endured two back operations since he last played in a golf tournament 15 months ago. He had another back operation that knocked him out of the Masters for the first time in 2014. He had four knee operations before that.None of that matters to Ernie Els when Woods returns to competition on Thursday at the PGA Tour’s Hero World Challenge in the Bahamas.Els is more curious about what is going on inside Woods’s head.“The talent’s there,” Els said. “It’s been proven. It doesn’t go away. It’s what you think of yourself. It’s what you think where you are. We look at this great player, but he’s not seeing the same stuff in his own mind. A lot of us are like that.”Els designed Albany Golf Course, where Woods will return from the longest layoff of his career.The Hero World Challenge features an 18-man field and no cut.The Big Ten Conference reprimanded Michigan Coach Jim Harbaugh and fined the university $10,000 for his violation of the conference’s sportsmanship policy after Harbaugh criticized officials following a 30-27 double-overtime loss at Ohio State.Harbaugh excoriated the officiating crew after the Wolverines’ defeat, saying he was “bitterly disappointed.”Harbaugh was most ardent about the spot of the ball on a fourth-down play that gave the Buckeyes a first down in the second overtime, when a stop would have won the game for the Wolverines.Thomas Hickey scored 3 minutes 7 seconds into overtime, and the Islanders again found their footing at home with a 2-1 win over the Calgary Flames.With the Flames caught in an awkward change after Michael Frolik broke his stick, the Islanders captain John Tavares backhanded a shot that Hickey tipped past Brian Elliott.Tavares also scored in the first period for the Islanders (7-10-4).The injured pitcher Nathan Eovaldi was released by the Yankees, as were the right-hander Nick Rumbelow and the left-hander Joe Mantiply.The three pitchers had been designated for assignment on Nov. 18.Eovaldi will be sidelined next season as he recovers from surgery to repair a torn flexor tendon and a partly torn ulnar collateral ligament in his right elbow.Acquired from the Miami Marlins in a December 2014 trade, Eovaldi was 9-8 with a 4.76 E.R.A. for the Yankees during the past season. He would have become eligible for free agency after the 2017 season.VOLQUEZ HEADING TO MARLINS The free-agent pitcher Edinson Volquez agreed with Miami on a two-year, $22 million contract, according to multiple news media reports.Volquez helped pitch Kansas City to the World Series title in 2015, when he went 13-9 with a 3.55 E.R.A.He slipped to 10-11 with 5.37 E.R.A. with the Royals this past season.Kemba Walker and Jeremy Lamb scored 21 points each, and the visiting Charlotte Hornets (10-7) built an early lead on the way to a 104-85 victory over the Memphis Grizzlies (11-7).Walker and Lamb were a combined 14 of 25 from the field, including 7 for 13 on 3-pointers. The rest of the Hornets were 2 of 13 from outside the arc.Advertisement