AdvertisementSupported byBy Justin SablichThe Sablich brothers have provided award-winning fantasy football advice for The New York Times since 2010. See their weekly player rankings and visit 5thDownFantasy.com for more fantasy analysis. You can also ask them questions through their Twitter account, @5thdownfantasy.Cam Newton (CAR vs. Falcons) — He has been a huge disappointment from a fantasy league perspective after his monster 2015 campaign. But in a week when most season-long leagues are playing for their fantasy title, Newton has a chance for redemption. After a gutsy performance against the Redskins, in which he played through pain to throw for 300 yards and two touchdowns, Newton faces a defense that has allowed the second most passing yards and the most fantasy points to quarterbacks this season.Philip Rivers (SD at Browns) — He hasn’t had an elite fantasy performance since Week 5, against the Raiders, but give him points for consistency, as he has had at least two touchdown passes in every game since Week 8. The Browns have allowed multiple touchdown passes to quarterbacks in 11 of 14 games and the second most fantasy points to the position.Sleeper: Derek Carr (OAK vs. Titans)Proceed With Caution: Aaron Rodgers (GB vs. Vikings)Jordan Howard (CHI vs. Redskins) — A top-five option at the position this week, Howard is averaging 17.6 fantasy points per game over the last four weeks and now gets a top-five fantasy matchup with the Redskins. Washington has allowed six running backs to top 10 fantasy points in its last five games, including performances of at least 24 points by David Johnson and Ezekiel Elliott.Latavius Murray (OAK vs. Colts) — He’ll be looking to rebound from a letdown fantasy performance against the Chargers in Week 15, though he still averaged 6.2 yards per carry. Before last week, Murray had three consecutive games with at least 14 fantasy points. The Colts have allowed an opposing back to top at least 14 fantasy points in three of the last five weeks. They are allowing the ninth most fantasy points to the position this season.These player rankings from the Sablich brothers are for standard scoring formats and will be updated each week.Doug Martin (TB at Saints) — It wasn’t pretty, but Martin had at least 12 fantasy points in two of his last three games, including 14.5 against the Saints two weeks ago. New Orleans is tied for the third most rushing touchdowns to backs and has yielded the third most fantasy points to the position.Sleeper: Todd Gurley (LA vs. 49ers)Proceed With Caution: Rob Kelley (WAS at Bears)T.Y. Hilton (IND at Raiders) — Vegas is thinking this game could be an offensive field day, picking it as the highest scoring game of the week (53 total points). Hilton faced three of the N.F.L.’s toughest pass defenses in the last four weeks but put up two 15-point performances, anyway. He also was rested in the fourth quarter of last week’s blowout win against the Vikings. The Raiders’ receiving defense is ranked 22nd this season.Michael Crabtree (OAK vs. Colts) — You will want to consider both Crabtree and Amari Cooper in this potentially high-scoring affair. Crabtree has been more consistent than his teammate, with at least 11 points in three of the last four games, but Cooper has shown greater potential for more elite performances. Crabtree is the safer bet, but consider Cooper if you need a large chunk of points.Tyrell Williams (SD at Browns) — He had been cruising since Week 9, with at least 11 fantasy points in four consecutive games before two straight duds. He is a great bet to bounce back against the Browns, who have given up the most passing touchdowns in the league (31) this season.Sleeper: Sterling Shepard (NYG at Eagles)Proceed With Caution: A.J. Green (CIN at Texans)Greg Olsen (CAR vs. Falcons) — He hasn’t had a touchdown since Week 9 but has at least 85 receiving yards in each of the last two games. You know he’ll be Cam Newton’s target of choice in a favorable matchup with the Falcons.Sleeper: Jason Witten (DAL vs. Lions)Proceed With Caution: Tyler Eifert (CIN at Texans)Defense/Special TeamsStart: BUF vs. Dolphins; SEA vs. Cardinals.Advertisement