By THE ASSOCIATED PRESSAPRIL 21, 2017
LeBron James had a triple-double, and the Cleveland Cavaliers set an N.B.A. postseason record by erasing a 25-point halftime deficit to beat the Indiana Pacers, 119-114, on Thursday night and take a three-games-to-none lead in a first-round series.James had 41 points, 13 rebounds and 12 assists, passing Kobe Bryant for third on the career playoff scoring list.The incredible rally ruined a big night for Paul George, who had 36 points, a playoff career-high 15 rebounds and 9 assists for the Pacers.Cleveland trailed by 74-49 at halftime. The largest halftime deficit overcome to win a playoff game had been 21 points by Baltimore against Philadelphia in 1948.AdvertisementThe Cavaliers will try to sweep the series on Sunday.BUCKS ROUT RAPTORS Khris Middleton scored 20 points, and the host Milwaukee Bucks overwhelmed the Toronto Raptors, 104-77, to take a two-games-to-one lead in their first-round series. Giannis Antetokounmpo had 19 points and 8 rebounds, and Greg Monroe added 16 points for the Bucks, who built a 20-point lead in the first quarter.AdvertisementRoman Josi scored twice, Pekka Rinne had 30 saves, and the Nashville Predators beat the visiting Chicago Blackhawks, 4-1, to complete a surprising sweep of the Western Conference’s top seed.Colton Sissons also scored, and Viktor Arvidsson added an empty-net goal as Nashville recorded the franchise’s first playoff sweep. The Predators limited the Blackhawks to just three goals in 13 periods.Nashville will face either St. Louis or Minnesota in the conference semifinals.PENGUINS ADVANCE Sidney Crosby and Scott Wilson scored 51 seconds apart in the third period, and the Pittsburgh Penguins beat visiting Columbus, 5-2, to eliminate the Blue Jackets in Game 5 of their first-round series.Get the big sports news, highlights and analysis from Times journalists, with distinctive takes on games and some behind-the-scenes surprises, delivered to your inbox every week.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.Bryan Rust had two goals, Phil Kessel also scored, and Marc-Andre Fleury had 49 saves for the Penguins, the defending Stanley Cup champions. Pittsburgh will face Toronto or Washington next.SABRES CLEAN HOUSE The Buffalo Sabres fired General Manager Tim Murray and Coach Dan Bylsma after the youthful team missed the playoffs for a sixth consecutive season.Chris Sale struck out 13 in eight shutout innings, Mookie Betts hit a three-run double in the 10th, and the Boston Red Sox beat the host Toronto Blue Jays, 4-1.Sale allowed four singles and lowered his E.R.A. to 0.91. But he is just 1-1 because the team has scored only four runs for him in four starts.AdvertisementAndy Murray and Stan Wawrinka were both knocked out in the third round of the Monte Carlo Masters.The top-ranked Murray blew a 4-0 lead in the deciding set and lost to Albert Ramos-Viñolas, 2-6, 6-2, 7-5. Wawrinka, last year’s United States Open champion, followed Murray out with a loss to Pablo Cuevas, 6-4, 6-4.Rafael Nadal, the defending champion, beat Alexander Zverev, 6-1, 6-1, and the two-time champion Novak Djokovic defeated Pablo Carreño Busta, 6-2, 4-6, 6-4.The Olympic champion hurdler Brianna Rollins was suspended for a year for failures to disclose her location to the United States Anti-Doping Agency.Rollins, who won the 100-meter hurdles at the Rio de Janeiro Olympics, accepted responsibility but said her confusion about the program was to blame.Marcus Rashford scored in the 107th minute to send Manchester United past visiting Anderlecht, 2-1, and into the Europa League semifinals.United will be joined in the semifinals by visiting Celta Vigo, which ousted Genk, 4-3 on aggregate, after a 1-1 draw in the second leg; Ajax, which needed extra time to beat host Schalke, 3-2; and Lyon, which beat host Besiktas, 7-6, in a penalty shootout after the game finished 2-1 to Besiktas, for a 3-3 aggregate score.A version of this article appears in print on April 21, 2017, on Page B12 of the New York edition with the headline: Pro Basketball; Cavaliers Stage a Record Rally vs. the Pacers.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.