By JAMES WAGNERMAY 15, 2017
PHOENIX — The steady trickle of injuries plaguing the Mets this year has given them plenty of difficult decisions. Particularly tricky are players with midlevel, nagging injuries: Should the Mets put the player on the 10-day disabled list or give him a few days of rest and hope it improves?With Asdrubal Cabrera, the Mets elected the latter option on Monday. Cabrera, a key part of the team, was given a second straight day off after he recently aggravated a thumb injury.John Ricco, the Mets’ assistant general manager, said before Monday’s game against the Arizona Diamondbacks that the team would decide on Tuesday whether to place Cabrera on the 10-day disabled list, depending on how Cabrera feels.A stint on the disabled list can be backdated only three days under the current rules. The disabled list threshold was lowered from 15 games to 10 this season to help teams wrestle with less-than-serious injuries without fear of losing a player for nearly two weeks.AdvertisementThe Mets again started Jose Reyes at shortstop on Monday in Cabrera’s place.Cabrera has gained the respect of his teammates and the organization for gutting through injuries. He played a crucial role in helping the Mets reach the National League wild-card game last season despite dealing with a knee injury for much of the year. This season, he has battled through knee soreness, hamstring tightness, sore legs and, now, the thumb injury.AdvertisementThe Mets have been reluctant to put Cabrera on the disabled list for the thumb problem so far, Ricco said, because “he’s such a big part of our team.”“To his credit, he wants to keep fighting,” Ricco added.Ricco said Cabrera’s injury is a thumb joint sprain. Cabrera has received medical treatment and has rested the past few days to calm the swelling.Cabrera has appeared to be a step slower in the field this season, perhaps because of his leg ailments. He was hitting .257 with three home runs and a .719 on-base plus slugging percentage entering Monday.Should the Mets place Cabrera on the disabled list, Ricco ruled out the team’s top prospect, shortstop Amed Rosario, as a short-term replacement option. While Rosario’s young legs and strong defensive skills could benefit the Mets’ infield defense, the Mets believe he still needs more seasoning in the minor leagues. Rosario, considered by many to be a top-10 prospect in the sport, was hitting .359 with a .894 O.P.S. for Class AAA Las Vegas, a hitter-friendly environment, entering Monday.Although Rosario’s offensive numbers since the start of the 2016 season are strong, he has played only 92 games combined between Class AA Binghamton and Las Vegas.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.Based on discussions with the team’s scouts and minor league officials, Ricco said the Mets want to give the 21-year-old Rosario “more time.”“One of the reasons you put a guy in Triple-A is because you face a different level of competition there,” Ricco said. “He’s starting to see more off-speed pitches. He can hit the fastball, but they’re starting to throw him off-speed pitches in fastball counts and see how he adjusts to that. There are certain things you can only get through repetition.”Rosario was slated to play third base for Las Vegas on Monday for the second time this season, part of the Mets’ plan of adding more positional versatility throughout the organization. Although the Mets and talent evaluators believe Rosario has the physical tools and ability to be an effective shortstop in the major leagues, the Mets wanted him to play third occasionally in the minors.AdvertisementCabrera first hurt his left thumb on a diving play in the field on May 6. He pinch-hit three of the next four games, and returned to the starting lineup last Friday in Milwaukee. But he left Saturday’s game in the seventh inning after fouling a ball and aggravating the injury.Cabrera said then that he would see how much discomfort he could tolerate to play.“If he’s not going to be able to play for a few days, we’ve got to get a guy in here,” Manager Terry Collins said before Monday’s game. “We’re not sitting in a situation where we can play too short.”The Mets, however, have done that often this season, as they have battled seemingly minor injuries to players such as Travis d’Arnaud and Yoenis Cespedes, but the ailments have eventually resulted in disabled-list stints following aggravations.“It’s a joint decision,” Ricco said of the disabled-list decision, later adding:Ricco said moves to the disabled list were joint decisions between the team and the player.“It’s more of an art than a science,” he said, “looking at the whole makeup of the club and looking at the injury and trying to figure out when you go conservative and when you play short. Certain teams have philosophies where they’ll play short more than others.”INSIDE PITCHYoenis Cespedes (hamstring) is expected to begin running exercises this week, John Ricco said. Cespedes has been hitting in extended spring training in Port St. Lucie, Fla. Mets Manager Terry Collins said he hoped that Cespedes was ready to rejoin the Mets in about a week. ... Steven Matz and Seth Lugo, both dealing with elbow injuries, are slated to pitch in a game with Class A St. Lucie on Thursday. ... Third baseman David Wright is not throwing and is still rehabbing his shoulder injury, Ricco said.A version of this article appears in print on May 16, 2017, on Page B9 of the New York edition with the headline: Mets Hope a Little Rest Will Suffice for Cabrera.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.