AdvertisementSupported byBy Wallace MatthewsThe Yankees placed closer Aroldis Chapman on the 10-day disabled list, and he is likely to be out for at least a month because of inflammation in the rotator cuff of his left shoulder.Chapman, whose fastball often exceeds 100 miles per hour, complained of pain in his shoulder after pitching Friday night in a 5-1 loss to the Houston Astros. Chapman had a magnetic resonance imaging test on Saturday and was placed on the disabled list before Sunday’s doubleheader.General Manager Brian Cashman said Chapman would not throw for two weeks and was unlikely to pitch for at least a month “if all goes well.”Manager Joe Girardi added: “He’s not replaceable. You just can’t replace an arm like that.”Although the injury apparently took Girardi by surprise — he said Chapman was fine after he had allowed three hits in a brief appearance in the ninth inning on Friday — Chapman said he had been battling pain in his shoulder for “about a couple of weeks.”“I was trying to work through it,” he said. “I was getting treatment. I believed it was going to go away. But eventually, it got even worse. It got to be a little more than I could handle.”At least one of Chapman’s pitches was clocked at 101 m.p.h. on Friday, but he seemed to display discomfort in his pitching arm, something he also indicated during an appearance on April 26 in Boston, in which he recorded his fifth save of the season but nearly gave up a game-ending home run on a ball that sailed foul.“People will point back to the Boston game, but he went on a roll after that — he pitched extremely well,” Girardi said. “Sometimes, an injury like this takes a while to manifest itself. Maybe the game in Chicago is what put it over the edge.”Chapman saved two more games before having his first blown save of the season against the Cubs at Wrigley Field on May 7. He allowed three singles, two walks and a stolen base, hit a batter and ultimately gave up three runs in two-thirds of an inning, wiping out a 4-1 Yankees lead in the bottom of the ninth inning. The Yankees eventually won the game, 5-4, in 18 innings. Chapman did not pitch again until Friday’s appearance against the Astros.He has seven saves this season and a 3.55 earned run average over 12 ⅔ innings.After sending Chapman to the Cubs at last season’s trade deadline, the Yankees brought him back as a free agent with a five-year contract for $86 million. He was signed in part because of his durability. Chapman said he had sustained a similar injury as a Cincinnati Red during the 2011 season, missing 36 games. He has been on the disabled list one other time in his career, when he sustained facial fractures after being hit by a batted ball in 2014.Dellin Betances, the setup man in the bullpen, will assume the job of closer, a role he also took on last August after Chapman was traded. In 19 appearances, Betances had 12 saves — and three blown saves — but his performance dropped off sharply in September, when he was 0-2 with a 9.64 E.R.A. in his final eight appearances of the season.“I’m confident in him because of the stuff that he has,” Girardi said of Betances. “I think what he learned last year doing it, the experience he got doing it, will help him tremendously this year.”Advertisement