JUNE 23, 2016
The best-selling sports books in May 2016, according to the New York Times best-seller list.1. SHOE DOG by Phil Knight (Scribner). A memoir by the founder of Nike.2. THE BOYS IN THE BOAT by Daniel James Brown (Penguin). The American rowers who pursued gold at the 1936 Berlin Olympic Games.3. BARBARIAN DAYS by William Finnegan (Penguin). A Pulitzer Prize-winning surfing chronicle and memoir by a New Yorker writer celebrates a lifelong obsession.4. THE ONLY RULE IS IT HAS TO WORK by Ben Lindbergh and Sam Miller (Holt). Two statistics-minded baseball analysts are offered a chance to manage a California minor league team.5. AMERICAN PHAROAH by Joe Drape (Hachette Books). A portrait of the Triple Crown-winning racehorse.6. I’M FASCINATED BY SACRIFICE FLIES by Tim Kurkjian (St. Martin’s). The ESPN baseball commentator shares inside stories.7. UNBROKEN by Laura Hillenbrand (Random House). An Olympic runner’s story of survival as a prisoner of the Japanese in World War II.8. 18 HOLES WITH BING by Nathaniel Crosby and John Strege (Dey Street). The former professional golfer shares life lessons he absorbed while playing golf with his famous father.Get the big sports news, highlights and analysis from Times journalists, with distinctive takes on games and some behind-the-scenes surprises, delivered to your inbox every week.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.9. STRING THEORY by David Foster Wallace (Library of America). A collection of essays about tennis, by the literary writer who died in 2008 and who was a lifelong player and fan.10. NATURAL BORN HEROES by Christopher McDougall (Knopf). The author of “Born to Run” discusses what makes a hero and what fitness techniques we can learn from some of them.11. PLAYERS by Matthew Futterman (Simon & Schuster). The lucrative business of sports.Rankings reflect sales for May 2016. The sports titles ranked here are selected by the editors from among all adult nonfiction books in all print and electronic formats, as reported to the New York Times best-seller list for the previous month. The definition of sports is deliberately broad and inclusive, so as to reflect all manner of the outdoor sports world, varying from the professional leagues to personal athleticism.A version of this list appears in print on June 24, 2016, on Page B13 of the New York edition with the headline: The Best Sellers: Filed Under Sports.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.