By MIKE VORKUNOVJULY 17, 2017
GREENBURGH, N.Y. — It took less than 90 seconds on Monday for Steve Mills, the Knicks’ newly anointed team president, to succinctly describe a vision of the future for his victory-challenged club.Speaking at a news conference to introduce the team’s new hierarchy, he said the Knicks would build around four young players: Kristaps Porzingis, Willy Hernangomez, the newly drafted Frank Ntilikina and the newly signed Tim Hardaway Jr.Notice someone missing from that list?That someone would be Carmelo Anthony. And yet even as Mills spoke of his enhanced role as the club’s top decision-maker and even as Scott Perry, the team’s new general manager, spoke of his excitement in becoming part of the organization, it was Anthony who kept intruding on the proceedings.Anthony, 33, has two years to go on his lavish, no-trade deal with the Knicks, and he does not seem to fit with the message that Mills and Perry conveyed on Monday — that the Knicks would concentrate on youth and defense as they rebuild.AdvertisementThat emphasis would seem to leave Anthony with no future in New York. He is not young by basketball standards and has never been much of a defender. Still, no one at the news conference — neither Mills nor Perry nor Coach Jeff Hornacek — was ready to say a definitive goodbye, even though Mills, in recent weeks, has spearheaded trade talks that would put Anthony, one of the N.B.A.’s best offensive players, in a Houston Rockets uniform.Advertisement“I’ve been in communication with Carmelo,’’ Mills said. “I think we will be a good developing team if Carmelo is part of the team. We’ll be a good developing team if he isn’t. We’ll be in constant communication with Carmelo and his camp, and we’ll come to some resolution that works well for both us.’’To some extent, Mills may have been posturing, as he does not want to make it look as if the Knicks are desperate to unload Anthony, which would make it harder to get anyone of value in return.Mills did give a definitive answer about Anthony when he was asked if the Knicks might buy out the remaining two years of his contract, at more than $50 million, to guarantee his departure.Phil Jackson appeared to support this option before he was recently ousted as the Knicks’ president, which allowed Mills to move up from general manager to succeed him and opened up a spot for Perry to join the organization. But Mills said Monday that the Knicks would definitely not buy out Anthony.The Knicks, Mills made clear, want something in exchange for letting Anthony go, which left the situation unresolved. But other matters on Monday seemed more clear cut.Although the Knicks were a poor defensive team last season, when they were 31-51, defense will be the team’s No. 1 priority in the coming season, Mills, Perry and Hornacek agreed.Hornacek used the word “scrappy’’ to describe the style of play he wanted the Knicks to adopt and, he talked about his players diving for balls more than they did last season and taking more charges on the defensive end.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.Mills kept talking up youth and athleticism and that key word of the day — defense. They were not necessarily the words that were stressed in recent seasons, when the emphasis was on the triangle offense so beloved by Jackson.AdvertisementBut they were the words on Monday as Mills, no longer Jackson’s No. 2, tried to carve his own path.“Those are the things we need to do if we want to build a sustainable organization,’’ Mills said. “That’s what we have to do, and obviously we’re in a situation now where that hasn’t been the case.’’As for Perry, 53, a veteran N.B.A. executive who most recently worked for the Sacramento Kings, Mills said he would have the leeway to make his own hires and put his own stamp on a front office that has struggled to make the Knicks competitive.“I think we’ll be partners in that in the sense that he’ll come to me with his recommendations and we’ll debate it back and forth,” Mills said. He said Perry was someone he had come to know over the years and with whom he felt a rapport. Mills and Perry now give the Knicks the only front office in the league in which both the team president and general manager are African-American.Perry described his new role as a dream job. His wife, Kim, and their daughter, Chelsea, who just moved to Brooklyn, sat in the front row and other family members were present, too.“I have to pinch myself sometimes realizing I’ve received this opportunity,” Perry said.A version of this article appears in print on July 18, 2017, on Page B10 of the New York edition with the headline: Knicks’ Leaders Talk Defense and Tiptoe Around Anthony.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.