By JAMES WAGNERMAY 14, 2017
MILWAUKEE — The Mets returned to baseball prominence thanks to the talent and dominance of their starting rotation. A fearsome stable of starters helped them reach the 2015 World Series and weather injuries to reach the playoffs last season. Their starters gave them swagger.It took six weeks of the 2017 season for that once-vaunted group to deteriorate into the worst in the major leagues.“It’s been shocking to me,” Manager Terry Collins said after the struggling rookie Robert Gsellman turned in another rough start in a 11-4 loss to the Milwaukee Brewers on Saturday. “We should be pitching better.”A day earlier, the Mets’ general manager, Sandy Alderson, had essentially conceded that the starting rotation that had been the team’s foundation could no longer be counted on. The team needs to be realistic about its expectations, including the belief that the rotation — now a shell of what it was expected to be heading into the season — could right itself and pitch deeper into games, he said.Advertisement“I think it would be foolish for us to say that the starting pitching is going to have to go deeper,” Alderson said. “It would be nice if it goes deeper. I don’t think we can count on that consistently over time.”AdvertisementThe numbers paint a grim picture.Even with injuries to Jacob deGrom, Matt Harvey and Steven Matz last season, the Mets’ starters finished the year with a 3.61 earned run average, third best in the majors. After Saturday’s game, their 5.13 E.R.A. was the worst.Get the big sports news, highlights and analysis from Times journalists, with distinctive takes on games and some behind-the-scenes surprises, delivered to your inbox every week.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.Injuries — including a latissimus tear that will keep their ace, Noah Syndergaard, out for months — have not been so easily overcome this year. Elbow injuries to Matz and Seth Lugo near the end of spring training robbed the Mets’ rotation of depth.DeGrom (3.80 E.R.A.) is the best able-bodied Mets starter now but has piled up unusually high walk totals. On and off the field, Harvey (5.63 E.R.A.) has had problems, but he has insisted that he has felt better mechanically of late despite the results. The backup starter Rafael Montero’s struggles led the Mets to pick up Tommy Milone, who had a 6.43 E.R.A. at the time, off the waiver wire.There has been at least one hopeful sign: After two years away because of injuries and rehabilitation, Zack Wheeler (4.18 E.R.A.) has been surprisingly effective.Gsellman’s problems are understandable; he is still technically only a rookie and is learning his craft at the highest level. It has, however, been an abrupt change from the sensational pitching he displayed late last summer in helping save the Mets’ season. After Gsellman was charged with six runs (five earned) over four-plus innings on Saturday, his E.R.A. stands at 7.07.Gsellman pitched out of jams over the first four innings, surrendering only two runs, but after teetering on the edge with uneven command in that time, he tumbled over in the fifth.After all four batters he faced in the inning had reached base, Gsellman was pulled for reliever Hansel Robles as the Mets clung to a 4-3 lead. Robles has pitched well lately, but he quickly stumbled. He gave up a two-run single to Orlando Arcia, a two-run double to Jesus Aguilar and finally a three-run homer to Travis Shaw.AdvertisementGsellman and Robles combined to allow eight runs in the inning and leave the game far out of the Mets’ reach.“I’m pretty concerned,” Collins said of Gsellman. “We’re not seeing how good we know he can be. We’re not seeing that good sink or command of his secondary pitches.”Collins said the Mets’ coaching staff had searched for ways to pull Gsellman out of trouble but was stumped. Gsellman said he had never struggled in the past the way he has been struggling.“But I can only look up from here,” he said.As a result of Gsellman’s struggles, Collins had a chance to try out some players in new positions. Before the game, Collins disclosed that the team had recently revisited the idea of using Jose Reyes in the outfield. Because T. J. Rivera has hit so well and Reyes has not, Rivera would keep playing third base.With the Mets trailing by 10-4, Collins put Reyes in center field in the sixth inning, Reyes’s first major league outfield experience.But after Asdrubal Cabrera left the game in the next inning when he aggravated a thumb injury, Collins asked Reyes to take over for him at shortstop and moved Rivera to left field — as with Reyes, his first outfield appearance in the major leagues; Rivera has played left field sparingly in the minor leagues. Wilmer Flores came in at third.Even without the injured Yoenis Cespedes, the Mets’ outfield contains two of their best hitters, Michael Conforto and Jay Bruce — but also one of their weakest, Curtis Granderson, who is hitting .148. Collins said before the game that the Mets had not discussed benching Granderson, at 36 the oldest player on the team.But trying Rivera and Reyes in the outfield gives the Mets more options as they await the return of Cespedes from the disabled list with a hamstring injury.Who plays where in the outfield, however, ranks low compared with the concerns facing the Mets’ bumpy rotation.A version of this article appears in print on May 14, 2017, on Page SP3 of the New York edition with the headline: Mets Collapse Again Under the Weight of Their Pitching Dysfunction.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.