By THE ASSOCIATED PRESSAPRIL 18, 2017
Tyler Bozak scored 1 minute 37 seconds into overtime to cap Toronto’s comeback from a two-goal second-period deficit, and the Maple Leafs beat the visiting Washington Capitals, 4-3, on Monday night to take a 2-1 lead in their first-round playoff series.Auston Matthews and Nazem Kadri each had a goal and an assist, and William Nylander also scored for Toronto. Frederik Andersen made 23 saves.Toronto trailed by 2-0 in the first period and then by 3-1 early in the second before Kadri and Nylander scored 4:07 apart to tie the score in the final minute of the period.Alex Ovechkin, Nicklas Backstrom and Evgeny Kuznetsov scored for the Capitals.All three games so far have been decided in overtime.AdvertisementSENATORS GET PAST BRUINS Bobby Ryan scored on a tip-in on a power play 5:43 into overtime, and the Ottawa Senators recovered after giving up a three-goal lead to beat the Bruins, 4-3, in Boston to take a 2-1 lead in their first-round series.AdvertisementMike Hoffman added two goals for Ottawa, with Derick Brassard scoring the other. Craig Anderson finished with 17 saves.It was the second straight overtime game of the series.This time, the Bruins rallied from a 3-0 deficit with three goals in the second period, tying the score on a power-play goal by David Pastrnak. Noel Acciari and David Backes also scored for the Bruins.BLUE JACKETS DEFENSEMAN OUT Columbus defenseman Zach Werenski will miss the rest of the postseason because of a broken cheekbone. The Blue Jackets announced the news one day after Werenski, a 19-year-old rookie, took a puck to the face on a shot by Pittsburgh’s Phil Kessel that opened a gash on his right cheek in the second period.Andrew Benintendi hit a go-ahead, two-run single as Boston scored three unearned runs in the second inning after a dropped throw by Tampa Bay second baseman Brad Miller, and the Red Sox beat the Rays, 4-3, in the annual Patriots’ Day game in Boston.Benintendi had three singles in the game, which began at 11:05 a.m. to coincide with the Boston Marathon.CARDINALS END THREE-GAME SKID Lance Lynn pitched seven shutout innings, Kolten Wong homered, and the Cardinals stopped a three-game losing streak, beating the Pittsburgh Pirates, 2-1, in St. Louis.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.The Cardinals, who had lost six of seven, are 4-9 and still have the worst record in the National League.BREWER HOMERS IN FIFTH STRAIGHT GAME Milwaukee Brewers first baseman Eric Thames tied a franchise record by homering in his fifth straight game. Thames, a former Korean baseball star, hit a solo shot off the Chicago Cubs’ John Lackey in the third inning. Thames’s streak ties him with Jeromy Burnitz (August 1997) for the franchise mark.AdvertisementThe two-time Wimbledon champion Petra Kvitova has entered the draw for next month’s French Open, four months after sustaining a serious hand injury, she said. Kvitova, 27, was stabbed by a knife-wielding intruder in her home in the Czech Republic in December. (REUTERS)Alexis Sánchez and Mesut Ozil secured Arsenal’s first Premier League win on the road in three months, with the 2-1 victory at Middlesbrough reviving the club’s pursuit of Champions League qualification.BRIGHTON EARNS PROMOTION Brighton will play in the top flight of English soccer for the first time in 34 years after securing promotion to the Premier League. Thousands of fans flooded the field after a 2-1 home victory over Wigan.The Kansas freshman Josh Jackson announced he would enter the N.B.A. draft. Jackson was named the Big 12’s newcomer of the year after averaging 16.3 points and 7.4 rebounds per game in helping the Jayhawks to a 31-5 record and a berth in the N.C.A.A. tournament’s round of 8.The Carolina Panthers made sure Kawann Short’s contract situation would not end the same way Josh Norman’s did a year ago. The Panthers signed Short, a Pro Bowl defensive tackle and their franchise player, to a five-year contract extension. Last year, the Panthers placed the franchise tag on Norman, an All-Pro cornerback, only to later rescind the offer. Norman became a free agent and signed with the Washington Redskins.A version of this article appears in print on April 18, 2017, on Page B12 of the New York edition with the headline: Hockey; Leafs Rally and Defeat Capitals in Overtime.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.