AdvertisementSupported bySports BriefingBy The Associated PressKyle Stanley got up and down for par from just over the 18th green on Sunday to win the Quicken Loans National, a PGA Tour event, on the first hole of a playoff with Charles Howell III in Potomac, Md.On a chaotic final day that included a five-minute delay for a storm, Stanley and Howell finished at seven-under-par 273 after matching final-round four-under 66s. Howell had a 21-foot putt to win on the final hole of regulation that rolled over the left edge of the cup.In the playoff, both missed the fairway and the green. Howell’s chip came up short, and he missed an 11-foot par putt. Stanley chipped to five feet and pumped his fist as the putt dropped.PERRY PREVAILS AT U.S. SENIOR OPEN Kenny Perry claimed his second United States Senior Open, pulling away from Kirk Triplett in Peabody, Mass., to finish at 16 under and win by two strokes. Perry, 56, closed with a two-under 68 for a record overall score of 264.ENGLISHMAN WINS FRENCH OPEN Tommy Fleetwood of England carded a five-under 66 to win the French Open, a European Tour event, defeating the American Peter Uihlein by one stroke in Guyancourt. Fleetwood had five birdies and no bogeys to finish at 12 under, while Uihlein just missed forcing a playoff after making a late charge. Uihlein, the overnight co-leader, shot a three-under 68.The four-time All-Star forward Paul Millsap agreed to a three-year, $90 million contract with the Denver Nuggets, according to multiple news media reports.Millsap, 32, spent the last four seasons with the Atlanta Hawks. He averaged a career-high 18.1 points, with 7.7 rebounds and 3.1 assists last season.LOWRY STAYS WITH RAPTORS Point guard Kyle Lowry announced on The Players’ Tribune website that he will re-sign with Toronto.Multiple news media reports said the deal was worth $100 million over three years. Lowry, a three-time All-Star, averaged 22.4 points and 7.0 assists last season for the Raptors, who also agreed to retain forward Serge Ibaka for three years and $65 million.GIBSON BOUND FOR MINNESOTA Forward Taj Gibson will reunite with Coach Tom Thibodeau after agreeing to a two-year, $28 million deal to join the Timberwolves, multiple news media outlets reported. Gibson has spent the bulk of his career with the Chicago Bulls, including five seasons under Thibodeau. The Bulls traded him to the Oklahoma City Thunder late last season.NENE AND ROCKETS AGREE Houston agreed to terms with the center-forward Nene on a three-year deal worth $11 million, according to multiple news media outlets. The deal came a day after an initial agreement fell apart because it violated rules of the collective bargaining agreement.KORVER STAYING PUT According to multiple news media outlets, the Cleveland Cavaliers agreed to terms with the 3-point shooter Kyle Korver on a three-year, $22 million contract. Korver led the league in 3-point percentage (45) and averaged 10.8 points in 35 games for the Cavs after a midseason trade from the Atlanta Hawks.LIBERTY LOSE TO ATLANTA Brittney Sykes had a career-high 19 points and 9 rebounds, Layshia Clarendon added 15 points and 9 assists, and the host Atlanta Dream beat the Liberty, 81-72. Tina Charles scored 21 points to lead the Liberty, which has lost four of five.Montreal signed goaltender Carey Price to an eight-year, $84 million extension through the 2025-26 season.Re-signing Price was a top priority for the Canadiens. In 2014-15, he won the Hart Trophy as the most valuable player and the Vezina Trophy as the top goaltender after he led the N.H.L. with a 1.96 goals against average and a .933 save percentage.Price, who turns 30 in August, is 270-175-55, with a 2.40 goals against average and a .920 save percentage, in 509 games through 10 N.H.L. seasons.MARLEAU TO MAPLE LEAFS Forward Patrick Marleau left the San Jose Sharks to sign a three-year, $18.75 million contract with Toronto. Marleau, 37, was widely considered one of the top free agents available. The second overall pick in 1997, Marleau has 508 goals and 574 assists for 1,082 points in 1,493 N.H.L. games.VEGAS OBTAINS CENTER The Golden Knights landed Marcus Kruger in a trade with the Chicago Blackhawks. Vegas gave up undisclosed future considerations to acquire Kruger, a two-time Stanley Cup winner.Mookie Betts hit two home runs and matched a career-high with eight R.B.I. as Boston routed the Toronto Blue Jays, 15-1, at Rogers Centre.Betts went 4 for 6 as the Red Sox, who lead the American League East, won for the sixth time in seven games and completed a three-game sweep. He hit a run-scoring single in the second inning, a three-run homer in the fourth, a two-run shot in the sixth and a two-run single in the seventh. Betts also had eight R.B.I. against Arizona on Aug. 14, 2016.ARRIETA SHINES FOR CUBS Jake Arrieta pitched one-hit ball over seven innings, Ian Happ homered twice, and Chicago beat the Cincinnati Reds, 6-2, at Great American Ball Park.INDIANS CHASE VERLANDER Jose Ramirez homered twice, and Cleveland halted Justin Verlander’s decade-long streak of games with at least one strikeout by chasing the Detroit star in the fourth inning of an 11-8 road victory.HARPER AND SCHERZER LEAD NATIONALS Bryce Harper homered twice, Max Scherzer struck out 12 over seven scoreless innings, and the Washington Nationals beat the host St. Louis Cardinals, 7-2, to end a three-game losing streak. It was Scherzer’s 10th double-digit strikeout performance this season.OZUNA’S HOMERS LIFT MARLINS Marcell Ozuna hit two home runs — the second moments after his bat was rejected for having too much pine tar — and Miami pummeled the Brewers, 10-3, in Milwaukee.ORIOLES TROUNCE RAYS Manny Machado hit a three-run homer, Kevin Gausman pitched seven innings of two-hit ball, and Baltimore thumped Tampa Bay, 7-1, at Camden Yards to avert a three-game sweep.Advertisement