JULY 2, 2017
Geraint Thomas won the wet and slippery opening stage of the Tour de France on Saturday and claimed the yellow jersey.It was the first Grand Tour stage victory for Thomas, who has escorted his Sky teammate Chris Froome to Paris for three Tour victories.Thomas took just over 16 minutes to cover the almost entirely flat 8.7-mile individual time trial up and down the banks of the Rhine River in Düsseldorf, Germany.Stefan Küng finished second, five seconds behind, and Vasil Kiryienka was third, seven seconds back.AdvertisementFroome finished sixth, 12 seconds behind, and bested all his expected challengers, finishing about 40 seconds ahead of Richie Porte and Nairo Quintana.AdvertisementAlejandro Valverde, who assists Quintana at Movistar, slammed into the barriers at high speed after falling off his bike and was forced to abandon the race in a neck brace.Novak Djokovic clinched his first title since January with a 6-3, 6-4 victory over Gaël Monfils in the men’s final in Eastbourne, England, while Karolina Pliskova lifted the women’s trophy after defeating Caroline Wozniacki.Djokovic, playing the week before Wimbledon for the first time since 2010, captured his 68th career title — but just his second this year — after downing Monfils for the 14th time in 14 meetings.“It’s been a while now that I have been trying to find my best game and kind of consistency with the performance level of tennis,” said Djokovic, whose form has sharply declined since completing the career Grand Slam at last year’s French Open.Djokovic, who will have the former players Andre Agassi and Mario Ancic on his Wimbledon coaching team, needed only an hour and a quarter to defeat Monfils, the No. 2 seed.Pliskova, the No. 3 seed, beat Wozniacki, 6-4, 6-4, to underline her status as a Wimbledon title contender. Pliskova secured her third title of the season after breaking Wozniacki, the No. 6 seed, once in each set.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.(AGENCE FRANCE-PRESSE)Portugal will have to play without its captain, Cristiano Ronaldo, as it seeks the consolation of a third-place finish Sunday in the Confederations Cup against Mexico.Ronaldo, 32, was excused from the squad for the game in Moscow after Portugal lost in a penalty shootout to Chile on Wednesday. He is returning home to meet his newborn twins. Multiple news media reports have said he fathered the twins with a surrogate mother in the United States.Advertisement(AGENCE FRANCE-PRESSE)CHELSEA SIGNS A BACKUP Chelsea, the English Premier League champion, has made the Argentine goalkeeper Willy Caballero its first off-season signing to provide backup to Thibaut Courtois. Caballero, 35, was a free agent after a three-year spell at Manchester City.Ilya Kovalchuk has taken one step closer to returning to the N.H.L. after spending the previous four seasons playing in his native Russia.The start of the league’s new business year has placed the Devils in a position to sign Kovalchuk, 34, to have him either stay with the team or — more likely — be traded. The Devils own the rights to Kovalchuk, the 2001 No. 1 draft pick, after he left the team to play in the Kontinental Hockey League.Since expressing an intention to return to North America in May, Kovalchuk has had the Devils’ permission to meet with teams and negotiate the framework of a contract. The Devils would then have to sign him to the agreed-upon deal and negotiate a trade with the team.Kovalchuk scored 30 or more goals nine times in 11 N.H.L. seasons.DADONOV BACK IN FLORIDA Evgeni Dadonov is back with the Florida Panthers after being out of the N.H.L. for more than five years.Dadonov, a right wing, agreed to a three-year deal to return to Florida, where he would figure to be a candidate to join Aleksander Barkov and Jonathan Huberdeau on the Panthers’ top line — another indication that Jaromir Jagr’s time with the team could be over.Dadonov spent the past five seasons in Russia’s K.H.L., with 101 goals and 123 assists in stints with Donbass and St. Petersburg.AROUND THE N.H.L. The Tampa Bay Lightning have signed defenseman Dan Girardi to a $6 million, two-year deal. Girardi, 33, was bought out of the final three years of his contract by the Rangers in June.  The Vancouver Canucks have signed forward Sam Gagner to a $9.45 million, three-year deal and defenseman Michael Del Zotto to a $6 million, two-year deal.  The Anaheim Ducks have signed defenseman Cam Fowler to an eight-year, $52 million contract extension through the 2025-26 season. Fowler has been a fixture on the Ducks’ blue line since he unexpectedly fell to Anaheim as the 12th overall pick in the 2010 draft.  The San Jose Sharks have signed long-term contract extensions with the shutdown defenseman Marc-Edouard Vlasic and goalie Martin Jones. The Sharks reached agreements on the deals to keep both players off the open market next summer. Vlasic received an eight-year deal and Jones was signed for six years.A version of this article appears in print on July 2, 2017, on Page SP4 of the New York edition with the headline: Cycling; An Unexpected Leader at the Tour de France.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.