By JAMES WAGNERJULY 24, 2017
The Los Angeles Dodgers were dealt a blow on Sunday as Clayton Kershaw sustained a back injury that will keep him out for an estimated four to six weeks, according to multiple reports. The silver lining for Los Angeles was that if any team could withstand the loss of a pitcher as talented as Kershaw, it is the Dodgers.Kershaw, who led all major league starters with a 2.04 earned run average as of Monday, left Sunday’s game with lower back tightness, which was concerning given that a back injury also claimed much of his 2016 regular season. Multiple news reports said he would be out at least a month, though he was expected to see a back specialist before an time frame was established.Dodgers Manager Dave Roberts told reporters Kershaw had sustained a lower back strain and did not have an issue with a disk, though he would not give a timetable for Kershaw’s return. The team’s initial estimate was at least a month, though a firm prognosis is expected later.“We know he will be back to help us at some time this year,” Roberts said.But the Dodgers may be the best-equipped team to survive the loss of a pitcher like Kershaw — a seven-time All-Star, three-time Cy Young Award winner and the 2014 National League most valuable player. With the largest payroll in baseball and a talented crop of pitchers, the Dodgers have thrived without Kershaw before.AdvertisementLast year, a herniated disk in Kershaw’s back kept him out from June 26 to Sept. 9. He returned in time to rebuild his arm strength for the playoffs and helped guide the Dodgers past the Washington Nationals in a dramatic National League division series before they lost to the Chicago Cubs in the National League Championship Series.Get the big sports news, highlights and analysis from Times journalists, with distinctive takes on games and some behind-the-scenes surprises, delivered to your inbox every week.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.With a makeshift rotation that included Scott Kazmir, Brandon McCarthy, Kenta Maeda, Bud Norris and Ross Stripling, the Dodgers went 38-24 in Kershaw’s absence.AdvertisementThe Dodgers are now in a better position in the standings and possess a more talented team. Alex Wood has a 2.17 E.R.A. The team also has Rich Hill, a veteran left-hander with a 3.48 E.R.A., Hyun-jin Ryu, McCarthy and Maeda. (McCarthy landed on the disabled list with a blister problem on Monday, and Ryu returned from the D.L. the same day.)With Kershaw, the Dodgers had a 3.32 E.R.A., the lowest in baseball. That mark would most certainly take a hit without him, but the rest of the team is performing at a high level.A strong cadre of relievers, led by closer Kenley Jansen, also helps. The Dodgers’ bullpen had the second-best E.R.A. at 2.92. And behind the rookie phenomenon Cody Bellinger and the All-Stars Justin Turner and Corey Seager, the Dodgers’ offense was fifth in baseball with 5.11 runs a game.While the Dodgers have been linked to other starters in the trade market, including Justin Verlander of the Detroit Tigers and Yu Darvish of the Texas Rangers, it is unclear whether Verlander would be an upgrade or whether the Rangers will be selling. But the Dodgers are one of the few teams with the money and prospects to trade for marquee, high-budget players.The most troubling part for the Dodgers is that Kershaw’s back was again the reason for his stint on the D.L.Perhaps a benefit may be that Kershaw, like last year, will have extended time off from the wear and tear of pitching during the regular season. Kershaw, who has had mixed results in the playoffs, pitched 14 solid innings in the postseason last year. Should he return without issues, he will probably be counted on to carry a heavy load again in October.A version of this article appears in print on July 25, 2017, on Page B12 of the New York edition with the headline: Kershaw Could Be Out as Long as Six Weeks.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.