By VICTOR MATHERFEB. 17, 2017
When Dak Prescott stepped in at quarterback for the injured Tony Romo and promptly put up a stunning rookie season for the 13-3 Cowboys, it seemed Romo’s days in Dallas were numbered.Romo, 36, is a four-time Pro Bowl selection and has been a Cowboy since 2004. But over the last two seasons, because of injury, he has started only four games. That hasn’t stopped the speculation about him, with nearly a dozen teams mentioned, off and on, as his next landing spot.Where will Romo suit up next?Record: 9-7. Starter in 2016: Trevor Siemian.A year after a Super Bowl title and the retirement of Peyton Manning, things didn’t go quite as expected for the Broncos, who missed the playoffs for the first time in six years. Their defense is still outstanding, and Siemian wasn’t bad, considering it was his first season as a starter. The team’s other option is Paxton Lynch, a rookie last season. The notion that the two young quarterbacks need a mentor and that this is the kind of team that thrives under veteran leadership is so prevalent that the Broncos have emerged as the leading contender for Romo.9-7, divisional playoff round. Brock Osweiler.Osweiler passed on a chance to succeed Manning in Denver and instead signed a lucrative deal with the Texans. It’s tough to sugarcoat it: He was a bust. The Texans made the playoffs anyway in the weak American Football Conference South and must be thinking that an upgrade at quarterback will send them even higher. The latest unsourced buzz has Romo intrigued by Houston.Advertisement2-14. Colin Kaepernick, 11 games; Blaine Gabbert, five games.Not much went right for the Niners. Gabbert was terrible, which meant the team returned to its star of 2013, Kaepernick. Both could be gone next season, as the team starts from scratch. The Niners have the second pick in the draft and could go with a young quarterback like Mitch Trubisky of North Carolina, possibly as Romo’s understudy.Advertisement3-13. Matt Barkley, six games; Brian Hoyer, five games; Jay Cutler, five games.The Bears are clearly a team in trouble, and the quarterback situation is one of their most troubled areas. After 11 years, Bears fans have wearied of Cutler. Of his injury replacements this season, the well-traveled Hoyer actually wasn’t bad: He was 1-4 but had six touchdowns without an interception. The Bears have the third pick, and, like the Niners, could be looking at Trubisky. That might make Romo attractive in the mentor role.Get the big sports news, highlights and analysis from Times journalists, with distinctive takes on games and some behind-the-scenes surprises, delivered to your inbox every week.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.4-12. Case Keenum, nine games; Jared Goff, seven games.After Keenum was ineffective, the Rams finally turned the ball over to Goff, who was the No. 1 overall pick in the 2016 N.F.L. draft. He was worse, and the team floundered in its first season back in Los Angeles. The Rams have too much invested in Goff to give up on him yet. Romo could be a stopgap while Goff, the Rams hope, matures.8-7-1. Kirk Cousins.You might think the Redskins would stick with Cousins, who led them to an unexpected playoff berth in 2015 and a winning record last season. But financial issues may lead them to let him go, and the unpredictability of the team owner, Dan Snyder, has Romo on fans’ radar.1-15. Cody Kessler, eight games; Robert Griffin III, five games; Josh McCown, three games.The quarterback position has, to put it mildly, not been a strong suit for the Browns. Since the team seems to bring in a new quarterback (or two, or three) every season, why not Romo?12-4, divisional playoff round. Alex Smith.The Chiefs seem to be on the right path, with a strong season despite a disappointing playoff loss to the Steelers. There’s nothing really wrong with Smith, unless you buy the notion that there’s some ineffable quality that is needed to turn a playoff team into a Super Bowl team. But whether Romo is the man with that quality is an open question.3-13. Blake Bortles.Another bad team with a quarterback putting up anemic numbers. Some Jags fans really believe that there is a fair amount of talent on this team and that a better quarterback could turn things around. It seems as if the Jags need a lot more help than that, and it’s hard to see a situation in which they are contenders before Romo retires.There’s another possibility. The Cowboys were 13-3, and Prescott was near the top of most quarterback statistics. So moving on from the aging Romo seems like a logical move. But in a league in which quarterbacks are injured every season, a canny backup who knows the system is a valuable asset.You can, of course, bet on where Romo will wind up. Bookmaker.eu makes the Broncos the favorites, followed by the Texans and the Bears.AdvertisementWill Jerry Jones, the Cowboys owner, be wagering? “Don’t think for one minute if you see something written or something said about what and where Romo is going to be relative to our team that there’s any credibility to it,” he said on his radio show in January. “There’s only one that can make that decision, and there’s been no decision made.”A version of this article appears in print on February 18, 2017, on Page D8 of the New York edition with the headline: Where Will Tony Romo Take the Field Next?.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.