By JAMES WAGNERFEB. 15, 2017
PORT ST. LUCIE, Fla. — As his fellow pitchers played catch Tuesday morning, during the first official week of spring training, Zack Wheeler watched off to the side with his glove off. He had felt tenderness in his right arm after a recent bullpen session, so he was resting.Dan Warthen, the Mets’ longtime pitching coach, maintained on Wednesday that it was not a setback for Wheeler, who has not pitched for the Mets for two years because of physical problems, but every twinge Wheeler feels has to make the Mets at least a little bit nervous.So it was not surprising that Warthen went on to say that Wheeler, who had Tommy John surgery in 2015, will be treated “with kid gloves” this spring. A physical examination this week revealed no new problems, and the tenderness Wheeler felt could have been related to scar tissue in his arm. The Mets hope he can throw this week.Still, the Wheeler development, as minor as it might have been, was one more reminder of the persistent and evolving issue the Mets will be dealing with all season: how to keep their precious — and often injury-depleted — pitching rotation in one piece.AdvertisementWarthen will be in the middle of the decision-making on that front, as will Manager Terry Collins, and the two of them have already put together a plan to limit the wear and tear that spring training can impose on pitchers.AdvertisementFor now, Mets pitchers are throwing bullpen sessions every third day, instead of every other day, as in the past. In addition, pitchers have not played catch before workouts, only after. They have been barred from throwing during fielding drills.As spring training progresses, pitchers will fully take part in those drills. But they will play catch or throw long toss for only 10 minutes, instead of the previous 20, Warthen said. Every throw will be counted.With all the changes, Warthen said, pitchers might make about 80 throws per day, far fewer than the 250 in previous spring trainings. He said the Mets had concluded that it was in the early part of spring training that a lot of pitching injuries occurred. Thus, the new precautions.Once the season begins, the Mets may skip starters on occasion to give them extra rest. And Collins said a six-man rotation would be a consideration, at times, during the heart of the season.Although Wheeler’s role in the 2017 season, assuming he is healthy, has not yet been defined, Warthen knows who his top four starters are — Jacob deGrom, Steven Matz, Matt Harvey and Noah Syndergaard — and he touched on all of them Wednesday.DeGrom, who had ulnar nerve surgery last season, has looked “bigger, stronger and faster,” Warthen said. Early results from the Mets’ advanced pitch-tracking data have indicated that deGrom is extending his right arm in his delivery as he did in the past, when he was healthy.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.Warthen said that Matz, who had a shoulder injury and surgery to remove a bone spur from his elbow last season, might have benefited from pitching while injured in 2016 because it forced him to ease up and be more relaxed on the mound.Harvey, who had surgery last summer to address thoracic outlet syndrome, a compression of the nerves, arteries or veins between the lower neck and the armpit, was humbled by his ragged 2016 campaign and arrived at camp in great shape, Warthen said.Advertisement“He wants to be the No. 1 pitcher in baseball, and I’d be very surprised to not see this kid come out and not have a great year,” Warthen said.Then there is Syndergaard, whom Warthen termed a “man giant” on Wednesday and who has announced he wants to throw harder than ever in 2017.Asked about that goal, Collins and Warthen said they were not worried — but with caveats. Warthen said that after he had heard what Syndergaard proposed, Warthen had told him that he did not care how hard Syndergaard threw as long as his pitching mechanics remained the same.“If it comes out harder and you’re still doing the same thing, then O.K.,” Warthen said. But putting more effort into throwing harder, Warthen added, “will not be allowed.”As for Wheeler, it is still unclear what his role might be. The Mets have discussed using him as a starter, the only role he has ever known, or as a reliever, to help limit his innings. But Warthen said that Wheeler had traditionally been slow to recover between starts, which might make relieving difficult for him.Warthen said Wheeler’s work limit for the 2017 season might be in the low 100-inning range. If that is the case, Wheeler might move in and out of the rotation, pitching five or six innings at most per start and perhaps filling in at times for other pitchers.“We have to be careful when he’s throwing with the rest of those guys because he wants to be one of the five,” Warthen said. “I can’t blame him — he earned it a long time ago, but we have to be extremely careful of this kid.”A version of this article appears in print on February 16, 2017, on Page B12 of the New York edition with the headline: Wheeler’s Arm Tenderness Draws Caution Lights, Not Alarm Bells.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.