By THE ASSOCIATED PRESSJAN. 17, 2017
The Pittsburgh Penguins ended the Washington Capitals’ nine-game winning streak with a wild 8-7 overtime victory that included nine second-period goals.Conor Sheary scored two goals, including the winner 34 seconds into overtime, for the Penguins, who ended a three-game losing streak. Evgeni Malkin picked up his 11th career hat trick during a frenetic second period, and Sidney Crosby collected his N.H.L.-leading 27th goal and three assists. Bryan Rust and Nick Bonino also scored for Pittsburgh, and Matt Murray got the win despite allowing seven goals on 28 shots.“That second period is one of the craziest periods I’ve ever been associated with,” Penguins Coach Mike Sullivan said. “I don’t even know how to assess it.”The Penguins trailed, 3-0, before scoring six times in less than 11 minutes in the second period. The Capitals had not allowed six goals in a game all season.AdvertisementLars Eller scored twice for Washington, and T. J. Oshie, Brett Connolly, Nicklas Backstrom, Justin Williams and Andre Burakovsky also found the net.AdvertisementISLANDERS SHUT OUT BRUINS Islanders goaltender Thomas Greiss stopped 32 shots for his first shutout of the season — and the first by an Islanders goalie in Boston — to lead the visiting Islanders past the Bruins, 4-0.Antonio Brown wanted to let the world in on the party when he live streamed the giddy celebration in the Steelers’ locker room after an 18-16 playoff win over Kansas City on Sunday.Brown, an All-Pro wide receiver, also caught Coach Mike Tomlin using an expletive to describe the New England Patriots, Pittsburgh’s opponent in the A.F.C. championship game.Tomlin’s word choice did not bother his players as much as Brown’s decision to throw back the curtain on what is usually a private moment.“Personally I’d like some of that stuff sacred,” long snapper Greg Warren said. “But this is a changing world, a changing environment. I can’t be some old guy stuck under a rock, that’s for sure.”Get the big sports news, highlights and analysis from Times journalists, with distinctive takes on games and some behind-the-scenes surprises, delivered to your inbox every week.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.Patriots Coach Bill Belichick hardly seemed bothered by Tomlin’s comments.“I’m not on SnapFace and all that so I don’t really get those,” Belichick said during a radio interview. “I’m really just worried about getting our team ready to go. I’m not really too worried about what they put on InstantChat or whatever it is.”CHIEFS COACH DISAGREES WITH PENALTY Chiefs Coach Andy Reid said he did not believe that the holding penalty on left tackle Eric Fisher that cost Kansas City a tying 2-point conversion against the Pittsburgh Steelers on Sunday night should have been called.AdvertisementAfter rewatching the important play from the Steelers’ 18-16 victory in an A.F.C. divisional-round game, Reid said that “I don’t want to be fined any money, but I’d lean a different way.”JETS EXTEND GUARD’S CONTRACT. The Jets signed right guard Brian Winters to a four-year contract extension. Winters, 25, started 13 games last season before being placed on injured reserve with a shoulder injury.Karolina Pliskova and Johanna Konta won their first-round matches in straight sets Tuesday at the Australian Open in Melbourne.The fifth-seeded Pliskova followed her title win at the Brisbane International with a 6-2, 6-0 victory over Sara Sorribes Tormo at Rod Laver Arena. Pliskova, who lost the United States Open final to Angelique Kerber last year, has never advanced past the third round at Melbourne Park.The ninth-seeded Konta, who won the Sydney International title last week, defeated Kirsten Flipkens, 7-5, 6-2, at Margaret Court Arena.In the men’s bracket, third-seeded Milos Raonic defeated Dustin Brown, 6-3, 6-4, 6Kris Jenkins scored 16 points and Jalen Brunson added 13 to lead No. 1 Villanova to a 76-46 win at home over Seton Hall.The Wildcats (18-1, 6-1 Big East) looked every bit like a team that could win a second straight national championship in their first game after returning to No. 1 in The Associated Press poll.Villanova had fallen from the top spot to third in the poll after a Jan. 4 loss at Butler. But wins over Marquette and Xavier vaulted the Wildcats over the Kansas Jayhawks and back into the top spot.Led by four 3-pointers from Jenkins, the Wildcats set a program record with their 47th straight win at the Pavilion.AdvertisementAROUND THE N.C.A.A. Roy Williams became the ninth Division I men’s coach with 800 career victories as No. 9 North Carolina defeated visiting Syracuse, 85-68.  Frank Mason III had 16 points as No. 2 Kansas held off host Iowa State, 76-72, for its 17th straight win.  Cole Huff got a pivotal rebound and made a pair of free throws with 16.7 seconds left, and No. 7 Creighton rallied for a 72-67 win over No. 22 Xavier.A version of this article appears in print on January 17, 2017, on Page B10 of the New York edition with the headline: A Wild End to the Capitals’ Win Streak.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.