By NOAH DAVISJAN. 15, 2016
On a temporary court erected under the ornate chandeliers in Grand Central Terminal’s Vanderbilt Hall, Amanda Sobhy became the first American-born player to reach the final of a World Series-level tournament on the Professional Squash Association Tour.Sobhy, a Long Island native, lost in four games, 11-4, 9-11, 12-10, 11-8, to Nour el Sherbini of Egypt on Thursday night, but by finishing second in the $150,000 J.P. Morgan Tournament of Champions, she confirmed her status as one of the sport’s rising stars.“Obviously I’m upset that it didn’t go my way in the finals, but I literally gave everything I had this week,” she said. “And I just fell short at the end.”The loss capped a remarkable week for Sobhy, who is in her first full season as a professional after graduating from Harvard in May with a degree in social anthropology and global health, as well as four straight collegiate national championships. Sobhy, the 2010 world junior champion, is ranked eighth in the world — the first American-born man or woman to reach the top 10 — and was the 10th seed in the tournament.AdvertisementAfter easily beating the qualifier Deon Saffery in the first round, Sobhy faced top-seeded Raneem El Welily, who had won the pair’s previous six matches, including a rout last month in three straight games that took only 22 minutes. Sobhy, one of the most powerful hitters on the tour, displayed a deft touch on her drop shots and an improved mental focus, winning in four games, 11-7, 6-11, 11-5, 11-6. Two days later, Sobhy defeated sixth-seeded Alison Waters of England, 12-10, 11-3, 11-9.AdvertisementNouran Gohar, the 18-year-old reigning world junior champion and eighth seed, met Sobhy in the semifinals. Sobhy took the initiative early, inspired by a partisan crowd that included her father, Khaled, a former under-19 national champion in Egypt; her mother, Jodie Larson, who won a United States national championship; her sister, Sabrina, a freshman at Harvard and a 2014 women’s national champion; and at least one supporter waving an American flag. She won in three straight games, 11-9, 11-9, 12-10.Get the big sports news, highlights and analysis from Times journalists, with distinctive takes on games and some behind-the-scenes surprises, delivered to your inbox every week.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.Thierry Lincou, Sobhy’s coach for the past two years and a former world champion, said that this week’s performances were the best he had seen her play.“In the past, she would never lose to someone below her in the rankings, but she never beat the top ones consistently,” he said after the semifinal. “She’s showing today that she belongs to that top group. She’s the one closing the games. And it’s just the beginning.”In Thursday’s final, most of the crowd of about 500 supported Sobhy, who said the atmosphere at Grand Central was as close to the rowdy crowds of a big-time college match as she had found on the pro tour.El Sherbini, 20, the youngest woman to make the final of this event, took the first game easily. Sobhy prevailed in the second, her close win capped with a scream and a fist pump after the final point. She fell in a close third game and again in the fourth and decisive game.Despite the loss, Sobhy’s performance demonstrated how much she had improved since she started to train full time as a professional over the summer. She is getting closer to reaching the potential that has players, including the former No. 1 Nicol David and Natalie Grainger, saying that she could earn the top spot in the world rankings.“Amanda is a complete player,” said Amr Shabana, the director and technical adviser for the Egyptian national team. “She took her time to reach where she is. She has become a very mature player with a lot of weaponry.”In the small but growing world of American squash, Sobhy was a star before the week began. Her success at the Tournament of Champions vaulted her to a new level. Her hands were tired from signing autographs, and her jaw was clenched from smiling so much.Advertisement“It was a magical run,” she said after the loss. “It would have been even more magical had I won it. But sometimes you can’t get a fairy-tale ending.”A version of this article appears in print on January 15, 2016, on Page B10 of the New York edition with the headline: Sports Briefing | Squash; American Loses in Final.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.