AdvertisementSupported byBruins 4, Devils 1By The Associated PressNEWARK — The Boston Bruins had everything they needed to get back on track: a road game against the banged-up Devils, a team they have owned lately.The rookie Frank Vatrano scored early, Jonas Gustavsson made 19 saves, and the Bruins continued to play well away from home, beating the Devils, 4-1, on Friday night for the 3,000th win in franchise history.“It’s always special when you look at 3,000,” Bruins Coach Claude Julien said. “It means that that team has been around for a while. I have always been proud of being part of an Original Six team. This team has done a lot of things in the past and we hope we can follow it up in the future.”Ryan Spooner, Jimmy Hayes and Colin Miller also scored as the Bruins ended a two-game losing streak and won for only the second time in seven games.The game was the start of a five-game trip, and that might be the best place for the Bruins. They are now 12-3-2 on the road and 9-11-2 at home. Boston has also won its last five against the Devils and 17 of 20.None of the Bruins could explain the disparity in home and away records.“Maybe we keep it a little more simple on the road,” Gustavsson said after beating the Devils for the second time this season.Bobby Farnham scored for the Devils, who have dropped three straight games in regulation for the first time since the start of the season. Cory Schneider finished with 27 saves.“We’re definitely fighting it a little bit,” Schneider said. “I can do more.”Vatrano jump-started this trip, scoring 2 minutes 2 seconds into the game. Miller took a shot from the right point that Schneider stopped. The puck, however, lay in the crease, and Vatrano collected it and scored his sixth goal, his first since a hat trick against Pittsburgh on Dec. 18.“Obviously, we talked about starting on a good foot with a big road trip coming up,” Vatrano said. “We couldn’t look past this game. I wouldn’t say we were struggling, but we just weren’t getting in the win column of late. It was good to start off the game with a goal and get us started.”Spooner stretched the lead to 2-0 almost five minutes into the second period. He wristed a shot from the blue line that Schneider seemingly did not see, with Matt Beleskey screening him.Farnham cut the margin to 2-1 at 11:57 of the second period with a shot from the right circle, which Gustavsson simply missed. The Devils’ Jordin Tootoo nearly tied the game minutes later, shortly after a Bruins penalty ended, but his shot went off the post.Boston restored the two-goal lead late in the second period with its league-leading power play, and Miller iced it early in the third.Hayes got his ninth of the season with 1:25 left in the period with period, tipping a shot by Zdeno Chara.Miller tallied his third at 6:33 of final period, beating Schneider with a slap shot.With their leading scorer, Mike Cammalleri, missing his fourth straight game with an upper-body injury and defensemen John Moore and David Schlemko also out, the Devils called up three players from Albany on Friday. Forward Paul Thompson, 27, made his N.H.L. debut, and defensemen Jim O’Brien and Marc-Andre Gragnani played in the league for the first time since 2013. Devils forward Jiri Tlusty left during the game with an undisclosed injury.“I’d say this is the first time where we had a little bit of a challenge, where there wasn’t a character response,” said Devils Coach John Hynes, who said he was disappointed with his team’s mental toughness.Forward David Pastrnak played in his first game for the Bruins since sustaining a foot injury on Oct. 31.The Devils start a four-game road trip in Minnesota on Sunday. Advertisement