By ALLAN KREDAJULY 18, 2017
Manager Terry Collins was a bit philosophical before the Mets faced the St. Louis Cardinals on Tuesday, with losses piling up and a drastic overhaul of his underperforming roster seeming imminent.“You’re a New York Met until you’re not — you can’t go home every night and think, ‘Well, gee, where am I going to be tomorrow?’” said Collins, who guided the Mets to the World Series two years ago. “You have to say to yourself: ‘I’m going to be out there tomorrow at Citi Field. I’ve got to get ready.’ The rest of the stuff is out of your control.”The Mets, however, appeared far from ready at the start of Tuesday’s game. The Cardinals’ Matt Carpenter laced the first pitch from Rafael Montero into the right-field corner for a double and later scored on a sacrifice fly by Jedd Gyorko. St. Louis added three runs in the second, although with the way Michael Wacha pitched, they needed only that first-inning run.Wacha threw a shutout in his first complete game, a 5-0 win over the Mets, allowing just three hits and walking one while striking out eight. He also drove in Paul DeJong in the second on a fielder’s choice and made it home himself on an error by T. J. Rivera, one of two by Rivera on the night.AdvertisementSince returning from the All-Star break with two convincing wins over the Colorado Rockies, the Mets have dropped three straight to fall to 41-50 as the July 31 nonwaiver trading deadline looms.AdvertisementThe struggles come against the backdrop of numerous Mets free-agents-to-be who could soon change addresses. The list includes outfielders Jay Bruce and Curtis Granderson, first baseman Lucas Duda, infielder Jose Reyes and reliever Addison Reed. Also eligible to sign elsewhere after the season is second baseman Neil Walker, who has been out for a month with an injured hamstring.Reyes smiled and shrugged when asked if the Mets, who sit well behind the first-place Washington Nationals in the National League East, might be pressing because of the impending trading deadline.“This is baseball; you’ve got to bounce back tomorrow,” said the 34-year-old Reyes, an All-Star for the Mets a decade ago who could be nearing the end of his second tenure with the team. “We have to come out tomorrow with good energy, and hopefully we win the game.”Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.Collins had to be exasperated by what he saw from his team in the early innings at Citi Field on a humid Tuesday.The Cardinals pounded Montero in the second inning. DeJong, who had homered on Monday night, led off with double. After singles by Kolten Wong and Magneuris Sierra loaded the bases, Wacha forced a run home when he was ruled safe on a fielder’s choice.Carpenter then doubled again — this time over the head of Yoenis Cespedes in left field — to drive in one more run, and Wacha scored to make it 4-0 on Rivera’s second error of the night. Carpenter, who finished with four hits, has reached base in 21 straight games.Cespedes gave the Mets their only hit of the first five innings, a sharp single to right in the first. But Cespedes, the Mets’ highest-paid player at $22.5 million this year, has only nine home runs this season, the first of a four-year, $110 million contract he signed after last season. A 31-year-old outfielder, Cespedes has been hampered by leg problems and has played in only 46 of the team’s 91 games this season.Cespedes has gone 18 games without a home run, an unusual slump for a player who hit 31 homers last season and smashed 17 in 57 games for the Mets in 2015.Collins said Cespedes’s work ethic and desire remained evident, even with the time for the team to benefit from a surge from him running preciously short.Advertisement“We know that when he gets back to what’s expected, to what we’ve seen, he’s dangerous,” Collins said. “He’s just not getting the bat to the baseball the way he normally does. This is all new to us because this guy has not struggled since he’s been here. We’ve got to work on it.”A version of this article appears in print on July 19, 2017, on Page B13 of the New York edition with the headline: With Overhaul Likely, Mets Fall Meekly.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.