AdvertisementSupported byBy Julie RobenhymerST. PETERSBURG, Russia — With ice hockey’s top federations gathered in Russia for the men’s world championship, some people here are looking ahead two years.When it was reported last month that the International Olympic Committee would no longer cover the costs of insurance and transportation for N.H.L. players to participate in the Olympics, starting with the 2018 Pyeongchang Games in South Korea, the league’s continued Olympic participation was put in jeopardy.“Everyone would like to see the N.H.L. players participate,” said Matti Nurminen, general director of the Finnish Ice Hockey Association. “Everyone wants to see a tournament with the best on best, that’s for sure, but the I.O.C. sees things differently now compared to previous Olympics, and that has caused some challenges for our sport. There’s a bill to pay, and now they’re trying to find the money to cover it.”The travel and accommodation expenses are expected to be negotiated with sponsors in cooperation with the I.O.C. and national Olympic committees, but the real sticking point is insurance: Premiums could climb to $10 million. For the 2014 Sochi Games in Russia, the bill was $7 million.This issue goes beyond health insurance. It is about insuring the future income of a player and his value as an asset to the team should a long-term injury occur. In the same way a private owner lends art to a museum and asks it to pay an insurance premium to display a painting, the N.H.L. and its team owners are asking the I.O.C. to pay the insurance premiums on the assets they are lending out for the international showcase.It is not an abstract problem. At the 2014 Sochi Games, the Islanders’ John Tavares tore a knee ligament while playing for Canada and missed the rest of the N.H.L. season.With the I.O.C. no longer willing to cover those premiums and the International Ice Hockey Federation unable to cover the cost by itself, the governing bodies are reaching out to all parties involved to find a resolution.“The I.I.H.F. has asked the national associations and the national Olympic committees if they are willing to cover that, but from our perspective, that responsibility rests on who is organizing the event and who is collecting all the revenues from the event,” Nurminen said. “In our opinion, the same party should pay the bills, and that’s not us. All the countries replied to the I.I.H.F. that they are not willing to pay for the insurance or the travel or any of the other expenses that are related to having the N.H.L. players participate in Pyeongchang.”At least 150 N.H.L. players are expected to be selected for their countries’ Olympic teams, requiring the league to shut down for the duration of the Games. European leagues plan to make their players available, but none will have to shut down for three weeks, as the N.H.L. will.Discussions among the N.H.L., the Olympic committee and the ice hockey federation are continuing, with an unofficial deadline set for the end of this year, when the N.H.L. begins planning for the 2017-18 season.The agreement between the N.H.L. and the Olympic committee for the Sochi Games did not come until seven months before the event, but the expectation was that a deal would be completed because of how important hockey is to Russia. That is not the case with South Korea. And the national federations, especially those in Canada and the United States, need time to develop a Plan B if the N.H.L. decides not to make its players available.Before 1998, the Canadian and United States Olympic teams were composed of former college and junior hockey players, while the European squads consisted of players from professional leagues. Because of the disparity, the level of talent missing without N.H.L. players, and the success of the Olympic basketball tournament with the N.B.A.’s participation, the I.O.C. struck a deal with the N.H.L. to ensure the inclusion of its players and a competition among the world’s best players.Tom Renney, now the president and chief executive of Hockey Canada, was the coach for the Canadian team in the last non-N.H.L. Olympics, in Lillehammer, Norway, in 1994.“It’s possible to find success without N.H.L. players, but it requires a lot more hard work, and we’d like to know as soon as possible if we need to do it that way again so we can get started,” he said.Jim Johannson, the assistant executive director for hockey operations at USA Hockey, said: “We like to talk about the growing depth of the American talent pool, and if N.H.L.ers don’t participate, we’ll find out pretty quick just how much depth we have.”If the N.H.L. declines to shut down for nearly three weeks to allow players to participate in the Olympics, the impact will be far-reaching.“The lack of N.H.L.ers at the Olympics would of course impact the commercial value for the Games for TV broadcasters, as well as for sponsors and spectators around the world,” said René Fasel, president of the I.I.H.F. since 1994. “Without a doubt, it would also impact the I.I.H.F.’s efforts to develop the game worldwide. The Olympic platform offers us a wide range of opportunities to present our game to a global audience. We have 74 member national associations within the I.I.H.F., and so many of these players picked up sticks for the first time after watching ice hockey at the Olympics.”The N.H.L. has no tangible stake in the Olympics. Not only does the league have to shut down its season and risk the health of its players, it earns no revenue directly from the event.“With all the issues related to going to the Olympics and the balancing act it is and what it does to the season, I’m not sure that there would be a lot of appetite for us, on top of that, to have to pay for the privilege,” Gary Bettman, the N.H.L.’s commissioner, said last month. “We don’t make money going to the Olympics. In fact, we kind of disappear for two weeks because historically the I.O.C. hasn’t even let us join in promoting our participation in the Olympics.”That is why the N.H.L. and the N.H.L. Players’ Association brought back the World Cup of Hockey, which will be held in Toronto in September and takes place every four years. While the national federations welcome the opportunity for another men’s international tournament featuring N.H.L. players, they say it cannot replace the Olympics.For now, one thing is certain: The national federations are unwilling to take money away from their player development programs to pay the bill.“As a federation, we’re stuck between a rock and a hard place,” Renney said. “We know that every elite hockey player wants the opportunity to compete for a gold medal at the Olympics. We know that it is very important to them, and we want to help them achieve that in any way we can.“But most hockey players don’t even come close to that level, and if we take money away from our development programs to cover that cost, how many kids won’t have the opportunity to play hockey because we don’t have the money to offer them free equipment to try it out?”Naila-Jean Meyers contributed reporting from New York.Advertisement