AdvertisementSupported byBy Geoff MacdonaldThe French Open, which begins Sunday, will be without one of tennis’s biggest stars, Roger Federer, who withdrew Thursday. Belinda Bencic, Caroline Wozniacki and the local favorite Gaël Monfils are out, too. Beyond top-ranked Novak Djokovic and Serena Williams, who are both seeking personal milestones at Roland Garros, here are players who could take a turn in the spotlight in Paris.Two years ago, Halep lost a memorable French Open final to Maria Sharapova. With extraordinary ball control, graceful movement and surprising shot selection, Halep nearly toppled Sharapova. Halep was widely viewed as a lock to eventually win a Grand Slam title.But she faltered, hindered by injuries, high expectations and a failure to seize opportunities. Her puzzling lack of competitiveness in her semifinal match against Flavia Pennetta in last year’s United States Open semifinal was the nadir.In the fall, she hired the widely admired Australian coach Darren Cahill to retool her game and help her with the mental side. The results look promising, as Halep is serving with more accuracy and variety, playing groundstrokes closer to the baseline to hurry the opponent, and changing direction on her groundstrokes to play more aggressively and less predictably. Halep, 24, dominated the field in Madrid this month, dropping only one set on the way to the title. With her improved game, Halep, seeded sixth, enters the French Open as a legitimate contender.Keys’s surprising run to the final of the Italian Open produced the first all-American final in Rome since Billie Jean King beat Julie Heldman at the Foro Italico in 1970. Keys lost to Serena Williams, 7-6 (5), 6-3, but looked impressive going toe-to-toe with one of the game’s greats. Keys, 21, has tempered her extraordinary power, and her improved decision-making has resulted in a higher shot tolerance, fewer unforced errors and a willingness to work for the right ball before going for a winner.In April, she began working with Thomas Hogstedt, who coached Li Na and Maria Sharapova. Hogstedt is known for being a steady hand who works hard on the practice court with his players, and he could help Keys, seeded 15th, make a serious run in Paris.Although only 5 feet 3, Cibulkova punches above her weight class. On her way to the final in Madrid, she won four straight three-set matches, toppling Agnieszka Radwanska, Caroline Garcia, Anastasia Pavlyuchenkova and Sorana Cirstea, coming back from a set down in three of those matches. She moves with an explosive athleticism, looking like a gymnast as she bursts around the court with one of the best first steps in the women’s game.The 22nd-seeded Cibulkova, a 27-year-old Slovak, plays aggressive tennis, always looking to seize control of the point at the first opportunity. Her speed, powerful groundstrokes and fierce desire to compete make her one of the toughest outs on tour.Nishikori has had a stellar clay-court season, losing to Rafael Nadal in the final in Barcelona and to Novak Djokovic in the semifinals in Madrid and Rome. In the Italian Open semifinal, Djokovic prevailed in a three-set epic, 2-6, 6-4, 7-6 (5). The match was played at an exceptionally high level, with Djokovic winning 112 points to Nishikori’s 111.The key to Nishikori’s rising level of play is his improved serve. He saved 12 of 14 break points against Djokovic, the game’s best returner. Even more telling is how much more effective Nishikori is at winning points on his second serve, once considered a weakness in his game. Against Djokovic, he won 57 percent of second-serve points, an astonishingly high number against the world’s top-ranked player.In addition to his improved serving, Nishikori, 26, is becoming a better tactician. He hit Djokovic off the court in the first set in Rome but grew passive at decisive stages of the second set. His rising level of play, though, makes him a dangerous threat to the higher seeds, as they know that the fifth-seeded Nishikori has the ability to make a run for the title at Roland Garros.Along with Nick Kyrgios, Alexander Zverev and Borna Coric, Thiem is a part of the next generation of Grand Slam contenders. Nicknamed Dominator, Thiem is having a breakout season, winning two titles and scoring victories over Rafael Nadal and Roger Federer. Thiem, a 22-year-old Austrian seeded 13th, has cracked the top 15 in the rankings with consistently strong performances.His match record this year is 32-10, a superb feat with the depth and parity on the ATP Tour. Red clay is Thiem’s favorite surface, and his heavy and penetrating forehand is a real weapon on it. He has a flowing one-handed backhand, good volleys and an excellent serve.Kyrgios, 21, continues to climb the rankings with his menacing brand of power tennis, which features a thunderous serve and a sledgehammer forehand. He is second to Novak Djokovic in top-10 wins this season. He reached the quarterfinals in Madrid with victories over Stan Wawrinka and the Uruguayan clay-court specialist Pablo Cuevas before losing a three-set prizefight to Kei Nishikori. In Rome, Kyrgios nearly took down Rafael Nadal.His on-court demeanor, including a stream of muttered profanities and glares directed at the umpire, would seem to hurt his game, but Kyrgios, a brash, confrontational Australian, is that rare player who uses anger as his primary fuel to stoke the competitive juices. Like Pancho Gonzales and John McEnroe, Kyrgios thrives on a “me against the world” mentality. It will be a fascinating story to watch. Kyrgios, seeded 17th in Paris, has the game and the fire in his belly to win a Grand Slam title.Geoff Macdonald is the women’s tennis coach at Vanderbilt University.Advertisement