By FILIP BONDYMAY 20, 2016
Over the course of five months, two hours at a time, David Villa sat down with a language instructor in his family’s Upper West Side apartment to master the fine art of English. Not just English, actually. Major League Soccer English.“So in the field, I can think that way,” Villa said Thursday. “I can talk to teammates, the referees, the coach, the media. Better and better.”It is for reasons such as this — and because Villa already has scored eight goals this season for a second-place New York City F.C. team that missed the playoffs in its inaugural campaign in 2015 — that he has quickly won the hearts and minds of club officials and fans. Unlike many aging, high-salaried players who have joined M.L.S. and then failed to live up to their reputations or contracts, Villa has proved to be a bargain — even at $5.6 million a year.It is not just the goals. Villa’s work rate this year has been exceptional, especially for a 34-year-old forward whose greatest days — including World Cup, European and Champions League titles — came alongside better players with bigger teams.AdvertisementBut there is also the personal side: Villa’s embrace of the New York City experience, his steady stream of selfies with fans and teammates and his eagerness to add English to his skill set as N.Y.C.F.C. captain in order to serve as a more capable intermediary between Coach Patrick Vieira and the players.Advertisement“He’s a different type of leader, quiet,” Vieira said as N.Y.C.F.C. prepared for Saturday’s rivalry game against the Red Bulls in the Bronx. “He doesn’t need to talk. I try to make him involved, the link between myself and the rest of the team. It is important for me to make him understand that no one else here has his career.”On Thursday, Red Bulls Coach Jesse Marsch heaped praise on Villa for the New York City F.C. turnaround, crediting not only his work rate but also his willingness to challenge any ball, to track back defensively and finish the chances he helps create.“It’s hard to not be a fan of the way he plays and the things he does,” Marsch said.Villa is practically up for sainthood since last weekend, when a passer-by posted a photo of him delivering food to a homeless man and his son outside a Starbucks when N.Y.C.F.C. was in Portland, Ore., for a game against the Timbers.“I didn’t know there was a photo,” Villa said about the Portland incident. “It was very sad, seeing the man with a boy who is my own son’s age. It must be very hard.”All travails are relative, of course. Villa suffered his own soccer indignities last year, when N.Y.C.F.C. finished eighth in the Eastern Conference in its debut season and he was about the only bright spot for the first-year club. Even the saint grew frustrated. After a 5-1 defeat against the Los Angeles Galaxy last August, Villa finally snapped. “I need teammates at my side to help me,” he said. “I can’t do this alone.”This season, after a slow start, has been better. New York City F.C. enters Saturday’s match with a 4-3-5 record, good enough for second place in a weak Eastern Conference.Villa refused to blame Jason Kreis, an intense commander who was replaced by the more laid-back Vieira after a single season, for the team’s disappointing first year. Villa simply says the new system works to his advantage, with more emphasis on possession and through passes.Advertisement“The first year is always more difficult for any new club,” Villa said. “This year, the team is more compact. The new guys are helping us. There is more precision.”Get the big sports news, highlights and analysis from Times journalists, with distinctive takes on games and some behind-the-scenes surprises, delivered to your inbox every week.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.While Villa may not be an all-around creator like Sebastian Giovinco of Toronto F.C., who led the league in goals and assists in winning Most Valuable Player honors last year, he is one of the purest finishers in M.L.S. Despite his relatively small frame, the fleet Villa has scored in every way imaginable, though he generally requires some form of delivery from teammates.That kind of service is arriving with greater frequency this year, and the prospect of the long-delayed return of midfielder Frank Lampard also raises expectations. Vieira said he hoped Lampard could join the squad Saturday, which would mean that Villa might finally enjoy more of the sort of in-stride passes that have come only sporadically from Andrea Pirlo — the team’s third well-pedigreed, well-paid international star.There is some concern about whether Villa and Lampard will mesh. Their finishing skills overlap in many ways, and Villa has at times drifted into the more withdrawn position that Lampard would be expected to occupy as an attacking midfielder. On England’s national team, it was theorized there was not enough room on the field to satisfy the talents of Lampard and Steven Gerrard. Some fear a similar collision with Villa and Lampard, though Vieira is not in that group.“That’s also what they said about Youri Djorkaeff and Zinedine Zidane,” said Vieira, who played with those stars with France in the 1990s. “Then we won the World Cup.”Villa was not picked by Spain’s coach, Vicente del Bosque, as part of his national team’s preliminary roster for this summer’s European Championship. This does not bother him, he says. He will focus instead on a large match on a narrow Yankee Stadium field Saturday. In preparation, Vieira sat Villa for much of Wednesday’s game in Toronto, using him only as a late substitute to avoid playing him three times in a week.“It was a tough decision, but he took it well, professionally,” Vieira said.Villa has been through local derbies far more important than the one in New York, including for Atlético Madrid against Real Madrid in La Liga. But he called Saturday’s match a great opportunity for his current club to prove its mettle, to establish its place in front of its home crowd.“A good day for the fans, a day to exchange jerseys,” Villa said in his accented but improving English. “This is an amazing city.”A version of this article appears in print on May 21, 2016, on Page D1 of the New York edition with the headline: An Aging Star Rejuvenates N.Y.C.F.C.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.