By BILLY WITZMAY 20, 2016
OAKLAND, Calif. — As if crawling out of the American League East is not a big enough task with Alex Rodriguez on the disabled list, Mark Teixeira in a funk and the unsolved mysteries of pitchers Michael Pineda and Luis Severino, the Yankees cannot seem to help getting in their own way.Not only did they have to overcome the Oakland Athletics, which they did Thursday night in a 4-1 victory, they also had to overcome a series of blunders on the basepaths that made the night’s chore considerably more difficult.And in the coming days, they may also be made to pay for the itchy bullpen trigger finger of Manager Joe Girardi, who for the second day in a row was reluctant to put any late-inning faith in a starter who had thrown superbly.One night after lifting Nathan Eovaldi, who was working on a one-hit shutout after six innings and only 85 pitches, Girardi lifted Ivan Nova with a 2-1 lead, even though Nova had thrown only 62 pitches through six innings.AdvertisementGirardi said he had lifted Nova because Reddick, Danny Valencia and Stephen Vogt, who had the four hits off him, were among the first four batters due in the sixth.Advertisement”I don’t second-guess myself,” Girardi said. “Maybe a lot of other people do. There’s a reason we put them together down there, and it’s for games like today and yesterday.”Dellin Betances, Andrew Miller and Aroldis Chapman took care of their duties for the second night in a row — though Betances again offered some drama. But it seems unlikely that any of the three will be available on Friday when C. C. Sabathia returns from the disabled list.Carlos Beltran provided the bulk of the offense with a run-scoring double and a two-run, ninth-inning homer that offered some comfort. But the Yankees were in position to have scored many more runs but for a series of bad baserunning.The most egregious mistake belonged to Beltran, who was at second after his third-inning double had sent Brett Gardner home. When Brian McCann followed with a liner to right field, Beltran stayed anchored near the bag even though there were two outs. When Reddick dropped the ball, Beltran advanced only to third. He stayed there when Starlin Castro lined out to end the inning.Get the big sports news, highlights and analysis from Times journalists, with distinctive takes on games and some behind-the-scenes surprises, delivered to your inbox every week.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.Beltran was able to laugh about his “terrible mistake” — but only after the game.“When I did that, I felt like I got caught up praying for four innings that we got the lead and would be able to win this one,” said Beltran, who acknowledged that it had happened before in his lenghty career. “When I went back and I saw the guy dropped the ball, and got to third base and looked at the scoreboard and saw two outs, I’m like, Oh, my god.”The Yankees might have blown the game open in the sixth if not for more mistakes. Chase Headley led off with a single but was picked off first by Kendall Graveman. Dustin Ackley followed with a single and went to third on Didi Gregorius’s base hit to right, but Gregorius was thrown out when he tried to take second on Reddick’s throw to third.Aaron Hicks picked up his teammates by lashing a double to left, scoring Ackley and giving the Yankees a 2-1 lead.AdvertisementThe Yankees’ brain cramps were not isolated incidents. On Wednesday in Arizona, Headley threw to first base when he had Jean Segura hung up between third and home on a ground ball. On Tuesday, catcher Brian McCann loafed after a passed ball as Nick Ahmed raced from first to third, and Pineda never looked at Paul Goldschmidt before he took a huge lead and stole third base.“It’s fortunate it didn’t hurt us,” Girardi said of the mistakes. He added, referring to the relievers, “In a way, maybe you don’t have to use those three guys if you don’t make those mistakes.”If the blunders are giving Girardi something to stew over, Nova is providing a more pleasant development on which to ruminate.After starting this season where he ended last season — in the bullpen — Nova has made the most of the opportunity he was given in the rotation as a result of Sabathia’s groin injury. Nova has a 1.66 E.R.A. in three starts — all of which the Yankees have won.Other than Josh Reddick’s home run, off a 1-2 curveball in the fourth, Nova allowed only three singles and a few hard-hit balls. One, a drive to left field by Yonder Alonso, was run down by Brett Gardner to end the second, and another, launched by Marcus Semien in the third, landed foul, a foot from being a home run. Nova then struck Semien out.If Nova continues to pitch as he has, it is difficult to envision him not remaining in the rotation by the time Severino, who is on the disabled list, is healthy enough to return. Perhaps that is what it will take not only to hold onto his spot but to hold onto the ball deeper into the game as well.“It’s way different than being in the bullpen,” Nova said. “I have my time to work on some pitches that I need to work.”We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.