By JAMES WAGNERSEPT. 28, 2016
MIAMI — Although he said the right things and carried himself well, the struggles and the time on the bench annoyed Jay Bruce. He was streaky at the plate, but he was a proven power hitter with three All-Star Game selections who had hit at least 20 home runs in eight major league seasons, including this year.The Mets had traded for him on Aug. 1, but by mid-September, with the Mets in a must-win situation, Bruce looked like a spare part. Last week, he was not in the starting lineup for five of six games, having been passed over for other options in right field.In the meantime, Bruce worked with the Mets’ hitting coaches to fix his timing. The efforts have proved fruitful for the Mets, highlighted by Wednesday’s 5-2 win over the Miami Marlins. As the Mets have inched to the threshold of a National League wild-card spot, Bruce has been the team’s most powerful hitter.“He’s locked in,” Mets Manager Terry Collins said. “It couldn’t come at a better time.”With the Mets clinging to a 3-2 lead in the fifth inning, Bruce smashed a two-run homer, his third home run in five games. James Loney had tied the score with a two-run blast in the second, and Jose Reyes gave the Mets a lead with an R.B.I. double, but Bruce’s homer and his recent improvements are encouraging signs for a team in a tight playoff race.AdvertisementWednesday’s victory meant the Mets’ magic number — a combination of wins for them and losses for the St. Louis Cardinals — was at two. The soonest that the Mets, who are off on Thursday, can secure a wild-card berth is Friday. At the conclusion of their game Wednesday, the Mets held a one-game lead over the San Francisco Giants, who entered their late game against the Rockies a game and a half ahead of the Cardinals.Advertisement“If we win, we’re in, and we’re going to play whoever we’re going to play at our place,” Bruce said.Bruce’s surge — along with strong recent contributions from Asdrubal Cabrera, Curtis Granderson and Lucas Duda — has helped a team that has been getting by on pitching. The rookie starter Seth Lugo, who has helped solidify the Mets’ rotation amid several other injuries, allowed two runs over five and a third innings.“This kid has done nothing but come here and save us,” Collins said.Holding a lead, Mets relievers Fernando Salas, Addison Reed and Jeurys Familia fired three scoreless innings. Familia became the first pitcher born in the Dominican Republic to notch 50 saves.“It’s something very important to represent my country,” said Familia, who thanked his coaches and teammates.Get the big sports news, highlights and analysis from Times journalists, with distinctive takes on games and some behind-the-scenes surprises, delivered to your inbox every week.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.For their critical final weekend of the season, the Mets are considering all their pitching options as they try to secure a wild-card berth, but they must balance that with their desire to have their best starters available for a potential wild-card game on Oct. 5.“Right now, we’re full-bore to get in,” Collins said.Collins said the Mets were debating whether to start Bartolo Colon on short rest Friday at Philadelphia. That would make him available to start a wild-card game in case Noah Syndergaard had to pitch in a meaningful game Sunday.Syndergaard, the Mets’ best healthy pitcher, pitched on Tuesday and is tentatively scheduled for the regular-season finale, on Sunday. If the Mets have secured a wild-card spot by then, Syndergaard might throw only 25 pitches in the game to keep him sharp for the wild-card game. But if they have not secured a berth, Syndergaard will pitch as normal, Collins said.AdvertisementColon, the Mets’ second-best healthy starter, is scheduled to pitch Saturday but could serve as essentially Syndergaard’s wild-card-game backup. Colon started Monday and threw only 47 pitches, so losing one day of rest to pitch again on Friday makes some sense.Another wrinkle: Even if the Mets have a guaranteed wild-card spot by Sunday, the day’s results could determine where the wild-card game will be played. That could make it tempting to use Syndergaard in the finale, which would most likely rule him out for the wild-card game three days later.“We want to go as far as we can,” Collins said. “If that means saving him to get us to the next round, we’ve got to certainly consider it.”All the dizzying playoff scenarios and pitching possibilities aside, the Mets have not guaranteed anything yet. Their win on Wednesday kept them in position to decide their own future in their final three-game series, over the weekend at Philadelphia.Some help from the offense has benefited the Mets’ pitching staff.Duda was off on Wednesday as he slowly worked his way back into game shape, so Loney started at first. He fittingly provided the home run that tied the score in the second. Lugo helped his cause with a double in the fourth inning and scored when Reyes doubled to give the Mets a one-run lead.The Mets seized control of the game for good in the fifth inning. Granderson, who has contributed significantly this month, smacked a single with one out, one of his eight straight times reaching base since Tuesday. Bruce then smashed a pitch over the right-field wall for a three-run lead.“I just wanted to come here and play good baseball and be a professional and contribute to the team,” Bruce said. “Lately I’ve been able to do that more, and that’s very, very important.”A version of this article appears in print on September 29, 2016, on Page B13 of the New York edition with the headline: Bruce’s Third Homer in Five Games Helps Protect Wild-Card Lead.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.