By SETH BERKMANJULY 17, 2017
When the St. Louis Cardinals’ starting lineup was announced Monday night, starting pitcher Adam Wainwright was mildly booed by the Citi Field crowd, apparently still harboring ill will 11 years after he struck out Carlos Beltran to end Game 7 of the 2006 National League Championship Series at Shea Stadium.As the night progressed, Wainwright provided more for the home crowd to dislike. He continued to stoke the ire of Mets fans, hitting a run-scoring double and picking up the win in a 6-3 victory over the Mets.Mets starter Zack Wheeler traded zeros with Wainwright over the first four innings, and Wheeler even escaped the fifth unscathed after walking the bases loaded with two out. But the sixth inning conjured bad memories of 2006 for Mets fans, and Wheeler retired only one more batter after the fifth.Yadier Molina, who hit the go-ahead home run in the ninth inning of Game 7 in 2006, led off the sixth with an infield single. Molina’s grounder sputtered toward shortstop Jose Reyes, who could not cleanly barehand the ball; Reyes, of course, hit leadoff for the Mets 11 years ago.AdvertisementSt. Louis shortstop Paul DeJong, who was 13 during the 2006 playoffs, added his own bit of torment in the Cardinals-Mets rivalry, homering to drive in Molina. DeJong became the first Cardinal to hit a home run in four straight games against the Mets.“He left it out over the plate, which is the pitch he’s been killing us with,” Mets Manager Terry Collins said of DeJong’s home run off Wheeler.Later in the inning, with Magneuris Sierra on first base, Wainwright launched his double to right field. The Cardinals scored all six of their runs in the sixth, with four charged to Wheeler — whom the Mets acquired in 2011 when they traded away Beltran. It was the fifth straight start in which Wheeler did not last beyond the sixth inning.Get the big sports news, highlights and analysis from Times journalists, with distinctive takes on games and some behind-the-scenes surprises, delivered to your inbox every week.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.After the game, Wheeler was particularly upset about allowing Wainwright to reach base, which prevented him from stifling the Cardinals’ rally early. Wheeler threw a fastball up in the zone, which Wainwright, who now has 28 R.B.I. over the last two seasons, feasted on.“We got to get the pitcher out in that situation,” Collins said of Wainwright’s sixth inning at-bat.AdvertisementIf the Mets felt haunted by ghosts from 2006 during the game, they received more auspicious visits earlier Monday, when they welcomed familiar faces back to Citi Field.Matt Harvey and Noah Syndergaard played catch in the outfield for about 15 minutes before batting practice, throwing from about 70 feet. It was the first time either had publicly performed any baseball activities since sustaining injuries this season — Harvey to his right shoulder in June, and Syndergaard to his right lat muscle in April.Second baseman Neil Walker also ran the bases and fielded grounders, moving closer to his own return after he partly tore his left hamstring on June 14.Hansel Robles, too, was back on the grounds, recalled from Class AAA Las Vegas after pitching six and two-thirds scoreless innings in his last five outings in the minors. Before the game, Robles called his demotion in May a low point of his career and said that he thought the mental break of pitching outside the majors would help him regain consistency.It did not come right away. Against his first batter in the sixth inning Monday, Robles gave up a three-run homer to Tommy Pham, which brought in Wainwright and Matt Carpenter.The Mets scored the first run of the game when Michael Conforto led off the fifth inning with a solo home run. Lucas Duda hit a solo homer in the sixth and the next batter, Reyes, also rounded the bases in one fell swoop, doubling to center field and scoring after errors by center fielder Dexter Fowler, who misplayed the ball, and Sierra, whose throw into the infield went awry toward the Cardinals dugout.The Mets looked close to eradicating their haunted past with Wainwright when Travis d’Arnaud followed Reyes by reaching second after Fowler dropped a fly ball. But d’Arnaud was stranded — another common theme for the Mets on Monday, when they went 0 for 11 with runners in scoring position.Perhaps pressing for a run-scoring hit in the ninth with runners on the corners and one out, Yoenis Cespedes swung on a 3-0 pitch, grounding into a double play to end the game.A version of this article appears in print on July 18, 2017, on Page B9 of the New York edition with the headline: Mets Can’t Escape Ghosts  Of a Dejecting Playoff Loss.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.