
On Baseball By                     
 TYLER KEPNER
 
OCT. 23, 2016
CHICAGO — Joe Maddon chose No. 70 for his uniform long before he agreed to manage the team that never wins. He picked it because he wanted a number nobody would ever care to take from him. It carried no significance.Maddon believes in a lot of things about baseball, but not in silly numerology or cosmic links to the past. He could not have known that one day he would guide the Chicago Cubs to the World Series, after 70 seasons in a row without a pennant.On Saturday night at Wrigley Field, the Cubs broke the streak, capturing the National League title by thumping the Los Angeles Dodgers, 5-0, in Game 6 of the N.L. Championship Series. They will face the Cleveland Indians in the World Series, their first since they lost to Detroit in 1945.The 70 years that followed brought a few close calls, two excruciatingly so. Needing one win for the pennant in 1984, the Cubs lost three in a row at San Diego. Granted three more tries against the Marlins in 2003, the Cubs blew it again.Advertisement“There’s angst; there’s all that kind of good stuff,” Maddon said before batting practice Saturday. “It’s just a fan base that’s been waiting for a while. We’re definitely on the verge of doing something wonderful.”AdvertisementThe Cubs did not procrastinate. After losing two of the first three games in this series — both by shutout — the Cubs routed the Dodgers the rest of the way. Instead of the Cubs unraveling, it was the Dodgers who did, collapsing in every facet of the game.The Cubs earned 103 wins in the regular season, yet the Dodgers seemed intent on giving them the pennant. They made four errors and gave up 10 runs in Game 4. They talked tough about exploiting the throwing yips of Jon Lester in Game 5 yet lost big in a halfhearted effort.Then came Saturday, when the Cubs’ Kyle Hendricks, not the Dodgers’ Clayton Kershaw, looked like the best pitcher on the planet.Kershaw was already trailing when his left fielder, Andrew Toles, took his eyes off a fly ball by Anthony Rizzo in the first inning. It clanged off his glove, and Rizzo got two bases. Rizzo later hit a home run, the second off Kershaw, who served up five extra-base hits and ran out of October magic.Get the big sports news, highlights and analysis from Times journalists, with distinctive takes on games and some behind-the-scenes surprises, delivered to your inbox every week.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.Maybe it transferred to Hendricks, plucked by the Cubs from the Texas Rangers’ farm system in 2011 for the veteran Ryan Dempster. Hendricks, a Dartmouth man, had then pitched just three innings above Class A. But his uncanny command of unassuming stuff led Kershaw to compare him on Thursday to Greg Maddux.A flag with Maddux’s name flies atop a foul pole at Wrigley Field, but Maddux had to leave Chicago to win a championship, with Atlanta. He fell short of the World Series as a Cub, which had always been a rite of passage on the North Side.The 1969 Cubs — with the Hall of Famers Ernie Banks, Fergie Jenkins, Ron Santo and Billy Williams — lost a bitter N.L. East pennant race to the Mets. Ryne Sandberg’s team lost in 1984, and he lost again five years later with two others bound for Cooperstown, Maddux and Andre Dawson.AdvertisementFour more teams expired in the playoffs, in 1998, 2003, 2007 and 2008. Only the 2003 team won its division series, before that fateful Game 6 in the N.L.C.S., when a fan deflected a critical foul ball and shortstop Alex Gonzalez booted a ground ball that would have ended the eighth inning with the Cubs ahead.Thirteen years later, the Cubs got the eighth inning right. Hendricks had retired 17 in a row before Josh Reddick singled to chase him with one out. At that moment, the Cubs stood five outs from the pennant, precisely where they were when the fan, Steve Bartman, got his hands on a foul ball before Moises Alou could reach it.Maddon called for Aroldis Chapman, his overpowering closer. Howie Kendrick came up to pinch-hit. Chapman threw two strikes — neither was fouled — before Kendrick hit a scorching grounder to second. This time, the Cubs got the double play: Javier Baez snagged the ball on a short hop and flipped it to shortstop Addison Russell, who fired to Rizzo for the double play.The Cubs had owned the longest National League playoff drought since 1961, the year before the N.L. expanded. That was their 16th year in a row without going to the World Series.On Saturday night, at their ancient brick-and-ivy home, the streak ended. Chapman struck out the leadoff man in the ninth and then walked Carlos Ruiz. Up came Yasiel Puig, who bounced a ball to Russell at short.The goat — pun intended — of 2003 was never really Steve Bartman. It was always a shortstop who could not turn a 6-4-3 double play when the Cubs needed it.And so the end came like this: Russell to Baez to Rizzo, a modern-day Tinker to Evers to Chance, the fabled double-play combination from 1908, the last time the Cubs won the World Series. Now, after seven decades, they finally have another chance to do it again.A version of this article appears in print on October 23, 2016, on Page SP2 of the New York edition with the headline: After 7 Barren Decades, Team Reaches an Oasis.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.See More »