AdvertisementSupported byBy The Associated PressAgents for running back DeMarco Murray confirm that Murray, the N.F.L.’s 2014 rushing leader, has been traded by the Philadelphia Eagles to the Tennessee Titans.Murray also has a new contract in the deal, his agents, SportsTrust Advisors, wrote on Twitter on Monday night.The deal gives the Titans the running back threat they have lacked since releasing Chris Johnson, while the Eagles rid themselves of one of the contracts signed by their former coach Chip Kelly.Murray signed a five-year, $40 million contract with $21 million guaranteed with Philadelphia last year.Other terms of the deal were not immediately available.The Titans hold the No. 1 pick in the April draft and have eight draft picks — three in the top 64 selections.This will be the first big move by the Titans’ new general manager, Jon Robinson, who was hired in January to turn around a franchise that has gone 5-27 since releasing Johnson in April 2014 to avoid the final three seasons of a $53.5 million deal. Johnson was the last running back to run for 100 yards in a game for Tennessee, a drought that stretches to December 2013.The Titans ranked 25th in the N.F.L. last season, averaging 92.8 yards rushing per game, and the new coach, Mike Mularkey, has talked about running the ball much more next season.Murray led the N.F.L. in rushing with 1,845 yards and 13 touchdowns for Dallas in 2014 and was the N.F.L. offensive player of the year.He ran for only 702 yards with the Eagles last season, including 112 yards Oct. 19 against the Giants. Murray, a six-year veteran, has run for 5,228 yards and 34 touchdowns in his career, averaging 4.6 yards per carry. He also has 215 receptions for 1,522 yards.REDSKINS CUT GRIFFIN In the end, quarterback Robert Griffin III was just another name on a list, one of four players released by the Redskins to create salary-cap space.The move, expected for some time, brings an end to Griffin’s sudden-rise-and-stunning-fall saga with a team that traded a bevy of draft picks to acquire him — and now receives nothing in return as he departs. The move gets Griffin’s 2016 contract, worth about $16 million, off the payroll before Wednesday, when the new league year begins and free agents can be signed.It also closes the book on Griffin’s tumultuous tenure in Washington. He arrived as a Heisman Trophy winner and the No. 2 overall choice in the 2012 N.F.L. draft — a pick that came from the Rams at the high price of three first-round selections plus a second-rounder — and immediately became a star and national sensation. He leaves having spent all of last season on the sideline.As a free agent, he can sign anywhere.In a lengthy posting on Instagram, Griffin wrote: “Although my time here is over, I’m excited about what the future brings!!!! I look forward to finding the team where God has me to be and growing with that team on the way to World Championships.”The Redskins, the N.F.C. East champions, also released safeties Dashon Goldson and Jeron Johnson, and defensive end Jason Hatcher, part of a busy day that removed nearly $30 million from Washington’s spending toward the cap and brings the team below the ceiling. In addition, fullback Darrel Young and nose tackle Terrance Knighton indicated on Twitter that they would not be brought back.INAPPROPRIATE QUESTION The Falcons said that the secondary coach Marquand Manuel asked the inappropriate question “Do you like men?” to Ohio State cornerback Eli Apple during the N.F.L.’s annual scouting combine in Indianapolis.Manuel and the rest of the Atlanta staff received social training Monday from a counselor approved by the league. Falcons Coach Dan Quinn said there was additional training for Manuel.BUCS’ MANKINS RETIRING Buccaneers offensive lineman Logan Mankins is retiring after 11 N.F.L. seasons. Mankins, a seven-time Pro Bowl guard, played the past two seasons with the Bucs after spending nine years with the Patriots.STEELERS RETAIN TWO The Steelers signed safety Robert Golden and wide receiver Darrius Heyward-Bey to three-year deals before they could become free agents.SEAHAWKS KEEP LINEMAN The Seahawks addressed one of their biggest questions before the start of free agency by agreeing to terms on a new deal with defensive tackle Ahtyba Rubin. Rubin was a big reason the Seahawks led the N.F.L. in run defense, giving up just 81.5 yards per game.COLTS RE-SIGN TIGHT END  The Colts have re-signed tight end Dwayne Allen to a contract extension. Allen was taken by the Colts in the third round of the 2012 draft and has 91 receptions for 1,045 yards and 13 touchdowns in his career. Indianapolis also released the backup Josh Freeman, leaving only two quarterbacks on the roster: Andrew Luck and Stephen Morris.TWO RAVENS GET DEALS The Ravens signed cornerback Shareece Wright to a three-year deal and long snapper Morgan Cox to a five-year contract.Advertisement