

 Benjamin Hoffman
 

KEEPING SCORE
MAY 20, 2016
LeBron James is known more for his play on the court than for his bold statements off it, but as the regular season was winding down he provided bulletin-board material for the 15 other teams that would be joining the Cleveland Cavaliers in the postseason.When asked after a loss to the Chicago Bulls how his team would hold up over the course of 20 to 25 playoff games, James balked, saying his team only needed to keep things going for 16 wins.It was not quite as quotable as Moses Malone’s prediction that the 1982-83 Philadelphia 76ers would go “Fo, Fo, Fo” on their way to a championship — meaning they would need just four games to win each of the team’s three playoff series after a first-round bye — but it did send a strong message that James was feeling unbeatable, regardless of the turmoil that had surrounded the team and the strength of the competition that the Western Conference was sure to provide if Cleveland made the finals for a second consecutive season.After Cleveland’s victory Thursday against the Toronto Raptors, the Cavaliers were 10-0 in the postseason. James’s prediction that his team would be the first to complete an undefeated postseason is still a possibility, even if many are quick to note the poor quality of the competition in the Eastern Conference, and the fact that Cleveland will need to face either the Golden State Warriors or the Oklahoma City Thunder in the finals if they eliminate Toronto. Defeating either Western team, let alone completing a sweep, represents a colossal challenge.“We know we have something we’re trying to accomplish,” Coach Tyronn Lue, who on Thursday broke Pat Riley’s record for consecutive postseason wins to begin a coaching career, said after the game. “Whoever your opponent is, whoever they put in front of you, that’s who you have to play, and if we get a chance to take care of our business and match up in the Western Conference, we’ll see.”AdvertisementLooking back on the teams that have come the closest to going unscathed through the playoffs shows there is no margin for error.AdvertisementMalone’s 76ers nearly delivered on his “Fo, Fo, Fo” promise when they became the first N.B.A. champions to lose only once in a postseason. Their lone loss came in Game 4 of the Eastern Conference finals against the Milwaukee Bucks. In an illustration of the difference between the media landscape then and now, game accounts by neither The Associated Press nor The New York Times even mentioned Malone’s inability to back up his words. And they certainly did not chastise him for it.The 2000-01 Los Angeles Lakers, led by Shaquille O’Neal and Kobe Bryant in their prime, came even closer to perfection on their way to the Lakers’ second of three consecutive titles.The Lakers entered the N.B.A. finals with an 11-0 record, having dispatched the Portland Trail Blazers, the Sacramento Kings and the San Antonio Spurs with ease. (First rounds were then best-of-five series.) In Game 1, O’Neal had 44 points and 20 rebounds, and the Lakers led with as little as 1 minute 38 seconds remaining in regulation and again with 1:20 left in overtime, but a 3-pointer with 1:19 left by Allen Iverson, who finished with 48 points, put Philadelphia on top to stay.Get the big sports news, highlights and analysis from Times journalists, with distinctive takes on games and some behind-the-scenes surprises, delivered to your inbox every week.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.For all the production that O’Neal and Bryant supplied, the Lakers were able to stay close to the 76ers thanks in part to a strong effort by Lue, then the Lakers’ diminutive backup guard, who had 5 points, 3 steals and a block in the fourth quarter alone. Unfortunately for Lue, the magic wore off in overtime. He fell victim to one of Iverson’s signature crossover dribbles before Iverson hit a 16-footer just 31 seconds after his go-ahead 3-pointer, sealing the Lakers’ fate.As Lue tries to coach his team to the perfection that his Lakers could not quite achieve, he may want to look into the attitude his coach, Phil Jackson, took at the time of the loss.“I’m kind of relieved it’s over, in a way,” Jackson said after the game in reference to the Lakers’ perfect start to the postseason. “But it puts pressure on us to win one on our home court. The streak was great; now it’s time to get back to the business of playing ball.”James, however, is sticking to his prediction that the best path to a championship is simply not to lose.“People say you need to lose a game, to go through something,” James said after Thursday’s win. “I think we’ve went through some things and if we happen to lose a game, we have to be able to bounce back from it, but that’s not our mind-set.”AdvertisementThe Cavaliers, heading into Game 3 Saturday night, need six more wins to prove James’s prediction right.A version of this article appears in print on May 21, 2016, on Page D7 of the New York edition with the headline: Cavaliers Searching for Elusive Postseason Perfection.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.See More »