By THE ASSOCIATED PRESSJULY 18, 2017
NEWPORT, R.I. — On the strength of rising-star coaches like Justin Fuente, Tom Herman, Matt Rhule and Willie Taggart, the American Athletic Conference has positioned itself to at least make the case that it should be viewed as a peer to college football’s most powerful leagues.The A.A.C.. a five-year old conference, has had enough success on the field to fuel Commissioner Mike Aresco’s aspirations of turning the Power Five into the Power Six. That might be more of a dream than a goal, but if the league has any chance to close the gap on the Big Ten, the Big 12, the Atlantic Coast Conference, the Pacific-12 and the Southeastern Conference, it will need a new wave of up-and-coming coaches to develop.At the A.A.C.’s annual news media day and clambake by the sea in this New England resort town, you might have needed a scorecard to keep track of the turnover in the coaching ranks. There are five new coaches, including three at teams that were among the best in the conference last year.“Any anxiety over so many new coaches is easily dispelled by our conference’s phenomenal record of hiring top assistants and established veterans who have invariably gone on to great success in our league,” Aresco said Tuesday. “These coaches will no doubt do the same and join our incumbent coaches to comprise as strong a group as any in college football.”AdvertisementAresco seems confident, but it remains to be seen if the next Herman or Fuente is currently coaching in the A.A.C.AdvertisementMajor Applewhite was promoted from offensive coordinator to replace Herman at Houston. In two years with the Cougars, Herman won 22 games and parlayed that success into the Texas job. At 38, Applewhite has already served as offensive coordinator at Texas and Alabama.“You have to be yourself,” Applewhite said. “Tom and I are different human beings. But I think we agree on a lot of the same principles that win games.”Rhule led Temple to the American championship in 2016 before leaving for Baylor. He was replaced by his longtime friend Geoff Collins, a former Florida defensive coordinator. South Florida took a different approach when Taggart left for Oregon, hiring the former Texas and Louisville coach Charlie Strong instead of a first-time coach to lead a team that is the overwhelming favorite to win the conference.Cincinnati went the first-timer route, picking the Ohio State assistant Luke Fickell to restore a program that went stale under Tommy Tuberville. Connecticut took a back-to-the-future approach, rehiring the former Huskies coach Randy Edsall.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.Other than Ken Niumatalolo, who has been coach at Navy since 2007, the longest tenured coaches in the American are Southern Methodist’s Chad Morris and Tulsa’s Philip Montgomery, who are both entering their third year.Entering Year 2 are Scott Frost of Central Florida, who took the Knights from winless in 2015 to a bowl last year, Willie Fritz of Tulane, Scottie Montgomery of East Carolina and Mike Norvell, the 35-year-old who took over at Memphis when Fuente left for Virginia Tech and kept the Tigers rolling.Frost said he looked at U.C.F. as a program with enormous potential because of its location in Orlando and its resources.“There’s a lot of schools like that in our league, which makes this conference attractive to a lot of coaches, especially first-time head coaches,” said Frost, a former Oregon assistant. “It certainly appears the teams that do well in this league, the coaches of those teams have an opportunity to move on if they want to.”AdvertisementAresco and the A.A.C. unveiled the Power Six campaign this year as an attempt to brand the conference in a way that distinguishes it from the so-called Group of Five leagues in the Football Bowl Subdivision, the highest level of the college game. A “P6” logo was splashed all over the ballrooms in the hotel where media day was held and even on the balls at a golf outing on Monday. Aresco used the term “P6” 13 times in his 22-minute opening remarks. He talked about the A.A.C.’s 19 wins against the other top conferences the past two years.“A Power Six résumé indeed!” he said.Success on the field goes only so far. What truly defines power is revenue, and while the Power Five conferences have billion-dollar media rights deals, the A.A.C.’s contract with ESPN pays the colleges a little less than $2 million per season. That deal runs out in 2020, and the Power Six campaign is a way of positioning the conference for negotiations.Aresco’s dream of a true P6 seems unlikely to ever come to fruition, but if coaches like the A.A.C.’s new breed can be as successful as Herman, Rhule, Taggart and Fuente, the future of the conference has a chance to be more lucrative.A version of this article appears in print on July 19, 2017, on Page B11 of the New York edition with the headline: American Athletic Conference Hopes It Will Remain a Cradle of Top Coaches.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.