By BRAD SPURGEONMAY 19, 2016
The Frenchman Alain Prost, 61, is a four-time Formula One world champion driver and former Formula One team owner, running Prost Grand Prix from 1997 to 2001. He also raced in the Trophée Andros ice-racing competition in France. He is now co-owner, with Jean-Paul Driot, a longtime French racing team owner, of the e.Dams Formula E team and serves as an ambassador for the Renault car company. Prost spoke recently with Brad Spurgeon of The International New York Times about the Formula E series and his involvement in it.Q. How do you explain the huge success of the Formula E series in such a short period of time?A. I don’t think there is one unique reason. Without naming them in order, the concept is part of it: that it is in the center of cities, and only in the center of cities, so the image is not diluted. I think that is very strong and interesting. Then there is the involvement of the F.I.A. [the International Automobile Federation, the sport’s governing body], with the credibility behind that. And then the fact there is Renault, DS, as well as the people who give it credibility — including myself — and many very good and well-known drivers.And I think people at the same time are curious to see something new in auto racing. And such a new concept attracts younger people, and in attracting younger people, we are in a world today where everything is known, seen, calculated — the social networks.And at the same time you have the rules for the automobile manufacturers about reducing CO2 in future years. So that boosts the technology. So there is a mix of things that makes it that on the level of marketing it is very positive because you do not have the same criteria of pollution, you have the environment, etc. The sponsors, the media, the younger public, the social networks, and of course the manufacturers above all — it’s a movement that is being created here.AdvertisementQ. Why, with all that you have achieved in your career, are you involved in this series? Is it partly because of your role as ambassador at Renault?A. Yes, it was tied to it in the beginning. But I had been looking at the project for a while, and I was keeping an eye on things for six or seven years. But the original concepts didn’t please me, the idea of mixing the cars with, for example, as a curtain raiser to the Formula One Grands Prix, or to have other car racing disciplines in the middle of it. But when they came up with the concept of racing only in the cities, in a single day, and without mixing with it any other kind of car that makes noise, then I said, “O.K.”Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.Q. Do you feel like a pioneer in this series, since perhaps the electric car is the way of the future?A. You feel a little bit like a pioneer. You must always remain open to new technologies. It’s obvious that this technology is going to develop. On the other hand, I am not at all a partisan of a mono-technology in cars in general. If someone told me that tomorrow all cars in the world are going to be electric, I would say, “No, I don’t think that’s reasonable.” It is always good to have technologies that are useful according to the needs that you have of the car. If you are always in a city or if you drive 100,000 kilometers per year all over the place, each is different, and you will never have the exact same thing with an electric car or a combustion engine.And there are other technologies that might arrive. Ten years ago I was in the French government mission for biofuels, and I remain persuaded that biofuels will stay, and they are still here, and there is a lot more of that in fuels than we may realize. And I’m persuaded that we will still find lots of things with biomass, with the sea, with algae, many things. And what is true one day, may become less true another day, and then will become so again after that.AdvertisementNo one can say exactly what is going to happen with cars in 10 years from now. And so that is why you must always have a kind of movement on one side or another, because it is always in movements that we make changes. And today the movement is positive for electric.A version of this special report appears in print on May 20, 2016, in The International New York Times.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.See More »