AdvertisementSupported byBy Ray GlierATLANTA — In early September, two days after No. 5 Clemson squeezed past Troy in a surprisingly close nonconference game, Tigers quarterback Deshaun Watson apologized for displaying what he described as “negative energy” in the 30-24 victory. A spotlight is always placed on a star player when a team with immense expectations appears to sag, it seems, and when Clemson did not obliterate Troy, Watson offered up himself as a sacrifice.“He tried to take the whole punch for us after that game,” Clemson running back Wayne Gallman said. “It’s who he is.”Watson, however, did not try to change the narrative by turning himself into sideline evangelist his next time out, waving his arms and bouncing up and down exhorting teammates. Instead, only days after his declaration that he needed to show more energy, he calmly directed the Tigers to a 59-0 thrashing of South Carolina State.Less than a week after that, Watson looked to be his usual, impassive self in a 26-7 victory over Georgia Tech. He went through his pregame routine on the field without exaggerated effort, tossing short passes in warm-up drills and chatting quietly with teammates as the stadium filled with fans. The high-resolution cameras, he had decided, were not going to capture anything but a poised quarterback.“I speak when I need to,” Watson said. “I’m a laid-back, quiet guy, but when I need to speak, I speak up and make sure the guys are fired up and encourage them. People lead different ways. My teammates understand how I lead.”How Watson leads the Tigers (4-0) is significant going into Saturday night’s Atlantic Coast Conference game with No. 3 Louisville (4-0). The Cardinals’ marauding defense, which has 15 sacks in its four games, would prefer an impetuous quarterback who can be hurried into mistakes over a coolheaded one trying to lead his team back to the national championship game.Louisville will not get recklessness from Watson, 21, who last week improved to 22-2 as Clemson’s starter. Georgia Tech tried to pressure him, but he consistently threw the ball on time and on target. He managed a methodical offense on an opening 75-yard drive for a touchdown — the first of three touchdown drives before halftime.Clemson converted 10 of 18 third-down plays and controlled the game from the start. Its quarterback hardly looked burdened by expectations. Watson completed 32 of 48 passes for 304 yards and two touchdowns. When a receiver turned the wrong way at the goal line and Watson threw an interception, he did not throw his hands up in anger. He just walked off the field.“You can’t get distracted,” he said.Center Jay Guillermo said he was never worried about pressure unnerving Watson, or that the early-season criticism might turn him into a freewheeling dramatist with a point to make. Guillermo also said it was unfair for Watson to have critiqued himself so harshly, and so publicly, after the Troy game.“He didn’t owe anyone an apology,” Guillermo said. “If anything, I felt like we might have owed him an apology. He didn’t have to do that.”Clemson had looked so impressive offensively in last season’s College Football Playoff — a 37-17 victory over Oklahoma and a 45-40 loss to Alabama — that it was assumed the Tigers’ offense would breeze through the first month of this season. Yet while Clemson is averaging 33.5 points through four games, it is considered to be scuffling. When compared to Louisville’s rate of 63.5 points and 682 yards a game, that might be true.“You can’t expect a team to be at their best the first couple games,” Gallman said. “People expect this and that. We’re working. We’re getting better every week.”If there is a difference in the Clemson offense this season it may be Watson’s expanded skill set. The Tigers’ scheme can call for quick throws to the wings, but Watson has become more comfortable coming off his primary receiver and picking up his second target while in the pocket. While he has been a good pocket passer since early in the 2015 season, he now seems even more adept at reading coverages.Watson is also up to 218 pounds, making him more of a force as a runner inside the tackles on third down. He ran the ball five times on third down against Georgia Tech and converted four of those carries into first downs with barreling, head-down surges into the line.“He’s laying the shoulder down more,” tight end Jordan Leggett said. “That’s good and bad. Let’s hope he doesn’t get hurt.”Louisville’s sophomore quarterback, Lamar Jackson, certainly looks more flashy so far, with 25 touchdowns in four games. Watson, by comparison, is puttering along with nine, all through the air.But the Tigers offer a collective shrug at those who feel Watson should be leading a more productive offense. The focus has been execution, not rolling up big statistics.Gallman said his objective as a running back was reading the defensive fronts and picking up the extra pass rusher. Guillermo said his job was to establish a point for the pocket and to keep the quarterback on his feet. Several Tigers said they feel they are a more physical team this season.And they are happy to stand in front of their quarterback when it comes to pass protection, or public criticism.“He doesn’t need to take any shots,” Gallman said.Advertisement