AdvertisementSupported byBy Benjamin HoffmanThe Golden State Warriors’ dream season, in which the team won 73 games and point guard Stephen Curry became the N.B.A.’s first unanimous most valuable player, crashed and burned at the hands of LeBron James, Kyrie Irving and the Cleveland Cavaliers. The loss was so unexpected that it started a meme online, with “the Warriors blew a 3-1 lead” used as a rallying cry in any bleak situation.The jokes are unlikely to subside because, beyond schadenfreude, the phrase also has some substance. The Warriors, strengthened even more by the signing of Kevin Durant, will now engage in a regular season and playoffs that seem almost irrelevant. Even an 80-win season would be met with skepticism and a solid dose of “we’ll see what happens in the finals.”Charles Barkley, a Hall of Famer who never won a championship, went as far as to write off Golden State’s 140 wins over the last two seasons and the team’s championship in 2015, saying they were aided by injuries and “I just don’t think you can win a championship shooting jumpers.”Durant, who won the Most Valuable Player Award in 2014, may take some time to mesh with Klay Thompson, Draymond Green and Curry, but freed from the ball-stopping offense he was used to in Oklahoma City, and having been called a villain for the first time in his career, he has plenty of motivation to fit in quickly and see just how far the Big Four can take the team.To say the Warriors and the Cleveland Cavaliers are the only real contenders in the N.B.A. sells some other teams short.The San Antonio Spurs, the Los Angeles Clippers, the Boston Celtics and the Toronto Raptors would all be more than happy to capitalize on complacency from the teams at the top. But barring significant injuries, a third consecutive season that ends in the same finals matchup seems most likely. The N.B.A. will just have to work hard to make sure the path there is not too boring.NorthwestTaking the last two winners of the Rookie of the Year Award, Karl-Anthony Towns and Andrew Wiggins, and pairing them with one of the game’s best teachers in Coach Tom Thibodeau could create something truly special for the Minnesota Timberwolves. Towns already looks elite, and Wiggins has flashed the ability to handle the do-everything-superstar role that Jimmy Butler thrived in under Thibodeau. If Zach Lavine and Kris Dunn can keep up, the young Timberwolves could be among the West’s elite immediately.The Portland Trail Blazers were a bit hamstrung by the team’s unexpected success last season and, instead of committing to their rebuilding efforts, they matched the Nets’ four-year, $75 million offer to Allen Crabbe, giving them an obscenely expensive backcourt in Damian Lillard, C .J. McCollum and Crabbe. That will be fine as long as their low-risk/high-reward gamble on Festus Ezeli at center pans out.Replacing Trey Burke with George Hill is an upgrade for the Utah Jazz, but the team would be better off if Dante Exum could eventually take over as the starting point guard. Until then, Derrick Favors, Rudy Gobert and Gordon Hayward will lead a borderline playoff team that is remarkably fun to watch.The Oklahoma City Thunder not only lost Durant but also traded away Serge Ibaka. Their Big Four of a few years ago has whittled down to just Russell Westbrook, but that is probably fine with him as he would very likely be fine with taking on opponents 1-on-5.There are a lot of ifs for the Denver Nuggets, but if Nikola Jokic and Jusuf Nurkic continue to improve, Emmanuel Mudiay learns how to shoot and Danilo Gallinari figures out how to stay healthy, the team could be competitive.PacificMuch will be made of the shot distribution among Curry, Durant and Thompson, but they are veterans who know what they signed up for. The real questions for the Golden State Warriors are whether Green, whose unusual set of skills is the engine of the team’s offense and defense, can keep himself out of trouble, and whether Zaza Pachulia can fill Andrew Bogut’s place at center — helping with ball movement, playing effective defense and staying out of the way.Being the third- or fourth-best team in a conference that has been dominated by Golden State and San Antonio has to be frustrating, but there is little reason to believe that will not continue to be the fate for the Los Angeles Clippers, who are coming back with the same exciting but thin roster.The Los Angeles Lakers have had chemistry issues and injury issues, and now they have “gaping-hole-left-by-Kobe-Bryant-retiring” issues. It is not that Bryant was all that effective in recent years, but he defined Lakers basketball to the extent that moving on from him is difficult regardless of his play. Spending a ton of money on Timofey Mozgov was amusing, but the team will need D’Angelo Russell, Jordan Clarkson and Julius Randle to step into Bryant’s void and forge a new identity for the team under Coach Luke Walton.After years of threatening to leave, the Sacramento Kings now have a sparkling new arena. Beyond that, the team is still the flawed group led by DeMarcus Cousins, but it could improve on defense if the players learn to trust Willie Cauley-Stein.Eric Bledsoe, who has missed huge chunks of two of the last three seasons, is the linchpin for the Phoenix Suns. The team has chosen to support him with a group of elderly players that are far past their prime.SouthwestComing up with new ways to compliment Coach Gregg Popovich can be tricky, but having the San Antonio Spurs enter the post-Tim Duncan era fairly seamlessly goes a long way toward creating yet another thing Popovich is good at. Tony Parker and Manu Ginobili probably do not have much left, but Kawhi Leonard is a superstar and the Spurs will be fine if LaMarcus Aldridge can get back to the way he played in Portland.It is hard to imagine a player as polarizing as James Harden, who was a legitimate candidate for most valuable player two years ago but then took much of the blame for the Houston Rockets’ struggles last season despite not changing his style much. He no longer has to worry about his relationship with Dwight Howard, which may be enough to get Houston a few more wins.For years, the Dallas Mavericks have had Dirk Nowitzki doing anything he can on and off the court to try to make the team a winner. The latest experiment is taking the money they saved by having Nowitzki sign a below-market deal and spending it on Harrison Barnes, a key member of Golden State’s vaunted Death Lineup who has often seemed on the verge of good things even if a poor showing in the playoffs last year brought out an army of doubters.Keeping everyone on the court is a struggle for the Memphis Grizzlies, but when healthy they are still a team to reckon with, and Chandler Parsons fills a niche on offense that the team was definitely lacking.The health of Anthony Davis is everything for the New Orleans Pelicans. The rest of the roster is hardly competitive, so the team should try to avoid any big injuries to Davis, their star, during their march to the lottery.AtlanticThe Boston Celtics were the anti-superteam last season, with a deep roster that locked teams down on defense and let the offense run through the tiny-yet-effective Isaiah Thomas, who blossomed into an unexpected All-Star. After losing the Durant sweepstakes to Golden State, the Celtics took their pile of cash and invested it in Al Horford, who does not have Durant’s celebrity — or the headaches that come with it — but is a perfect fit as one of the best two-way players in the game.The Toronto Raptors won the division last season, and the team’s strong playoff showing was no fluke, as the Raptors finally got a glimpse of what Jonas Valanciunas can bring when he plays aggressively. Valanciunas can be an elite offensive center, but with his defensive counterpart, Bismack Biyombo, departing in free agency, he will have to expand his game.The Knicks represent the division’s — and perhaps the N.B.A.’s — biggest wild card. Carmelo Anthony still wants to succeed somewhere other than the Olympics, and he has a worthy (and gigantic) sidekick in Kristaps Porzingis. Courtney Lee is a perfect complementary piece, but the uncertainty comes in how much the team can rely on the health of the recently acquired Derrick Rose and Joakim Noah.The Philadelphia 76ers continued their run of terrible luck, with the No. 1 overall draft pick Ben Simmons sustaining a Jones fracture in his foot that has him out indefinitely. Joel Embiid may single-handedly make the team watchable.The Nets, meanwhile, are putting the offense in the hands of Jeremy Lin, who occasionally has a game in which he reminds people of the Linsanity era but may be in over his head if asked to do so consistently.CentralWith his team down by three games to one in the N.B.A. finals, James found the extra gear that people had been waiting to see for his entire career and carried the Cleveland Cavaliers to the title. But asking James and Irving to carry the team like that for another full season and playoffs is a lot, and Cleveland took some risks in assuming that J .R. Smith and Richard Jefferson could continue their unexpected effectiveness. Still, after the finals, there is apparently no situation in which James should be doubted.Even after promoting the defensively minded Nate McMillan to head coach, Larry Bird insisted the Indiana Pacers would focus more on offense. He backed that up by adding Jeff Teague, Thaddeus Young and Al Jefferson to a roster that will be competitive as long as Paul George is around.Coach Stan Van Gundy did a great job turning around the Detroit Pistons, and his mentoring of center Andre Drummond has turned him into an elite player. An offense that can alternate between Reggie Jackson and Ish Smith should be an upgrade, but it will have to wait until Jackson returns from injury.The Chicago Bulls were a mess last season, but if Rose’s departure helps Coach Fred Hoiberg create a cohesive offense, that move alone will have a bigger impact than the off-season additions of Dwyane Wade, Rajon Rondo and Robin Lopez.It will be fun to watch what the Milwaukee Bucks can get out of the team’s experiment with Giannis Antetokounmpo at point guard, but a serious injury to Khris Middleton and the uncertainty of Greg Monroe’s future will probably prevent the Bucks from improving much.SoutheastRemaining a serious playoff contender after losing Horford and Teague is a testament to the roster-building that the Atlanta Hawks have done over the last several seasons. Paul Millsap, Kent Bazemore, Kyle Korver and Dennis Schroder are a solid foundation, and the Hawks may be special if Dwight Howard can find happiness and some redemption after returning home.After surprising everyone with 48 wins last season, the Charlotte Hornets were forced to say goodbye to two important pieces of the team’s success in Lee and Lin, but the return of Michael Kidd-Gilchrist and the addition of Ramon Sessions should keep the team afloat, and the Hornets should once again be a playoff team, perhaps challenging for the division lead.The Miami Heat’s Big Three era was over as soon as James left two years ago, but now things are truly blown up, as Wade left as a free agent and Chris Bosh has been exiled because of his health problems. The Heat still have talent in Hassan Whiteside, Goran Dragic and Justise Winslow, but they may not have the leadership necessary to thrive.John Wall and Bradley Beal are a pair of immensely talented guards, but the bigger question for the Washington Wizards is if Otto Porter Jr. or Kelly Oubre Jr. can develop into a third star for the team. If one or both pan out, and everyone remains healthy, Coach Scott Brooks can do great things.Teams should avoid being seduced by big names if there is not a good roster fit, as the Orlando Magic will find out when they are unable to play Ibaka and Biyombo, their new additions, at the same time and probably will struggle to have either one on the court at the same time as Nikola Vucevic. Evan Fournier and Aaron Gordon are on the rise, but the Magic need to trade away a big man or two.Advertisement