By BENJAMIN HOFFMANJAN. 19, 2017
Russell Westbrook of the Oklahoma City Thunder is averaging a triple-double and is the prohibitive favorite to be named the N.B.A.’s most valuable player, but he will not be starting in the All-Star Game. And he can blame the league’s fans for that.The news shocked many around the N.B.A. when it was announced Thursday, with Stephen Curry of the Golden State Warriors and James Harden of the Houston Rockets beating out Westbrook for the starting guard spots on the Western Conference squad that will take the court Feb. 19 in New Orleans.In a new voting system in which the fans, the players and the news media all got a portion of the vote, Westbrook’s dominant season helped him finish first among the players and the news media, but third in the tiebreaking fan vote, more than 200,000 votes behind both Curry and Harden.The reaction among players and some fans was swift, with many expressing disbelief that Westbrook’s season was not enough to secure a starting spot.Advertisement“Dude averaging a triple double and not starting in the all star game is wild,” Chandler Parsons, a forward for the Memphis Grizzlies, wrote on Twitter.AdvertisementThe announcement came as part of a rough 24-hour period for Westbrook, who was the All-Star M.V.P. in each of the last two seasons. He caught flak for a particularly egregious traveling violation in a loss against the Warriors, in which he also had 10 turnovers and was leveled in a violent collision with Zaza Pachulia. That he earned his 21st triple-double of the season hardly seemed to matter, and for him to lose an All-Star starting spot to Curry, the two-time defending M.V.P. who is having a season well below the standard he set last year, had to sting.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.Curry’s numbers would certainly be deserving of an All-Star starting spot in most seasons, as he is averaging 24.6 points and 6.1 assists a game as the point guard of the team with the N.B.A.’s best record. But Westbrook, since the abrupt departure of Kevin Durant to Golden State, has been a man on a mission. His team may not have the firepower of the Warriors, but Westbrook has had no problem going it alone, averaging a league-leading 30.6 points a game while also averaging 10.6 rebounds and 10.4 assists.Those numbers have him on pace to join Oscar Robertson of the 1961-62 Cincinnati Royals as the only players to average a triple-double for an entire season. Thus far, Westbrook’s effort has willed the thin Thunder roster to a 25-19 record and the No. 7 spot in the West.While Westbrook has significant leads over Curry in traditional game averages and most advanced statistics, the most telling number may be usage percentage, which is an estimate of the percentage of a team’s plays that an individual is part of while he is on the court. Westbrook’s 41.9 percent not only leads all current players by more than 5 percentage points, but it would also break Kobe Bryant’s N.B.A. record of 38.74 percent set in the 2005-6 season.But in the end, Curry, thanks to his popularity, his past success and his team’s stellar record, will start, and Westbrook, despite his myriad accolades and accomplishments, will be forced to come off the bench. For better or worse, that reflects what the fans wanted.A version of this article appears in print on January 20, 2017, on Page B9 of the New York edition with the headline: M.V.P.? Probably. All-Star Starter? No.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.