AdvertisementSupported byNationals 9, Mets 1By Seth BerkmanMets Manager Terry Collins was not alarmed by two of his team’s biggest concerns entering Thursday’s game against the Washington Nationals.As Collins explained, the struggles of Matt Harvey, who has seldom pitched to the standard of the superhero persona he has helped cultivate, and the Mets’ recent inability to score runs were problems that were eventually solved last season.After a 9-1 drubbing by the Nationals at Citi Field, the Mets’ sixth loss in their last seven games, those complications not only grew worse, but, in the case of Harvey, might have reached a crisis point.Harvey allowed seven runs — four earned — in a catastrophic third inning that led to the shortest start of his career, two and two-thirds innings. In total, Harvey gave up nine runs, a career high, six of which were earned.After the game, stopping Harvey’s slide no longer seemed as simple. Collins said he would have to examine if Harvey’s making his next start scheduled for next week at Washington was in the best interest for both him and the team.“First thing we got to do is, right now, I think, is try to build up some confidence some way, somehow,” said Collins, who often paused and inhaled deeply before trying to find the words to describe Harvey’s stumbles.Harvey said his body felt fine, but he did not resemble a confident figure speaking at his locker, which is contradictory to the demeanor he has presented through most of his career. When Collins strode to the mound to pull him, Harvey knew his fate and began walking off, head down, before his manager could ask for the ball.The crowd booed Harvey roundly as he left the field, walking down the dugout steps and straight toward the clubhouse.“There’s times in this game where you got to learn from the bad times, and I think right now it’s just one of those stretches for him,” catcher Kevin Plawecki said.Harvey (3-6) was not helped by his defense. In the third, Bryce Harper collected his first career hit off Harvey with one on and one out, ending an 0-for-21 stretch. The Mets then intentionally walked Daniel Murphy to load the bases. Ryan Zimmerman followed by grounding a ball toward shortstop Asdrubal Cabrera, but Cabrera bobbled the attempt, making way for the first run of the inning to come home.“He could have been out of the inning, and now he’s not, and all hell breaks loose right after that,” Collins said. “I think that’s a confidence issue more than anything else.”Anthony Rendon followed with a line drive to left field that Michael Conforto could not contain, and two more runs scored.There would be no similar outbursts against Stephen Strasburg, who struck out 10 batters and improved to 7-0.Not only did the Nationals assert themselves in the National League East by taking two of three from the Mets in convincing fashion during their first series of the season, but there continue to be troublesome signs that the Mets’ offense is stalling.The lineup is constructed like a freight train. Power, not speed, is its forte. Runs are supposed to be produced via the long ball, and the Mets have been among the best power-hitting teams in baseball — their 56 homers through the first 39 games were the most in franchise history, and led the N.L.But the inherent fallacy of that blueprint is an inability to manufacture runs when the ball is not flying over the fence. As Collins said before the game: “Are we going to hit and run, and bunt? No. Because that’s not what we do.”When the Mets tried to be aggressive on the basepaths against the Nationals, it did not work smoothly. In the second, trailing, 2-0, after a two-run homer by Murphy in the first, the Mets had Yoenis Cespedes on second base and Neil Walker on first with one out.Cespedes and Walker tried a double steal as Cabrera swung away, knocking a single into center field. Cespedes slid into third base, not realizing the ball was in play, but no immediate throw by Ben Revere allowed him to recover in time to score, for the Mets’ only run.During their last seven games, the Mets have scored only 13 runs. This month, they have scored more than four runs only twice.Before the loss, Collins was not worried about his team’s offensive funk.“I know it’s a great story to panic and to scream and holler,” Collins said. “I’m probably not going to do that. I’m going to probably try to maintain my composure and my confidence in my players that I have, because I think we’re pretty good. Eventually that cream rises.”After Harvey’s outing and another muted night at the plate, it would be understandable if a few items inside Collins’s office were rearranged.Advertisement