By BILLY WITZOCT. 22, 2016
LOS ANGELES — A baseball player’s relationship with his bat is … well, it’s complicated.It is not unusual to see a player holding the barrel next to his ear, tapping it with his finger, listening as intently as a safecracker. Others roll their bats on the clubhouse carpet as deliberately as bocce balls, watching intently for imperfections. Ichiro Suzuki treats his bats delicately, carrying them the way a musician would his instrument — in a shockproof, moisture-free case.“Bats are like girlfriends,” said Bob Dernier, a former outfielder and current broadcaster who spent 10 years in the big leagues. “It’s all very personal.”So when Anthony Rizzo, the anchor of the Chicago Cubs’ lineup, was mired in a dreadful slump during this postseason, it was as if he had been betrayed not just by his abilities, but by his bats.After striking out in his first two at-bats on Wednesday, making him 2 for 28 in the postseason, he was done with them. Instead, he reached into the bat rack and grabbed a black-barreled, 34-inch, 32-ounce bat with No. 20 stamped on the knob. It belonged to his teammate Matt Szczur.AdvertisementWith the borrowed bat, Rizzo slammed a home run off the Los Angeles Dodgers reliever Pedro Baez. Rizzo added two more hits that night as the Cubs tied the series. He picked up two more hits using Szczur’s bat on Thursday night, including a double that gave the Cubs an early advantage as they took a 3-2 lead in the National League Championship Series.AdvertisementAnd on Saturday night, in the victory that gave the Cubs the National League pennant, Rizzo hit another home run with Szczur’s bat, along with a double.Szczur (pronounced “Caesar”), a reserve outfielder who has not been on the Cubs’ active roster during the postseason, has nevertheless made a profound contribution. And not just with Rizzo. Cubs shortstop Addison Russell, who had also been in a deep funk at the plate, forgot his leggings on the trip to Los Angeles, so he borrowed Szczur’s to wear under his uniform. Russell homered in both Game 4 and Game 5.At which point, Ben Zobrist asked Szczur if he had anything left for him.“I think this whole thing’s crazy,” Szczur said. “Tony just wanted to get a feel for something else, and he ran with it.”The 27-year-old Rizzo may have temporarily lost his feel at the plate in the postseason, but he did not lose his sense of humor. After beginning the playoffs 0 for 13, he singled in Game 4 of the Cubs’ division series against San Francisco. As he reached first base, he hugged the first-base coach, Brandon Hyde, and put his head on his shoulder.“He has fun with the game, and he’s a big kid out there sometimes,” right fielder Jason Heyward said.. Rizzo is a team leader and a candidate for the N.L.’s Most Valuable Player Award. But he was hardly the first marquee player to struggle in the postseason.Barry Bonds, who hit eight home runs in the 2002 postseason, had only eight hits in his first 56 playoff at-bats. Robinson Cano went 29 consecutive at-bats without a hit in the 2012 postseason, and his Yankees teammate Alex Rodriguez (3 for 25) was so bad that October that he was benched. Even Mr. October struggled: Reggie Jackson was 2 for 18 in the 1982 playoffs.AdvertisementThe angst is palpable when one of the team’s best hitters slumps in October. When Brooklyn Dodgers first baseman Gil Hodges went hitless in 21 at-bats in the 1952 World Series, which the Dodgers lost to the Yankees, fans sent him rosary beads, rabbits’ feet, mezuzas and scapulars, according to the author Roger Kahn in “The Boys of Summer.”Hodges, in his book “The Game of Baseball,” recalled the story of a Brooklyn priest who told his parishioners: “It’s too hot for a sermon. Just go home and say a prayer for Gil Hodges.” (Perhaps it worked belatedly. Three years later, the Dodgers finally vanquished the Yankees, and Hodges drove in both runs in a 2-0 Game 7 victory.)Zobrist said he had never borrowed another player’s bat, although sometimes he will dip into his own collection if things are not going well.Get the big sports news, highlights and analysis from Times journalists, with distinctive takes on games and some behind-the-scenes surprises, delivered to your inbox every week.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.“My relationship with my bats are long term,” Zobrist said. “If you find a good one, you hold on to it. At this point, I’m committed, but we don’t talk a whole lot. We just work together.”As a result, Zobrist was more pragmatic about his own hitting troubles this postseason. Although he was batting just .190 since the playoffs began, his bunt single in Game 4 against the Dodgers was the catalyst that ended a 21-inning scoreless streak for the Cubs and revived their offense. He said he had no plans to pick up a new bat.“It’s probably magnified because of who he is,” Zobrist said of Rizzo. “You just know he’s so good, it doesn’t matter what he brings to the plate, but sometimes you just need a little something mentally to help you turn the page.”Cubs Manager Joe Maddon recalled that when he was the bench coach for the Angels in 1999, the players opted for a novel approach to find their way out of a communal slump: The entire lineup would use the same bat.It did not begin well. When Orlando Palmeiro led off by striking out, he dropped his bat at home plate, leaving it for the next hitter.Advertisement“The home-plate umpire threw him out of the game, thinking he was trying to show him up,” Maddon said. “We’re, ‘No, no, no, no.’ We had to explain he was leaving it for the next guy.”When the San Francisco Giants won the World Series in 2010, first baseman Aubrey Huff credited the red rally thong that his wife had given him for his strong playoff performance.More conventionally, players are more likely to change batting gloves or bats.“That’s just part of the tradition of baseball,” Maddon said. “Guys are normally very superstitious, and if it takes another bat to get you moving in the right direction, you’re going to do that.”Which is what Rizzo did, and now he is moving on to the World Series.A version of this article appears in print on October 23, 2016, on Page SP2 of the New York edition with the headline: A Cub Benches His Bats.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.