

 Victor Mather
 

KEEPING SCORE
MAY 18, 2016
The Atlanta Braves have taken the path of so many bad teams and fired their manager, Fredi Gonzalez.But the Braves are not just another bad baseball team. At the moment, they are on a pace to be one of the worst teams ever.On Wednesday morning, the Braves sat at 9-29, a .237 winning percentage that, projected over a whole season, would put them at 38-124. That would be the worst record of the 162-game era. Should they keep up the abysmal pace, they would surpass the woeful 1962 Mets, who, despite their legendary inability to play the game, managed 40 wins. (The Braves did win Wednesday night, beating Pittsburgh by 3-1 to raise their winning percentage to .256.)It was not that long ago that the Braves were good; they won 96 games and made the playoffs in 2013.But after a disappointing 2014, the Braves remade their team, trading away Jason Heyward, Justin Upton and Craig Kimbrel. Andrelton Simmons was shipped out in the last off-season.Yet despite the fire sale, the Braves’ batters have not gotten any younger. Six of their eight regular starters are in their 30s.Those veterans are just not hitting the ball at the moment. Catcher A. J. Pierzynski, 39, is hitting .207. Shortstop Erick Aybar, 32, is at .174. Outfielder Jeff Francoeur, 32, is at .226.AdvertisementCollectively, the team was slugging a pitiful .313 entering Wednesday, the worst mark in baseball, and had scored the fewest runs of any team.AdvertisementThe Braves’ worst category by far is home runs. The team totals for homers in the rest of the major leagues ranged from 55 (Mets, Orioles and Rays) to 30 (Phillies) entering Wednesday. The Braves had 13. That matched the total hit by Nolan Arenado of the Rockies, the major league leader.Although the Braves’ pitching is better, it is not good. The team E.R.A., 4.70, was fourth worst in the National League. The Braves did rank first in one category: wild pitches, with 23.There are some bright spots, sort of. Unlike the batters, the pitching staff is young. Starters Matt Wisler and Julio Teheran, although a combined 2-7, both have solid E.R.A.s.Get the big sports news, highlights and analysis from Times journalists, with distinctive takes on games and some behind-the-scenes surprises, delivered to your inbox every week.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.Center fielder Mallex Smith, the youngster of the starting lineup at 23, is hitting a little, and first baseman Freddie Freeman, the other player in his 20s, at least has six homers.The Braves have also been a little bit unlucky. Their ratio of 123 runs scored to 193 given up entering Wednesday would be expected to produce 12 wins, rather than nine.Perhaps the biggest saving grace for the team is that it is not the only bad one out there. The Twins are now 10-29 as well. The Reds’ run differential, minus-72, is actually worse.It is not uncommon for teams in any sport to get out to extreme starts and then slip back to more reasonable performances as the season goes along. It certainly seems to be a reasonable guess to say the Braves will not maintain their torridly bad pace and the Mets’ record will be safe.Those 1962 Mets statistics make for ugly reading. Playing their first season in the league, with players mostly too old, too young or too untalented, they were last in baseball in both batting average (.240) and E.R.A (5.04). It was the type of season most baseball fans thought they would never see again.AdvertisementMaybe they were right. Maybe.A version of this article appears in print on May 19, 2016, on Page B14 of the New York edition with the headline: A Horrific Season on Pace to Be Historic.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.See More »