By HARVEY ARATON and SCOTT CACCIOLAMAY 18, 2016
Phil Jackson’s long, strange trip to hire a new Knicks coach appears close to ending. Jackson, the team’s president, has zeroed in Jeff Hornacek, who was fired as coach of the Phoenix Suns this season after 49 games.Jackson and Hornacek met in Los Angeles on Monday and came away with strong mutual interest, according to a person briefed on their discussions. While Jackson and Hornacek had yet to begin negotiating a contract as of Wednesday night, a deal was expected to be worked out within days.Another person with knowledge of the coaching search said that Jackson had settled on Hornacek, confirming a report by Bleacher Report.Hornacek, 53, coached the Suns for two full seasons before this one, compiling a 101-112 record, although his first year — at 48-34 — was considered an overachievement by most N.B.A. observers. His teams played an up-tempo offense. At the time of his firing, the Suns were 14-35 and had lost 19 of 21 games.AdvertisementThe Knicks, of course, are no strangers to turmoil. Jackson fired Derek Fisher as coach in February after the team’s record fell to 23-31. Jackson named Kurt Rambis, formerly Fisher’s top assistant, as interim coach. The Knicks went on to finish with a 32-50 record and were left out of the playoffs for the third straight season.Still, Rambis was widely viewed as a favorite to keep the job on a full-time basis entering next season. At the start of his search, Jackson said he wanted to focus on candidates with whom he had personal connections and who were familiar with the triangle offense. Rambis, then, would have been a natural choice.“I’ve seen a lot of situations where coaches end up coming in without simpatico with the general manager, and those things don’t work well,” Jackson said last month when the team held exit interviews. He added that he would look for “someone who has compatibility with what I do as a leader.”Get the big sports news, highlights and analysis from Times journalists, with distinctive takes on games and some behind-the-scenes surprises, delivered to your inbox every week.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.At the same time, Jackson knew he would face a backlash from the news media and the fan base — and possibly the owner James L. Dolan — if he hired Rambis, 58, whose career coaching record is 65-164.In recent interviews, Carmelo Anthony was adamant in saying he wanted Jackson to speak with more candidates, and Jackson did so, meeting with David Blatt, who was fired by the Cleveland Cavaliers this season, and Frank Vogel, whose contract was not renewed after five and a half seasons with the Indiana Pacers.AdvertisementHornacek was a late entry into contention for the job, with news of his meeting with Jackson reported this week. Hornacek neither played nor coached under Jackson, although he was briefly teammates with Rambis in Phoenix. In addition, Hornacek has never run the triangle offense. In Phoenix, his guard-centric teams were known for playing with pace.In New York, Hornacek would inherit a team that has struggled since Jackson was hired to reshape the franchise in March 2014. Jackson has churned through three coaches while trying to rebuild the roster and placate Anthony, who has three years left on his contract. Anthony has expressed impatience.“How do we move forward?” Anthony said last month. “How do we take advantage of this window that I have? I think that’s the main question. That’s the major question. How can we take advantage of this window?”The Knicks are a long way from being a title contender. But they do have a promising young star in 7-foot-3 Kristaps Porzingis, who averaged 14.3 points, 7.3 rebounds and 1.9 blocks a game in his first N.B.A. season. The Knicks, who long ago traded away their first-round draft pick, will need to find additional pieces through free agency this summer.Hornacek, a 6-foot-3 shooting guard, had a 14-year playing career with Phoenix, Philadelphia and Utah, averaging 14.5 points per game and appearing in one All-Star Game. Before becoming the coach of the Suns, Hornacek spent three seasons as an assistant with the Jazz.A version of this article appears in print on May 19, 2016, on Page B10 of the New York edition with the headline: Knicks Appear Close to Hiring Hornacek to Be Their Coach.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.