AdvertisementSupported byBy Zach SchonbrunThe Philadelphia 76ers were not jinxed, said their coach, Brett Brown. But his brow was still sweating Tuesday night when he sat onstage in a ballroom at the New York Hilton Midtown anxiously awaiting the results of the N.B.A.’s draft lottery.He did not feel the need to bring anything for luck, even though two seats down from him, Boston Celtics guard Isaiah Thomas arrived with a Ziploc bag of Lucky Charms cereal. But Brown searched for any clues that might foretell where the woeful Sixers (10-72) would be picking. He started reading the announcer’s teleprompter, thinking it might give away something, anything.“When we got to the commercial,” Brown said, “that was a big first hurdle.”The commercial break meant there were three teams left to hear their names read. Moments later, there was one. Brown’s poker face remained subdued for a few extra seconds. He shook hands with Mitch Kupchak, general manager of the Los Angeles Lakers, who got the second draft slot. Then Brown looked toward the camera and smiled.“I never felt jinxed,” Brown said again. “I believed in what we were doing. We’ve been rewarded for our patience and perseverance.”For the first time since 1996, the Sixers will select first in the June draft. It is not for lack of trying. In each of the last three years, Philadelphia finished with one of the worst three records in the league, a sustained level of futility that has reduced a proud franchise and fan base into a laughingstock.But the Ping-Pong balls never bounced the right way. In 2014, the Sixers finished with the second-worst record but were chosen to pick third, selecting Joel Embiid, who, because of injuries, has yet to suit up. Last year, Philadelphia also wound up with the No. 3 pick, taking Jahlil Okafor.They had a 25 percent chance to get the top spot this time. And despite the high picks in previous years, Brown said this one feels different.“It gives us the injection that we need,” he said.General Manager Bryan Colangelo, the team’s new president for basketball operations, said, “The good news is, when you look at the top of this draft, it’s almost a position where you can’t go wrong.”Indeed, both the 76ers and the Lakers seemed to depart equally satisfied with Tuesday’s result. The consensus for weeks now among draft analysts and scouts has been that two players, Duke’s Brandon Ingram and Louisiana State’s Ben Simmons, have separated themselves from the rest of the draft class.Brown actually coached Simmons’s father, Dave, with the Melbourne Tigers in the Australian National Basketball League in the early 1990s. Brown said Tuesday that he had known Ben Simmons since he was born.“There are lots of different connections that would just make me better informed,” Brown said. “He’s obviously an extremely talented young man and comes from great stock with his family.”Three hours before the lottery slots were announced, the former 76ers center Dikembe Mutombo, an N.B.A. global ambassador, wrote a message on Twitter congratulating Philadelphia for winning the No. 1 pick. The message was quickly deleted, but not before many fans saw it as a sign that perhaps Mutombo knew something about the 76ers’ fate.Reached by telephone Tuesday evening, though, Mutombo denied any involvement in the lottery selection process and said he had sent the message in error from his home in Atlanta. He had been asked by a 76ers staff member to send the tweet in the event that they did win the lottery.“I made a mistake,” Mutombo said. “My idea was just to congratulate them if they got the No. 1 pick.”The Celtics wound up with the third pick, via the Nets, who traded the rights to the pick in 2013 in exchange for Paul Pierce, Kevin Garnett, Jason Terry and D. J. White. The Toronto Raptors will select ninth thanks to the Knicks, who traded that pick away for Andrea Bargnani.Neither the Knicks nor the Nets will own a first-round pick this year.Advertisement