By JOHN BRANCHMAY 19, 2016
OAKLAND, Calif. — On one play, Stephen Curry dribbled 14 times, toying with defenders before bursting forward for a layup. On another, he dived over the first row of fans after a loose ball and disappeared like a magician. And during one breathtaking stretch of the third quarter, he did what he does best — score points in rapid succession — to turn a tight game into a blowout.Curry, the Golden State Warriors guard with unique flair for the dramatic, did a bit of everything to lead the Warriors to a 118-91 victory over Oklahoma City in Game 2 of the Western Conference finals on Wednesday night.Mainly, Curry scored 15 of his 28 points during a dizzying span of 1 minute 58 seconds of the third quarter, loosening a physical game into a dashing runaway.Before he made a 27-foot 3-pointer with 7:09 left in the third quarter, the Warriors were clinging to a 64-57 lead. After he made a 26-footer with 5:11 left, the Warriors led, 79-59, and it was clear to the nearly 20,000 in attendance that the series would soon be tied at a game apiece. Game 3 is scheduled for Sunday in Oklahoma City.Advertisement“It’s all about our ball movement,” Curry said of his outburst. “The way that they’ve been defending, it’s hard to get a rhythm if you don’t move the ball.”AdvertisementHe called it “our brand of basketball.”His teammate Festus Ezeli had a different explanation.“Steph is gonna Steph,” he said.
            Fun with @stephencurry30 on @nbaontnt pic.twitter.com/ekgdP454wi Curry’s swollen right elbow is the Warriors’ next worry. Curry played it down, saying it was an issue of pain, not range of motion.“Looks like it has a tennis ball on top of it,” Curry said.He had not seen a replay of the dive into the stands, and he wondered aloud if fans had tried to catch him. (None did.) There is a narrow walkway behind the first row, and Curry thought he had banged his elbow against the step in front of the next line of seats.“I missed the first row and didn’t quite get all the way to the next row,” he said.Golden State Coach Steve Kerr said: “I just expect nothing less from Steph. He’s the M.V.P. for a reason. He knows he didn’t have his best night in Game 1 and came out and played exceptionally well.”“This is what he does,” Kerr added.Oklahoma City had won three in a row on the road against the teams with the two best regular-season records in the N.B.A. San Antonio and Golden State combined to lose just three times in 82 home games before the playoffs, but the Thunder upset the Spurs in the second round with two victories in San Antonio and then won Game 1 here on Monday.The Warriors, however, trying to punctuate history’s best regular-season record, 73-9, with a second consecutive N.B.A. championship, had not lost consecutive games all season. They avoided the difficult task of coming back to win a seven-game series after losing the first two games at home.Get the big sports news, highlights and analysis from Times journalists, with distinctive takes on games and some behind-the-scenes surprises, delivered to your inbox every week.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.After Golden State’s Game 1 loss, Curry said it would be “fun” to play a game while trailing in the series. Fans found little joy in the idea, fretting for 48 hours that the Warriors’ pixie-dusted ride of the past two seasons could be on the verge of collapse.AdvertisementBut Curry rarely lets them down. No one had more fun on Wednesday than Curry, and the fans at Oracle Arena found the mood contagious. Fans who spent the third quarter cheering wildly for the home team mostly headed for the exits midway through the fourth as the lead climbed into the 30s.The Thunder won the opener on Monday by erasing a 13-point halftime deficit, largely behind 19 third-quarter points from Russell Westbrook and frosty shooting by the Warriors in the fourth.But Oklahoma City had no retort this time. Kevin Durant had 29 points, but just 6 in the second half. Westbrook was held to 16, though he handed out a game-high 12 assists.“Guys in the locker room aren’t happy that we’re 1-1,” Durant said. “We’re upset that we didn’t play well tonight.”The Thunder, behind Durant, kept the Warriors on a short leash until Curry’s third-quarter burst. Oklahoma City led with less than two minutes left in the second quarter before the Warriors surged to a 57-49 halftime lead.To that point, the building was never louder than when Curry’s fast-break pass was deflected to Iguodala, who was fouled and fell as he flung up an off-balance layup that banked into the basket.In the Game 1 defeat, the Warriors got just 16 points from their bench, usually a reliable strong suit. With center Andrew Bogut slowed by an adductor strain (he had 0 points and 3 rebounds in Game 1), Kerr mostly used a small lineup featuring no player taller than 6 feet 8 inches.In Game 2, Bogut was limited early by foul trouble, but the Warriors got strong minutes from their backup big men, Festus Ezili (12 points) and Marreese Speights (13 points). Golden State’s bench players combined for 50 points, more than three times as many as in Game 1. Seven Golden State players reached double figures.Advertisement“It was defintely what was needed,” Golden State’s Draymond Green said. “When the bench is clicking like that, we’re tough to beat.”But, as usual, the star was Curry, carrying championship hopes on his slight shoulders. He missed several games earlier in the playoffs with a sprained knee and threw a brief scare into the Warriors in the first quarter on Wednesday when he threw himself over the first row while diving for a loose ball.He disappeared out of view in front of the second row for 15 seconds, and even fans around him stood silently, unsure if he was O.K. To everyone’s relief, except perhaps those on the Oklahoma City bench nearby, Curry finally stood and walked back onto the court, preparing for even better tricks.“Just hoping he didn’t bang into a chair or somebody’s knee,” Kerr said of the play. “We were just waiting to see if he got up, and he got up and looked fine. And we all breathed a sigh of relief.”A version of this article appears in print on May 19, 2016, on Page B13 of the New York edition with the headline: Warriors Even Series With the Thunder Behind Curry’s 28 Points.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.