By MELISSA HOPPERTMAY 18, 2016
BALTIMORE — The fanfare was so great surrounding the undefeated Kentucky Derby champion Nyquist at the Preakness Stakes draw on Wednesday that his camp spilled over to tables reserved for the connections of other horses, yet nobody seemed to mind. And when Nyquist drew Post 3 and was made the 3-to-5 morning-line favorite for the 141st running of the race on Saturday, all assembled cheered.After a 37-year wait for a Triple Crown champion ended when American Pharoah won the Belmont Stakes last year, this Triple Crown season has been all about getting along while basking in the afterglow.“It’s numbing,” the trainer Doug O’Neill said of Nyquist’s Triple Crown run so far. “To be 8-for-8 going into the Preakness, to be 3-5, it’s such an honor and such a privilege.”Even Keith Desormeaux, trainer of the second-place Derby finisher Exaggerator — Nyquist’s toughest competition among the 10 horses set to challenge him at Pimlico Race Course — watched with awe as a replay of the Derby was shown on several screens.AdvertisementMaybe Desormeaux was smiling because he saw how close his horse had come to catching Nyquist, who won by one-and-a-quarter lengths. Or maybe he was smiling because he knew the tables could be turned Saturday, when the forecast calls for a 70 percent chance of rain.AdvertisementExaggerator, who drew Post 5 and was installed by the Pimlico oddsmaker Keith Feustle as the second choice at 3-1, has won two graded stakes on wet tracks, including the Grade I Santa Anita Derby on April 9.“It’s a nonissue for us at least,” Desormeaux said of racing in the slop. “We know we can do it.”Get the big sports news, highlights and analysis from Times journalists, with distinctive takes on games and some behind-the-scenes surprises, delivered to your inbox every week.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.Still, Nyquist’s camp remained confident, and rightly so. Nyquist, the 2-year-old champion, has won the Breeders’ Cup Juvenile, the $1 million Florida Derby and the Kentucky Derby, pushing his earnings to $4.95 million.O’Neill said he did not think the rain would bother his colt. After all, he said, Nyquist did not flinch on a wet track at Gulfstream Park on April 2 in the Florida Derby.The Japan-based Lani, the ninth-place finisher in the Kentucky Derby, drew Post 6 and was given odds of 30-1 and will be the only other Derby entrant in the Preakness field after Gun Runner, who ran third at Churchill Downs, was withdrawn from consideration Tuesday. Also taking a shot will be Laoban (Post 8, 30-1) and Cherry Wine (Post 1, 20-1), who were on the also-eligible list for the Derby.The third choice in the morning line at 8-1 is Stradivari, a late-developing colt who drew Post 11 and is trained by Todd Pletcher. Stradivari recently won an allowance race at Keeneland by 14½ lengths under the jockey John Velazquez.Rounding out the field for the mile-and-three-sixteenths Preakness are Uncle Lino (Post 2, 20-1); Awesome Speed (Post 4, 30-1); Abiding Star (Post 9, 30-1); Fellowship (Post 10, 30-1); and Collected (Post 7, 10-1), who is trained by the Triple Crown winner Bob Baffert.AdvertisementBaffert, whose Derby entrant, Mor Spirit, finished 10th, was happy to cede the Preakness spotlight to Team Nyquist.O’Neill and Nyquist’s owner, Paul Reddam, won the Preakness with I’ll Have Another in 2012 and headed into the Belmont Stakes with a Triple Crown on the line until the horse developed a tendon injury and had to be scratched a day before the race. That setback was a reminder to savor the journey, O’Neill said.“We’re just living in the moment,” he said, “and going to enjoy every bit of it.”A version of this article appears in print on May 19, 2016, on Page B12 of the New York edition with the headline: Nyquist, in Post 3, Is Favorite at 3-5 Odds.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.