By VICTOR MATHERJAN. 19, 2017
They played together for eight seasons in Oklahoma City, winning hundreds of games and making several deep playoff runs. But as Russell Westbrook confirmed Wednesday night, he and Kevin Durant are no longer on speaking terms.Durant’s Golden State Warriors beat the visiting Thunder, 121-100, to improve their N.B.A. best record to 36-6. Durant rose to the occasion with 40 points on 13-for-16 shooting. It was his first 40-point game with his new team. Westbrook led Oklahoma City with 27.After the game, when asked if he and Durant were on speaking terms, Westbrook answered bluntly: “No.”Westbrook has expressed his displeasure throughout the season with Durant’s decision to leave the Thunder as a free agent and join the mighty Warriors, who last season set a regular-season record for wins. Durant has, in general, taken a slightly higher road, but on occasion made remarks that at least cryptically critiqued Westbrook.Get the big sports news, highlights and analysis from Times journalists, with distinctive takes on games and some behind-the-scenes surprises, delivered to your inbox every week.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.The game on Wednesday ended up not being close, but it did have several memorable incidents. Late in the first half, Westbrook and Zaza Pachulia collided, and Westbrook went down. Pachulia was called for a Flagrant-1 foul after a review, and Westbrook later vowed to get Pachulia back for the incident.AdvertisementIn the third quarter, Westbrook began bringing the ball up the court but inexplicably did not dribble. It was one of the easiest traveling calls ever.
            Russ traveling on an inbounds is hilarious pic.twitter.com/CiWFa0HsCy Both Durant and Westbrook are having extraordinary seasons. Joining a team of stars has not slowed Durant, who has career highs in shooting (.544), rebounds (8.6) and blocks (1.7), while scoring 26 points a game.Westbrook’s season is even more astonishing, as he seems to try to do it all for his undermanned team, scoring 31 points a game and averaging 11 rebounds and 10 assists. He is threatening to become the first player to average a triple-double since Oscar Robertson in 1961-62.AdvertisementThe teams meet again on Feb. 11 and March 20, and a playoff matchup is a possibility. Their rivalry looks like one that will sizzle for some time to come.We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.