By BILLY WITZSEPT. 28, 2016
A quick survey of the Yankees’ clubhouse — a small sample, admittedly — revealed that no one was familiar with the perhaps apocryphal tale from Russian history of Rasputin, the spiritual adviser to Czar Nicholas II, whose rivals fed him poisoned wine, shot him several times and then tossed him into an icy river, which he tried to claw his way out of before finally dying.“Who?” the rookie Tyler Austin asked.“Never heard of him,” said a smiling Adam Warren, who has a bachelor’s degree from the University of North Carolina, but in business administration.The Yankees entered Wednesday needing one more day of Rasputin-like survival instincts to keep alive their playoff hopes, which hovered somewhere between microscopic and nonexistent.After stirring victories the previous two nights, the Yankees mustered another when — down to the final out to stay mathematically alive — Mark Teixeira blasted a game-ending grand slam to keep the Yankees relevant for another day with a 5-3 victory over the Boston Red Sox.AdvertisementThe Yankees, trailing by three runs with one out to go, knew a loss would eliminate them after the Baltimore Orioles staged a ninth-inning rally of their own moments earlier, coming from behind to beat the Toronto Blue Jays.AdvertisementAs Teixeira threw his arms up while rounding first base, watching the pitch from reliever Joe Kelly land in the Yankees’ bullpen in right-center field, there was a contrasting display of emotions. As Teixeira’s teammates poured out of the dugout to mob him at the plate, the Red Sox — who clinched the American League East title thanks to Toronto’s defeat — trudged off the field, winners of the prize but unable to fully savor it until they reached the clubhouse. Once there, however, they broke out the champagne and celebrated having again won the division a year after finishing in last place.The Yankees have provided some dramatic victories this season and endured some gut-wrenching defeats, particularly in the last two weeks, but Wednesday’s turnabout may have been as unlikely an outcome as any they have experienced in 2016.“It’s an unbelievable moment,” Manager Joe Girardi said. “Baltimore won tonight, and you have to win or you’re eliminated, and to be able to come up with five runs in the ninth inning ….”The Yankees entered the ninth inning having managed just one hit against Clay Buchholz, the Red Sox’ starter, and two relievers. They were facing Craig Kimbrel, Boston’s closer.But Brett Gardner led off the ninth with a single, and Kimbrel then walked Jacoby Ellsbury and Gary Sanchez. Brian McCann, Kimbrel’s former battery mate in Atlanta, fought off four two-strike pitches to work a 10-pitch walk that forced in a run and spelled the end of Kimbrel’s night.Kelly entered the game and struck out Starlin Castro and then retired Didi Gregorius on a shallow fly ball in foul territory, setting the stage for Teixeira, who had hit a game-tying home run in the ninth inning of Monday’s comeback victory at Toronto.The home runs have been a satisfying capstone to a disappointing season for Teixeira, whose production and playing time have waned after a series of knee and neck injuries. He announced in early August that he would retire at the end of the season.Advertisement“That’s as good as it gets right there,” Teixeira said. “I guess if you hit one to win the World Series, it might be this much fun.”Get the big sports news, highlights and analysis from Times journalists, with distinctive takes on games and some behind-the-scenes surprises, delivered to your inbox every week.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.If the 409th home run of his career happens to be his last, he will have no complaints.“You don’t want a wall scraper in an 8-0 game to be your last one,” he said. “You want a walk-off grand slam against the Red Sox. I’ll still be trying to hit one the next four games, but if it just happens to be my last one, it will be pretty special.”If Teixeira’s home run proves memorable, the Yankees hope that pitcher Bryan Mitchell’s performance will be enduring. Leaning on a sharp curveball, Mitchell kept Boston’s formidable lineup scoreless through seven innings — and earned the trust of Girardi, who let him finish the seventh after he walked Brock Holt with two out to put two runners aboard. Mitchell rewarded his manager by retiring Sandy Leon on a groundout.But the Red Sox broke through in the eighth against Warren, taking a 2-0 lead on Mookie Betts’s bases-loaded double and a 3-0 advantage when David Ortiz scored on a passed ball.By the time the Yankees came to bat in the ninth, the Orioles had staged their comeback, which clinched the division title for the Red Sox and pushed the Yankees to the brink.As it stands, the Yankees have no margin for error. They must win their remaining four games — against the Red Sox on Thursday and a home series this weekend against the Orioles, who also must lose Thursday at Toronto — to even have a chance to tie for the final spot.But they also need Detroit to win no more than once and Seattle to win no more than twice. And if Houston and the Yankees both win all their remaining games, they will finish with identical records.Still, the Yankees will carry on, their manager figuring that there was a lesson for some of his young players to learn, even if it does not help them this season.“You never stop playing the game,” Girardi said. “You never know.”A version of this article appears in print on September 29, 2016, on Page B13 of the New York edition with the headline: Clinging to Hope, Yankees Are Saved by Teixeira’s Slam.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.