By KAREN CROUSEMARCH 6, 2016
DORAL, Fla. — Twenty minutes before he took aim at his 12th PGA Tour victory, Rory McIlroy sensed a fast-approaching atmospheric storm and glanced up from his spot on the range. Donald J. Trump, trailed by Secret Service agents, police officers, employees, photographers and golf reporters, was making his way toward him.McIlroy, a native of Northern Ireland, had begun his week at the Cadillac Championship fielding a local television news reporter’s question about whether it was a distraction dealing with the “political shenanigans” stemming from having a World Golf Championships event at a resort owned by a presidential candidate. “He’s not going to be the leader of my country,” McIlroy said, adding, “It doesn’t bother me too much.”McIlroy, who led by three after 54 holes, sure looked bothered once he was out on the Blue Monster course. One of the game’s longest hitters, McIlroy did not make a birdie on any of the par 5s in the final round (he played them in nine under in the first three rounds).“That’s really what killed me today,” said McIlroy, who was the last of the 65 players in the field to record a birdie Sunday. He made a seven-foot putt for a 3 at the 305-yard 16th, on his way to a closing two-over 74 and a tie for third with the Englishman Danny Willett (69).AdvertisementTrump also shook hands and held a brief conversation with Dustin Johnson, the only other player on the range when he blew through. Johnson, the defending champion, closed with a 79, suggesting that not everything touched by Trump, the real estate mogul turned Republican presidential front-runner, turns to gold. After making the turn in one over, Johnson recorded double bogeys on three of the next four holes to flirt with joining five players who shot worse than a 79 on a cool, blustery final round.AdvertisementThe Australian Adam Scott briefly entertained the nightmarish thought that he might end up with a score in the 80s. Somehow he instead became the tour’s first multiple winner of the wraparound season with a closing three-under 69 in a fitful wind.“It was ugly and good all in 18 holes,” said Scott, who fell six strokes behind McIlroy with 13 holes to play after finding water hazards on the third and fifth holes, leading to double bogeys. He played the back nine in four under to win for the second time in two weeks. With a 72-hole total of 12 under, Scott finished one stroke ahead of Bubba Watson, last month’s Northern Trust Open champion, who closed with a 68 in his bid to win consecutive starts.It was Scott’s 13th tour victory and his first back-to-back titles since the end of 2013, when he won the Australian Masters and the Australian PGA Championship. He fell short of the Australian Triple Crown when he lost to McIlroy at the Australian Open. “After the second double bogey, winning was kind of far from the front of my mind,” Scott said. “At that point, I took a moment to think about kind of just gaining some traction on the round before it slips away, and I shoot 80.”He added, “It’s just bizarre because I hit some horrible shots today.” Scott laughed. “I think you have this picture in your mind that you’ve got to play so beautifully to win all the time, and sometimes, especially at a golf course like this, in windy conditions like this, it can’t be that pretty.”Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.As a concession, Trump did not take part in the award ceremony, delegating the photo opportunity to his son Eric.Trump was making his first appearance of the week at this World Golf Championships event, for which he serves as the unofficial host. He was fresh from a day spent campaigning and a night in which he tracked results from four states with Republican contests from a golf course he owns in West Palm Beach. He came wearing a white billed cap emblazoned with his campaign creed, “Make America Great Again.” He said, “Today I’m going to try to spend some relaxing time.”He quickly amended himself. “But it’s not going to happen,” Trump said, noting that he had a 52-person Secret Service detail, which restricted his ability to wade into the galleries to shake hands, hold babies, pose for selfies and track players’ shots. It is the last year for Cadillac as the title sponsor, and the tournament’s future is unclear. Trump has waged a presidential campaign that has created a disconnect with a sport striving to become more inclusive. He insisted his relationship with the PGA Tour was “very good,” adding: “I’m also a front-runner. Being a front-runner, people like you more.Trump was three minutes into an impromptu interview on the range when a Hispanic woman’s voice rose above the din of the crowd behind the range that was vying for Trump’s attention.Advertisement“Mr. Trump, Sign for the Latina woman here,” Melida Demorizi said. “I love you. Sign my shirt.”Trump was happy to oblige her. At a campaign rally last fall here, he was interrupted by protesters who took exception to disparaging comments he had made about Mexicans. Trump walked over and signed the back of Demorizi’s pink shirt, then returned to his interviews.“I’ve lived here 39 years, and I’m getting my citizenship because of Mr. Trump,” said Demorizi, who said she planned to sit for her interview this month and then participate in the United States naturalization ceremony.Wherever Trump went on the grounds Sunday, he was followed by screaming fans. Around dinnertime, more shrieking was heard in the hallway outside a ballroom in the main building of the resort. But Trump was nowhere to be found. Scott was at the center of the frenzy.An article last Monday about the final round of the World Golf Championships event at Trump National Doral, which was attended by Donald J. Trump, misstated his son Eric’s role at the tournament’s award ceremony. While he was present at the ceremony, he did not give Adam Scott the trophy.A version of this article appears in print on March 7, 2016, on Page D6 of the New York edition with the headline: Scott Wins at Doral as McIlroy Falters After a Handshake From Trump .  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.