By THE ASSOCIATED PRESSMARCH 6, 2016
Evgeni Malkin scored two goals, and the Pittsburgh Penguins took advantage of a couple of defensive lapses by the Devils in posting a 6-1 victory at home on Sunday.Matt Cullen, Nick Bonino, Bryan Rust and Scott Wilson also scored. The backup goaltender Matt Murray made 17 saves as the Penguins rebounded from a dismal performance against the Calgary Flames 24 hours earlier.Kyle Palmieri scored his 25th goal of the season for the Devils, who played without the injured All-Star goaltender Cory Schneider, who had limited Pittsburgh to six goals in the last six meetings. Keith Kinkaid made 24 saves.The win was the Penguins’ fourth in six games, and it moved them into seventh place in the Eastern Conference, 1 point ahead of Detroit. The loss was the eighth in 10 games for the Devils.AdvertisementThe Penguins, who had played poorly in a 4-2 loss at home to the Flames on Saturday, decided this one in the opening 21 minutes 37 seconds, taking a 3-0 lead.AdvertisementMalkin and Cullen scored 38 seconds apart roughly halfway through the first period to give Pittsburgh a 2-0 lead, and Bonino scored on a rebound at 1:37 of the second period to put it in command.BLACKHAWKS 4, RED WINGS 1 Patrick Kane scored his 38th goal on the first shot of the game, and Corey Crawford made 33 saves, helping Chicago win at home against Detroit.Artem Anisimov and Duncan Keith each had power-play goals as Chicago won for the third time in four games, including a 5-2 victory at Detroit on Wednesday. The Blackhawks went 2 of 3 with the man advantage and have at least one power-play goal in each of their last four games. Jonathan Toews, Chicago’s captain, also scored.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.The crowd, announced at a season-high 22,247, had just started its usual derisive Detroit chant when Kane skated up the right side and beat goaltender Petr Mrazek with a wrist shot 21 seconds into the game.The Red Wings played without center Pavel Datsyuk, who was scratched because of illness.STARS 2, SENATORS 1 Antoine Roussel scored the go-ahead goal late in the third period, leading Dallas past host Ottawa.Jason Spezza also scored for Dallas, and Kari Lehtonen made 23 saves.Zack Smith scored the lone goal for Ottawa. Andrew Hammond turned aside 23 shots in the loss, which left the Senators 6 points back of the Red Wings for the final wild-card spot in the Eastern Conference.BLUES 4, WILD 2 Jori Lehtera scored in his return to the St. Louis lineup, and his team held on to win at Minnesota.Ryan Reaves, Patrik Berglund and Robby Fabbri also scored for St. Louis, which won its third straight. The Blues have victories in seven of their past eight road games, and remain 2 points behind Chicago and Dallas in the Central Division.OILERS 2, JETS 1 Lauri Korpikoski scored the go-ahead goal in the second period, and Cam Talbot made 39 saves as Edmonton edged host Winnipeg.AdvertisementPatrick Maroon also scored for Edmonton, which moved out of last place in the Western Conference, 1 point ahead of Calgary.A version of this article appears in print on March 7, 2016, on Page D4 of the New York edition with the headline: Devils Overwhelmed Early in Loss to Penguins.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.