AdvertisementSupported byBy Randal C. ArchiboldPORT ST. LUCIE, Fla. — The Los Angeles Dodgers’ Chase Utley, who was barred for two games after his aggressive slide in a playoff game last year broke the leg of Mets shortstop Ruben Tejada, had his suspension lifted by Major League Baseball, according to multiple news media reports.The Los Angeles Times first reported Sunday that baseball and the players’ union had reached an agreement lifting Utley’s suspension. Tony Clark, the union’s executive director, who was visiting the Mets’ spring training complex here on Sunday, said the matter had been “resolved,” but he declined to comment further.In a pivotal play during Game 2 of a National League division series, Utley slid hard into Tejada to break up a double play. Tejada’s injury caused him to miss the rest of the postseason.Utley was called safe on the play, but Joe Torre, Major League Baseball’s chief baseball officer and its disciplinarian, ruled the slide illegal and suspended Utley for two games. Utley appealed, allowing him to continue playing during the postseason, but baseball and the union took up the case in the off-season, leading to a rule change addressing so-called rolling slides.Tejada told reporters before a spring training game against the Atlanta Braves on Sunday that he had moved on from the episode.“I don’t care, really,” he said. “I care about me. I’m healthy here. I’m happy here. I don’t care about what’s going to happen there. That’s the past. I’m all right here this year, healthy.”Under baseball’s new policy, a slide breaking up a double play will have to include a bona fide attempt to reach and remain on base. Contact with the fielder is allowed, but the runner cannot change his path to initiate contact or engage in a “roll block.”The plays will be subject to video review, and if it is determined that the runner did not engage in a bona fide slide attempt, interference will be called, and both the runner and the batter can be called out.“The most important thing is that the rule was changed, as far as I’m concerned,” Mets General Manager Sandy Alderson said.Alderson also suggested that the league should drop the suspension of Mets pitcher Hansel Robles, who threw toward the head of Phillies catcher Cameron Rupp in an October game. Baseball and Robles last month negotiated a reduced penalty of a two-game ban, instead of three.“As long as they are dropping penalties, they might as well drop his,” Alderson said. Advertisement