By TAL PINCHEVSKYMARCH 6, 2016
EL SEGUNDO, Calif. —  For the Los Angeles Kings’ Vincent Lecavalier, two months removed from the first trade of his 17-year N.H.L. career, everything seems new. And for Lecavalier, that is a very good thing.Lecavalier, a four-time All-Star and an integral member of the Tampa Bay Lightning’s 2003-4 championship team, is now playing as a third-line center. His adjustment to a new role on a new team has been aided by the fact that his three young children have already been won over by Southern California, thanks in large part to a Disneyland trip during a recent day off. More important, though, Lecavalier is again contributing to a winning team after his impressive career had appeared to be skidding toward an unceremonious end.“It’s been a lot of fun, just being part of this organization and the guys I’m playing with and the coaching staff,” Lecavalier said, adding, “I’m really happy and really excited for the last 20 games and the playoffs.”Those last 20 games and the playoffs — the Kings sit in fifth in the Western Conference — are all that remain for Lecavalier. Shortly after the Philadelphia Flyers traded him and defenseman Luke Schenn to the Kings on Jan. 6, Lecavalier announced that this season would be his last.AdvertisementHaving joined a team seeking a third Stanley Cup in five seasons, Lecavalier, playing lately on a line between the captain Dustin Brown and Trevor Lewis, has been reinvigorated.Advertisement“He’s helped me out a lot,” Lewis said. “He’s a good veteran presence in the room. I think when he speaks, everyone listens. On the ice, he’s been great.”Without the benefit of a practice after the trade, Lecavalier and Schenn rushed to Staples Center, quickly making the acquaintance of their new teammates before taking the ice in a 2-1 win over the Toronto Maple Leafs on Jan. 7. Lecavalier instantly endeared himself to the Kings faithful with an assist on Los Angeles’s first goal.He was not done there, collecting five goals and two assists in his first 11 games with Los Angeles. His point production has since slowed, but merely earning a regular shift is a far cry from the situation he left in Philadelphia.The Flyers had signed Lecavalier to a five-year deal in 2013, hoping he could regain the form that had made him a star with the Lightning. But Lecavalier never realized the lofty expectations that came with his $22.5 million contract. Midway through last season, his second with Philadelphia, he was a healthy scratch for the first time. His time with the Flyers hit a low point when he started this season as a healthy scratch and dressed for just seven of the team’s first 38 games.“Whatever your motivation is, to get back to playing or to get traded, you have to be in shape,” Lecavalier said of the adversity he faced in Philadelphia. “So you’ve got to keep your work ethic. You don’t want to be a cancer in the locker room; you want to be a good guy. You don’t want to be that guy that disrupts everything.”After Lecavalier’s trade, playing as a depth center behind the Kings stars Anze Kopitar and Jeff Carter was an unfamiliar job for a player who had been so heralded a prospect that Arthur L. Williams Jr., then Tampa Bay’s owner, proclaimed shortly after taking Lecavalier first over all in the 1998 draft that he would become “the Michael Jordan of hockey.” The following season, at 19, Lecavalier became the youngest captain in N.H.L. history.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.The Lightning’s management relieved Lecavalier of his captaincy during the 2001-2 season but handed it back to him in 2008, after he signed an 11-year, $85 million contract that made him among the highest-paid players in N.H.L. history. Tampa Bay bought out the contract five years in, ending Lecavalier’s tenure with the franchise.“I definitely don’t look back; I look forward and in the present,” he said. “At the end, I’m here because I want to help the team win as much as possible. That’s all I want.”AdvertisementLecavalier’s reclamation in Los Angeles started with a startling realization. It turned out that after more than a decade as a first-line star, Lecavalier still had plenty to learn about hockey.“Supporting the puck is huge here,” Lecavalier said. “Just the importance of playing solid in your zone may be something I didn’t really have the last 17 years. There are some teams where there is a system for some guys, but here everyone is playing the same way. I think that’s what makes this team special.“I used to go away from the play all the time and wonder some games why I didn’t touch the puck. Now I know why, 10 years later. It’s a team game, I find here. Going all through the lineup, everybody has a role. Every individual feels important.”Lecavalier’s willingness to assume a supporting role immediately caught the attention of Kings Coach Darryl Sutter, not known for suffering fools gladly.“He had to be on the right team, in the right situation,” Sutter said. “It’s a good fit if he’s got the passion to do it. There’s a point in everybody’s career where that passion diminishes, but his certainly hasn’t. That’s why I think he’s a Hall of Fame player.”Sutter still has vivid memories of Lecavalier’s crowning achievement in the N.H.L. As the coach of the Calgary Flames in 2004, Sutter lost to Lecavalier’s Lightning in the Stanley Cup finals, a riveting seven-game series in which each of the final four contests was decided by a single goal.With the end of his long career in sight, Lecavalier, who turns 36 in April, is hoping for another championship run — this time in a very different position.“It’s a different role that I’ve never been through,” Lecavalier said. “But I really enjoy it.”A version of this article appears in print on March 7, 2016, on Page D5 of the New York edition with the headline: Lecavalier Relishes New Role on Kings’ Third Line.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.