AdvertisementSupported byOn BaseballBy Tyler KepnerFORT MYERS, Fla. — The memorial stretches nearly from the wrist to the elbow on the right forearm of the major leagues’ next slugging star. Miguel Sano, the Minnesota Twins’ 22-year-old power hitter, is never far from his daughter.Her name was Angelica, and she was born in the Dominican Republic on Nov. 28, 2014. She died about a week later, he said, because of a heart defect. Whenever Sano unleashes his ferocious — but controlled — swing, a tattoo of her name, with “R.I.P.” above and a dove trailing the last letter, is close to the impact.“Last year in Double-A, I cried a lot,” Sano said the other day near his locker at Hammond Stadium. “I was really sad. I don’t concentrate too much on playing because I think a lot about my baby. But now I understand that God takes her. I don’t know if she would have problems in life.”Sano arrived in the majors in July and played 80 games, hitting 18 home runs, with 52 runs batted in. Although he plays his home games at spacious Target Field, he should become the first Twins player to hit more than 35 homers in a season since Harmon Killebrew in 1970.“He’s got so much power,” said Terry Ryan, the Twins’ general manager. “There’s not a ballpark that can handle him — in any part of the ballpark. If he gets a pitch and barrels it up, it’s going to go.”Sano’s success last year was even more remarkable because of the grief he endured while achieving it. He began the season in the Class AA Southern League, with the Chattanooga Lookouts, and through April, he was hitting .159.To Lookouts Manager Doug Mientkiewicz, the former Twins first baseman who had also managed Sano in Class A, something seemed off. Sano had missed the 2014 season after having Tommy John surgery, but this was deeper. It was a daily grind, Mientkiewicz said, to try to get Sano into the right frame of mind.“The effort was there,” Mientkiewicz said. “Just mentally, he’d kind of tap out.”On a trip to Pearl, Miss., Mientkiewicz noticed a commotion at the team hotel. He did not offer specifics but said that what he thought was simply goofing around became serious enough for him to intervene. He pulled Sano aside, sat down with him and learned about his daughter’s death.“I eased up a ton off of him after I found this stuff out,” said Mientkiewicz, who shared stories of former teammates who had also dealt with heartbreak. “He’s a hard kid not to love, because he does everything so well. He’s a good teammate; the guys love him. He’s not flashy, he’s not arrogant. He’s just Miggy.”The Twins signed Sano in October 2009 for $3.15 million, then a record bonus for a Latin American position player who was not from Cuba.Sano’s journey to professional baseball was later the subject of a documentary, “Ballplayer: Pelotero,” which chronicled an exhaustive Major League Baseball investigation into questions about his age that delayed his signing for months. The wisdom of the deal is obvious now.Among rookies with at least 200 at-bats last season, Sano ranked first in on-base percentage (.385) and slugging percentage (.530). He struck out a lot — 119 times in 335 plate appearances — yet his plate discipline still stood out to pitcher Phil Hughes, a veteran teammate who noticed that Sano walked twice Wednesday in his exhibition debut.“I think he saw two 3-2 changeups,” Hughes said. “He’s not selling out to just guess fastball and hit an absolute bomb. He’s got a really, really good approach at the plate. It’s nothing like I’ve ever seen from a guy his age. He’s so big, he’s so strong, and he knows he doesn’t have to take this big, monstrous swing. If he doesn’t get the pitch he wants, fine.”When he was growing up, Sano said, his favorite hitters to watch were Alex Rodriguez, Manny Ramirez and especially Miguel Cabrera, all right-handed sluggers who have also won batting titles. Sano hit .269 last season, but Mientkiewicz saw him hit .330 at Class A and obliterate the next level after his early struggles last season.“He came back after the All-Star break, and it was just completely different,” Mientkiewicz said. “He embarrassed Double-A baseball. I called Terry, and I was like, ‘I don’t know where he can go, but he needs to go somewhere, because it’s not normal what he’s doing to this league.’ ”Sano was in the majors by early July, although the Twins had no position for him. He started nine games at third base and 69 as the designated hitter. Now he is learning right field.“I keep working really hard,” Sano said. “I want to be one of the best outfielders. I have a good arm, I have good speed, and I think I can catch the ball.”Paul Molitor, the Twins’ manager, said Sano had smart instincts and surprising athleticism for his 6-foot-4, 260-pound frame. Switching Sano to right field, Molitor said, is the best way to make the pieces fit for the Twins, who have the steady Trevor Plouffe at third and signed Byung Ho Park from South Korea to be the D.H.Playing in the American League Central gives Sano many chances to see Cabrera, the Detroit Tigers’ first baseman, up close. Tom Brunansky, the Twins’ hitting coach, said he urged Sano to watch Cabrera during batting practice and in games, to study his preparation and his approach at the plate.Pitchers, Brunansky said, will attack Sano the same way they do Cabrera, who often spoils their plans. Sano did the same in his first half-season in the majors while carrying a wrenching burden.“I’m sure that has to have a lot of effect on his inner strength,” Brunansky said. “When he goes up to the batter’s box, what’s the worst thing that can happen to him that he hasn’t already dealt with?”Sano said he had a strong support group, with his mother, his brother, his sister and his wife in the United States. He said that he hoped to be a father again someday and that he did not dwell on his loss.“I know that God does everything for us, so I need to repay that,” Sano said. “And I told my family that I’m O.K. now.”Advertisement