

 Scott Cacciola
 

ON PRO BASKETBALL
MAY 17, 2016
CLEVELAND — During the Cavaliers’ recent sabbatical from the N.B.A. playoffs, Cleveland’s J. R. Smith went to a comedy club to see a friend perform. Afterward, fans approached Smith to offer what he described as unconditional support for his team’s continued quest for a first championship.“You would think there’s so much pressure on us for being a team that hasn’t won in X amount of years,” said Smith, referring to the 46 years — or, the entirety of the organization’s existence — that the team has fallen short. “But they’re happy with what’s going on. Of course, they want a championship. But it’s never like ‘You guys have to get it done.’ It’s always ‘We’re rooting for you guys.’ ”Smith paused to offer perspective drawn from his not-so-distant past with a former employer.“I admire that,” Smith said, “because when I was in New York, there was a lot of desperation: ‘You guys got to do it.’ ”The Cavaliers, after sweeping their first two playoff opponents, had nine days to prepare for Game 1 of the Eastern Conference finals at Quicken Loans Arena on Tuesday night. A new round meant a new opponent (the Toronto Raptors) and a new defensive assignment (DeMar DeRozan) for Smith, who lately seems to bear only a vague resemblance to the guard who played for the Knicks.AdvertisementDefensive stopper? Charitable teammate? Judicious shooter? It still depends on the day, but there is little question that Smith has become more dependable and — get this — a steadying force for the Cavaliers. In the first two rounds of the playoffs, he averaged 12.3 points a game while shooting 47.8 percent from the field and 50.8 percent from 3-point range.“When we’re moving the ball,” LeBron James said, “the ball has energy behind it.”Smith is channeling much of that energy for the greater good, at least as far as the Cavaliers are concerned.AdvertisementAs Smith prepared for Game 1 here, his old team was again tiptoeing onto a different type of stage for all the wrong reasons. The Knicks played a bit part at Tuesday’s N.B.A. draft lottery, having long ago traded the rights to their first-round pick as one component of the disastrous Andrea Bargnani deal with Toronto in 2013.Smith, of course, was an unwitting participant in another debatable move made by the Knicks, who sent him to the Cavaliers last season in a three-team, multiplayer deal that was largely a salary dump for the Knicks. To be fair, Smith was not exactly excelling for the Knicks at the time of the trade, having accrued fines for transgressions that included untying opponents’ shoelaces and making threats on one of his social media accounts. He was also shooting 35.6 percent from the 3-point line.In Cleveland, Smith has accepted life as the fourth option. He was quick to acknowledge that it took time for him to buy into a sharing-is-caring philosophy. He recalled having teammates earlier in his career who had advised him to get his shots, to post his numbers, to make sure he got paid. Smith had been eager to listen.But perhaps he learned something from the finals a year ago, when the Cavaliers, absent the injured Kyrie Irving and Kevin Love, turned to Smith for some production and he floundered, shooting 31.2 percent from the field as the Golden State Warriors took the series in six games. Smith left the arena on a hover board.On Tuesday morning, Smith made the point that what he did on offense against the Raptors hardly mattered compared with what DeRozan was capable of doing, or not doing. So Smith was mostly focusing on his defensive responsibilities. He did not always have that mind-set — not with the Knicks, and not when he joined the Cavaliers.Get the big sports news, highlights and analysis from Times journalists, with distinctive takes on games and some behind-the-scenes surprises, delivered to your inbox every week.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.“It wasn’t easy, trust me,” Smith said. “It wasn’t easy coming in here and thinking, I’m not going to shoot the ball because we’ve got these three guys, four guys. I looked at it as, I really have to mature and grow up. Because it’s really about winning and playing defense.”AdvertisementHe added, “Sometimes it’s hard running up and down the court for five minutes without touching the ball, but you know your impact is on the defensive end.”Smith went so far as to suggest that his effort on defense helped keep his teammates “accountable.” Yes, J. R. Smith actually used the word accountable. But there he was, pointing out that it was vital for the Cavaliers to involve Love in the offense, that he understood his place in the series’s star constellation, that passing the ball made the game more enjoyable.“I think the pressure releases from a lot of guys — from Ky, from Kev, from Bron — when everybody’s just knocking them down,” said Smith, who has a thing for monosyllabic nicknames. “When we’re flowing the way we’ve flowed the last two series, shooting the ball, moving the ball, that makes it so much easier to play.”When Smith stepped into his news media scrum after the team’s morning shootaround, James bellowed his greetings from across the court.“Oh, Swish!” James said, referring to Smith by his nickname, his voice bouncing off the walls of the practice facility. “I see you, boyyyyyy!”Gone, for now, are the league-imposed fines and the nights of gluttonous shooting. With a more understated approach, Smith has secured his place in the spotlight.A version of this article appears in print on May 18, 2016, on Page B13 of the New York edition with the headline: A Former Mischief Maker Learns to Share.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.See More »