AdvertisementSupported byBy Chris GordonPITTSBURGH — Two star goaltenders were here Monday night for Game 2 of the N.H.L.’s Eastern Conference finals between the Tampa Bay Lightning and the Pittsburgh Penguins. But one sat on the bench while the other watched from the press box.A matchup between these two teams would normally have pitted Tampa Bay’s Ben Bishop, 29, a finalist for the Vezina Trophy for the N.H.L.’s top regular-season goalie, against Pittsburgh’s Marc-Andre Fleury, 31, who in 2009 helped lead the Penguins to a Stanley Cup.Instead, their 21-year-old understudies, the Lightning’s Andrei Vasilevskiy and the Penguins’ Matt Murray, are on the ice in the make-or-break postseason.The question is whether the two young goalies will continue to dominate the series or the veterans will make a comeback.Vasilevskiy was called into action midway through the first period of Game 1 on Friday after Bishop fell awkwardly and was carted off on a stretcher. On Tuesday, Lightning Coach Jon Cooper said he was optimistic that Bishop would return to the series at some point, though Bishop had not skated with the team or taken shots since his injury.If Murray falters, Fleury could be back in the net. Sidelined after a concussion late in the regular season, Fleury was cleared to resume playing two weeks ago. But Penguins Coach Mike Sullivan has stuck with Murray for 11 straight playoff games.For now, both budding goaltenders are likely to remain in the net. Neither seems to be a flash in the pan.“Both of them have been great,” Fleury said in an interview at his team’s practice complex Tuesday. “They’ve looked very calm and relaxed. I think on both sides they’ve made some key saves in the games. I think they are two guys that will be fun to watch over the years.”A player from western Siberia whose father was a goalie in the top Russian league, Vasilevskiy has a reputation for disciplined workouts. The soft-spoken Murray, of Thunder Bay, Ontario, is known for his calm demeanor in the crease.In Game 2, Vasilevskiy stole the show, if not the win. He made 38 saves on 41 shots, losing only after a defensive breakdown by the Lightning allowed for a Sidney Crosby blast 40 seconds into overtime, giving the Penguins a 3-2 victory.The series is tied, 1-1, with Game 3 scheduled for Wednesday in Tampa, Fla.“I feel bad for Vasilevskiy,” Cooper said after his team landed back in Florida. “That kid just plays lights out for us every time.”Of Vasilevskiy’s saves in Game 2, 12 came in the first period. He made 16 in the third period, and the Lightning were outshot by 41-21 in the game.“Clearly, he was the reason the game was so close,” Cooper said.On the other side, Murray played a solid game, though he was not tested much. After allowing what he later acknowledged was “a soft goal” to Jonathan Drouin late in the first period, Murray stonewalled Tampa Bay for the remaining 41 minutes 30 seconds of the game.“I made the saves I needed to win the game, and that’s what matters,” Murray said Tuesday.Murray, who had played in only 13 N.H.L. games before the playoffs began, is 8-3 with a 2.14 goals-against average and a .928 save percentage this postseason. He beat the Rangers’ Henrik Lundqvist and the Washington Capitals’ Braden Holtby, two of the league’s premier goaltenders, in the first two rounds.Murray began this season in the minor leagues, with Pittsburgh’s top affiliate in the American Hockey League. Last season, he chalked up some impressive records with the club and was named goaltender and rookie of the year. At one point, he set an A.H.L. mark by going 304 minutes without allowing a goal.Sullivan was Murray’s coach in the minors early this season until he was promoted to lead the Penguins in December. Three days later, Murray was called up to Pittsburgh, too.“He has a maturity level beyond his years,” Sullivan said of Murray on Sunday. “He has a really good work ethic and preparation process that he puts himself in a position to be successful.”Vasilevskiy was drafted 19th over all in 2012, the same year the Penguins took Murray in the third round. Vasilevskiy was impressive in relief of Bishop in Game 1, making 25 saves in the Lightning’s 3-1 victory. He survived a 16-shot onslaught by Pittsburgh in the third period.Even Murray praised his rival.“I don’t think it was much of a drop-off losing Bishop,” Murray said of Vasilevskiy after Game 1. “He’s such a good goaltender.”It should not be surprising that Vasilevskiy has been able to handle the pressure. During last year’s Stanley Cup finals, he came in after Bishop was injured in Game 2 against the Chicago Blackhawks and earned a 4-3 victory. He also started Game 4 of that series, losing, 2-1.“Talk about pushing somebody a little bit down the learning curve a little faster than we wanted to,” Cooper said.The current series is the first time since 1987 that two goalies of 21 or younger have faced each other in the playoffs. Despite the stakes, neither team seems uneasy about casting its fate with youth.“I’ve watched just the age of the entire league go down,” Cooper said last week. “It’s not uncommon now that young guys are getting more of a chance to perform and excel.”Advertisement