By BILLY WITZMAY 18, 2016
PHOENIX — When Michael Pineda stands atop the pitcher’s mound, he often delivers something that looks like performance art. His cap is askew, his jersey fights an uphill battle to stay tucked into his pants, and he carries on a nearly constant conversation with himself — the dialogue typically accompanied by flailing arms.For those tuning into watch the Yankees, it is not often necessary to check the scoreboard. Simply check with Pineda.So it was Tuesday night that in the fifth inning, Pineda stood on the infield grass behind the mound, his hands on his hips and his gaze toward the roof of Chase Field. He was the picture of exasperation.Pineda had just mishandled a comebacker, and by the time he threw to first, it was too late. Moments like this had company on Tuesday, when the Yankees were beaten by the Arizona Diamondbacks, 5-3. The Yankees have lost two straight, both in Phoenix.AdvertisementThe Yankees showed some fire late — driving Zack Greinke, who had been dominating, from the game and bringing the tying run to the plate in the eighth inning. But reliever Daniel Hudson struck out Brett Gardner and Mark Teixeira to escape.AdvertisementGardner vehemently protested his called third strike, on a low 3-2 fastball, to the umpire Fieldin Culbreth, who showed restraint in not ejecting the irate Gardner before he was led away by Manager Joe Girardi.“I was obviously pretty mad,” Gardner said. “It’s a big point in the game; we’re making a little comeback. I’m frustrated with the umpire, frustrated with myself — I haven’t been swinging the bat well. I just let my emotions take over too much.”It was the type of competitiveness that was lacking for much of the game from the Yankees, whose inattentiveness was punished by the Diamondbacks.Chris Owings turned a ground ball over the third-base bag into a triple, Paul Goldschmidt stole third when Pineda failed to bring Goldschmidt’s walking lead to a halt, and Nick Ahmed raced from first to third when he noticed catcher Brian McCann lollygagging after a passed ball.There were also errors of commission, such as Pineda’s error and another when Chase Headley, covering second when Goldschmidt stole second, failed to glove McCann’s throw and Goldschmidt continued to third.“You can’t play like that and expect to win — I know that,” Girardi said. “It’s just poor baseball.”All this left Pineda an emotional spectacle.“I know I’m better than that,” Pineda said. “Right now, I’m struggling. I need to get better.”AdvertisementHe has not won since his first start, his record dropping to 1-5 and his E.R.A. climbing to 6.60. There were times when Pineda was very good — striking out nine hitters in five innings and generating all other outs via ground balls — but he was undone by leaving a handful of sliders over the middle of the plate. It is a familiar pattern.The handful of loosely spinning sliders that Pineda left up in the strike zone were punished without prejudice by the Diamondbacks, most gallingly an 0-2 pitch that the light-hitting Ahmed singled to drive in a run. And Pineda threw a 1-0 fastball that Jake Lamb blasted over the right-field fence for a two-run homer.Pineda has been far less effective this season when he has been ahead in the count, and many of the problems have come when he has been working from the stretch.”That at-bat tells the story of a lot of stuff that’s happened this year,” the pitching coach Larry Rothschild said, referring to Ahmed’s single. “It would be easy to sit here and say it’s going to turn and things will change, but it’s too long. We’re almost a quarter of the way through his starts, so we need that straightened out.”As confounding as Pineda has been this season, so, too, has been Teixeira, who has not hit a home run since April 13, a span of 103 at-bats.Girardi had hoped the three hits that Teixeira collected on Monday might be a sign of an upcoming power surge, but Teixeira was hitless Tuesday with three strikeouts, including one against Hudson that ended the eighth when Teixeira represented the tying run.Greinke, who signed a six-year, $206.5 million deal with the Diamondbacks over the winter, has rarely looked the part this season — until Tuesday.Get the big sports news, highlights and analysis from Times journalists, with distinctive takes on games and some behind-the-scenes surprises, delivered to your inbox every week.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.Greinke, who entered the game with a 5.26 E.R.A., looked like the pitcher he had been in recent years with the Los Angeles Dodgers, where he had looked like a worthy sidekick to Clayton Kershaw. Greinke expertly located his diverse repertoire all over the strike zone, and sometimes beneath it.AdvertisementMistakes were rare, and only one was punished: a letter-high fastball in the second inning that Starlin Castro crushed for a home run to the deepest canyon of the park, just to the left of the 413-foot sign in left-center field. It was the Yankees’ only hit until Dustin Ackley’s pinch-hit single in the sixth.The Yankees did little else until the eighth, when Didi Gregorius and Aaron Hicks led off with singles, prompting Hudson to enter. He retired pinch-hitter Carlos Beltran on a run-scoring groundout, and Jacoby Ellsbury singled to drive home Hicks and bring the tying run to the plate. But it turned out only to be a prelude to the Yankees’ disappointment.Once Hudson escaped the eighth, Brad Ziegler retired the Yankees in order in the ninth.An earlier version of this article misstated the type of pitch from Michael Pineda that Jake Lamb hit for a two-run homer. It was a fastball, not a slider.We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.