By SCOTT CACCIOLAMAY 17, 2016
CLEVELAND — Dwane Casey was about an hour from coaching the Toronto Raptors in the opening game of the Eastern Conference finals, but first he wanted to list some concerns.The Cavaliers, he said, were rested. LeBron James had turned into a pass-first facilitator. Kevin Love had shot a crazy percentage from 3-point range through the first two rounds of the N.B.A. playoffs. J. R. Smith had committed to becoming a terrific defender. And the entire team had shown an ability to jump all over opponents in the first quarter.Given this alarming set of factors, Casey sought to put the sunniest spin possible on the situation at hand.“There shouldn’t be any pressure on our guys,” he said.If the Raptors went into Game 1 on Tuesday night without any pressure, the Cavaliers made sure to provide some. It came in the form of dunks and 3-pointers, in blocked shots and swarming defense. The Cavaliers, who have yet to lose a game four weeks into the postseason, throttled the Raptors in a 115-84 victory at Quicken Loans Arena.Advertisement“The score is embarrassing,” Casey said after the game, “but again, it’s just one game.”Kyrie Irving scored 27 points, and James added 24. The Cavaliers shot 55.4 percent from the field to turn the whole evening into a glorified pickup game at the local Y.M.C.A., though one with thousands of screaming fans, a national television audience and a scoreboard known simply as Humongotron, which spewed fire and flashed an increasingly lopsided score.Advertisement“We were getting to our sweet spots as much as possible,” Irving said. “We played at an unbelievable pace.”The Cavaliers, who will host Game 2 on Thursday, led by 22 at halftime and by 28 at the end of the third quarter. DeMar DeRozan scored 18 points for the Raptors, who looked as if they had spent three months at sea before the game was 15 minutes old.The Cavaliers and the Raptors took opposite paths to the conference finals. The Cavaliers swept their first two opponents and had a nine-day layoff after breezing past the Atlanta Hawks in the conference semifinals. The Raptors, on the other hand, went the full seven games in each of the first two rounds. Lots of minutes. Lots of travel. Lots of stress.“They’ve been off their feet,” DeRozan said of the Cavaliers. “We’ve been battling the last couple of weeks.”Before Tuesday’s game, Casey searched for the positives. Perhaps the Cavaliers would be rusty. Maybe the Raptors would still be in rhythm after defeating the Miami Heat on Sunday in the deciding game of their conference semifinals series. Then again, Casey said, if he had the choice, he would always opt for rest, especially given his team’s injuries.Where to begin? Jonas Valanciunas, the Raptors’ starting center, was absent with a sprained ankle. Others, like DeRozan (thumb), Kyle Lowry (elbow) and DeMarre Carroll (wrist), played on — and played well, at least for a while. The Raptors made 8 of their first 11 field-goal attempts. The only problem was that James made his first nine. There was no discernible rust.Toronto won two of three games against Cleveland in the regular season. But the Cavaliers have found another level in the playoffs, largely by feasting on 3-pointers. In the first two rounds, they averaged 36.3 attempts a game from beyond the arc. But far from being mere long-distance gluttons, they were also marksmen, making 46.2 percent of those shots.AdvertisementStill, James sounded almost defensive about the Cavaliers’ growing reputation as a perimeter-oriented team, as if it were some sort of stigma.“We’re a balanced team,” he said before the game. “We work all facets of the game, both in the paint and on the perimeter.”Asked what the Cavaliers had emphasized at practice, James said, “Everything.”He added, “We know that we’re prepared, and that’s all we can ask.”Get the big sports news, highlights and analysis from Times journalists, with distinctive takes on games and some behind-the-scenes surprises, delivered to your inbox every week.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.No kidding. From the opening seconds, the Cavaliers ran at the rim and spotted up from Akron. They did not defend particularly well, but it did not matter. The Raptors shot 13 of 25 in the first quarter — and still trailed by 5 points. For a team tasting the conference finals for the first time in franchise history, it was not a winning formula.The game got away from Toronto early in the second quarter. The Cavaliers’ Channing Frye and Matthew Dellavedova came off the bench to drill back-to-back 3-pointers, and the lead was suddenly 11. Casey called a timeout. Unfortunately for the Raptors, the officiating crew allowed the Cavaliers to return to the court.Minutes later, James drove along the baseline as Carroll reached out in a desperate — and ultimately pointless — attempt to impede his path. James absorbed the contact, launched himself at the rim and then tried to rip it off the backboard.His dunk seemed to turn a basketball game into a spiritual experience for an arena full of fans wearing matching gold T-shirts that read, “All In.” As the minutes passed and the lead swelled, the Cavaliers drew themselves one win closer to the ultimate prize.A version of this article appears in print on May 18, 2016, on Page B13 of the New York edition with the headline: Cavaliers Show No Signs of Slowing in 31-Point Rout of the Raptors.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.