By THE ASSOCIATED PRESSMAY 16, 2016
ST. LOUIS — The San Jose Sharks got only three power plays during their loss in Game 1 of the Western Conference finals, and no call when Joe Thornton’s bushy beard got tugged on by the St. Louis Blues’ captain, David Backes, in the first period.Sharks Coach Peter DeBoer did not make a big deal about it Monday. Still, he believed his team deserved many more chances with the man advantage, and was hopeful referees would have a firmer grip on Tuesday night in Game 2.“St. Louis is one of the most-penalized teams in the league, regular season and playoffs,” DeBoer said. “They need to call the game accordingly. Need to make them pay a price for being the most-penalized team in the power play, which we didn’t last night.”The Blues were the ninth-most penalized team in the regular season, and they have the second-most minutes in the postseason. (They have also played more games this postseason than any other team.)AdvertisementBlues Coach Ken Hitchcock, informed of those comments, wanted to know whether DeBoer was “whining for calls.”“Well, we were told not to whine for calls, so we’re not going to whine for calls,” Hitchcock said. “We’ll play the game, we’ll play it the right way, we’ll play it honest, but we’ll play it hard, let the refs decide.”Five minor penalties were called, three on the Blues, and there were none in the second period, when the Sharks were at their best, ringing up a 16-to-6 shots advantage but coming up empty and falling behind for good on Jori Lehtera’s unassisted goal.Get the big sports news, highlights and analysis from Times journalists, with distinctive takes on games and some behind-the-scenes surprises, delivered to your inbox every week.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.Thornton shrugged off the beard-tugging incident, saying it might have actually helped him.“It’s all good for me,” Thornton said. “I think it gets you more involved in the game.”Backes joked about the tactic, too.“Yeah, just seeing whose was real and making sure they weren’t glued on,” Backes said.AdvertisementBlues players spent little time celebrating their hard-earned 2-1 victory, showing up to the rink to dissect areas in need of improvement before sitting down with Hitchcock.“Everyone knows this was kind of like a heavyweight fight, round one, just jabbing a little bit,” the Blues’ Carl Gunnarsson said. “Now we know how they play. We’ll make some adjustments, and off we go.”The Sharks were not disappointed in their effort, just the bottom line.Both teams seemed to sense they might be in for a long haul, perhaps a seven-game marathon.Twice this season the Blues have needed seven games to advance, putting them in the conference finals for the first time since 2001. The Sharks dispatched the Kings in five games during the first round but needed seven to eliminate the Predators and earn a first trip to the conference finals in five years.Entering Game 2, the Sharks trail in a series for the first time this postseason.“I think this team has shown short memory,” Thornton said. “Get the last game out of your head and focus on the next game. We’ll see if we can do it again tomorrow.”The Blues won the opener despite getting outshot, 32-23, relying heavily on another standout effort from goalie Brian Elliott. He is 4-0 with a 1.29 goals against average and a .954 save percentage in five career playoff appearances against the Sharks.“Whenever it seems like he’s down and out and we may give up what we call a bad scoring chance, he has a knack for really just working to get back and getting a piece of it,” defenseman Kevin Shattenkirk said. “It’s not only in games — we see him do it every day in practice.”Backes scored his seventh goal, matching the sharpshooter Vladimir Tarasenko for the team lead, with his fourth deflection of the postseason. He has 13 points, matching his career postseason total from 2006-7, and also was credited for 11 hits, most ever by a Blues player in a postseason game.The Sharks were shut out on the power play for the first time since Game 2 of the second round.“We stepped up to the challenge,” Blues defenseman Alex Pietrangelo said. “It was a big topic for us all week.”AdvertisementDeBoer said the team was not going to overreact to power-play failures or to anything else.“It was a winnable game,” DeBoer said. “We probably had more quality chances than they did.”A version of this article appears in print on May 17, 2016, on Page B12 of the New York edition with the headline: Sharks Coach Questions Dearth of Calls Against Blues.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.