By VICTOR MATHERMAY 16, 2016
When the 40 racecars lined up for the first Indianapolis 500, on May 30, 1911, 39 of them had something in common: There were two men onboard. In the 40th car sat Ray Harroun, all by himself.Harroun went on to win the race, at least in part because of the aerodynamic advantages his one-man car gave him. But that is not why other drivers protested before the race. They were worried about safety.One of the key jobs of the second man in a racecar, who was known as a riding mechanic, was to look backward and alert the driver to what was going on behind him. Harroun’s rivals were concerned that without this spotter, he might cause a pileup.Don’t worry, Harroun told officials. He had rigged a 3-inch-by-8-inch mirror in a makeshift case mounted above his dashboard.It was, quite possibly, the first rearview mirror on a motorcar.This week, 33 drivers are beginning to practice and qualify for the 100th Indianapolis 500, to be held on May 29, when solo drivers will cram themselves into the narrow cockpits of aerodynamic wonders that often average more than 160 miles per hour in the race.AdvertisementHarroun’s car in the first Indy 500, the Marmon Wasp, which averaged 74.6 m.p.h. in his victory, was ahead of its time in a number of ways.Advertisement“You could save the weight of the second person, and the body could be more narrow,” said Donald Davidson, the official Indianapolis Motor Speedway historian.The Wasp was one of the few cars at the time to be streamlined, and in the 1960s, Davidson said, several astronauts inspected the Wasp, which is still on display at the speedway museum.“They were fascinated by the shape of the tail and asked, ‘How did they know to do this?’” Davidson said.The mirror also probably helped Harroun aerodynamically, producing downforce, Davidson said.Passenger cars began introducing rearview mirrors soon after the race; Davidson said he had never seen a photograph of one on a car before that date.“As far as we know,” he said, “Ray Harroun had the first rearview mirror on an automobile.”Harroun, who died in 1968, told Davidson he got the idea for the mirror while serving as a chauffeur in Chicago in 1904 for William Thorne, the president of Montgomery Ward.“Along came a horse-drawn taxicab,” Davidson said Harroun told him. “The fellow was sitting up on top with a top hat, and he noticed there was a pole sticking out with a mirror.”The other 39 drivers in the 1911 race stuck with two-seaters as Harroun circled the track alone for 6 hours 42 minutes 8 seconds. (Tony Kanaan won the 2013 race in a record 2:40:03.4, with an average speed of 187.4 m.p.h.)AdvertisementRiding mechanics, who in addition to being lookouts kept an eye on tire wear and would even hop out of the car and run back through the infield to get fuel, shared the danger with the drivers. S. P. Dickson, whom a New York Times article referred to as a mechanician, died during the race after his car lost a wheel, causing both occupants to be thrown out. The driver, Arthur Greiner, was lucky to escape with a broken arm.“Dickson was thrown against a fence 20 feet from the car and terribly mangled,” the Times reported.Four other riding mechanics sustained injuries in the race.Safety standards at races in that era were poor. Many of the spectators that day, estimated at more than 80,000, wandered into situations almost as dangerous as those facing the drivers.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.“The spectators swarmed across the infield when Dickson was killed and pressed close about his body and that of the unconscious Greiner,” The Times reported. “Soldiers had to club their guns to clear a space for the surgeons when the ambulance arrived.“The throng went wild with excitement after the first accident and rushed back and forth over the field when the other accidents were reported.”The drivers fell short of the fame of those today. Most of the drivers and the mechanics were employees of the company that manufactured the car, and races were often seen as battles between companies rather than men.Harroun compared himself to a jockey.“I didn’t win the 500 in 1911,” Harroun told Davidson. “Marmon won the 500. I just happened to be the driver.”The headline of the Times article about the first race read, “Marmon Car Wins.”Harroun, the only man to ride alone in that first Indy 500, was also the only one to do so for many years.Beginning the next year, the rules were changed to require the use of riding mechanics. They were mandatory until 1922 and then again from 1930 to 1937.But while he was winning the first Indy 500 in his innovative car, Harroun had a secret, which he related to Davidson in 1967. His innovative mirror had reassured his rivals that the race would be safe. But the brick track at the speedway made for a bumpy ride.Advertisement“To tell you the truth, on the brick surface, I couldn’t see a damn thing in it,” Harroun said. “And no one knew it but me.”A version of this article appears in print on May 17, 2016, on Page B9 of the New York edition with the headline: Innovation Began With a Look Back.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.