By THE ASSOCIATED PRESSSEPT. 28, 2016
BEREA, Ohio — Terrelle Pryor did it all last week for the Cleveland Browns, lining up at wide receiver, quarterback and safety.He was also a throwback.With an all-around performance of a type not seen on an N.F.L. field since 1959, Pryor displayed his athletic gifts and gave Cleveland fans some hope in an 0-3 season that has been sabotaged by injuries to key players.Pryor, a former quarterback for Ohio State and the Oakland Raiders, was remarkable Sunday while running, catching and throwing during the Browns’ 30-24 overtime loss to the Miami Dolphins. He finished with 144 receiving yards, 35 passing yards and 21 rushing yards.No player had posted those kinds of statistics since the Hall of Famer Frank Gifford did it for the Giants 57 years ago. Pryor, who also scored a 3-yard rushing touchdown, became the first player since Billy Kilmer in 1964 to throw three passes, catch three passes and have three carries in one game.Advertisement“I always say, before I go into a game, ‘I’m the best athlete on the field,’” Pryor said as the Browns began preparing for this week’s game in Washington. “And I firmly believe that.”AdvertisementThe Dolphins do not doubt it. Pryor was a one-man wrecking crew.“Any time he gets the ball in his hands with just a little bit of space or separation, he can take it the distance,” Miami cornerback Byron Maxwell said. “He’s fast. He’s big. He’s a problem. He can be a problem in this league, if he stays consistent. He was their offense. He made a lot of plays.”Pryor switched positions a year ago to keep his career afloat. On Sunday he bailed out the Browns, who had to start the rookie quarterback Cody Kessler after Robert Griffin III and Josh McCown were injured in consecutive weeks.Browns Coach Hue Jackson designed several packages to take advantage of Pryor’s skills. He took 14 snaps behind center, caught eight passes as Kessler’s primary target and had the Dolphins’ attention every time he left the huddle.Get the big sports news, highlights and analysis from Times journalists, with distinctive takes on games and some behind-the-scenes surprises, delivered to your inbox every week.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.Pryor’s ability to run and pass kept Miami’s defense off-balance and allowed the Browns to break off several big plays. Beyond his physical performance, Pryor impressed his teammates by handling the responsibilities of multiple positions.“It’s amazing,” the Pro Bowl left tackle Joe Thomas said. “Learning quarterback, running back, receiver, it takes a lot of mental gymnastics to be able to go out there and do it the right way.”Thomas added, “People have to consider him a serious, legitimate threat at receiver, and you have to try and stop him there, so it kind of opens up the rest of his game.”Jackson is the one who recognized Pryor’s potential as a wide receiver.They spent one season together in Oakland, where Pryor later started 10 games but did not convince the Raiders he was their future quarterback. Pryor wound up with the Cincinnati Bengals in 2015, where Jackson was in his second season as offensive coordinator. Pryor’s football future was in doubt, but at Jackson’s urging he switched to wide receiver.AdvertisementStill, he was waived by the Bengals and the Browns last year, but he signed with Cleveland in December and finished the season with one reception.Now, with the rookie Corey Coleman out with a broken hand and Josh Gordon suspended, Pryor is the team’s No. 1 wide receiver.Jackson believes that Pryor is just starting.“He hasn’t even scratched the surface of what he is,” Jackson said. “His best football is still ahead of him — by far.”Redskins Coach Jay Gruden said Pryor’s versatility had given his team much to consider.When the Browns line up Sunday, the Washington defense’s first assignment will be the same on every play.“We just have to find out where he is,” Gruden said. “He could be a receiver. They could throw him double passes, and he can be in the backfield and be a quarterback, a lot of things he can do. There is not a lot he can’t.”A version of this article appears in print on September 29, 2016, on Page B13 of the New York edition with the headline: Once a Quarterback, Now a Jack-of-All-Trades.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.