
Keeping Score By                     
FILIP BONDY

OCT. 21, 2016
Every mistrustful, jittery Cubs fan requires reassurance right about now that this moment in time is not merely another cruel tease. The Cubs have dropped six match points in a row in my lifetime, whenever they needed just one more victory to reach the World Series. I wear the scars on my knuckles, from the time I slammed my hand into a low ceiling in despair.For moral support, I am regularly rereading a letter of solicitation from an investment firm that thought I had money to burn. “Past performance is no guarantee of future results,” it states.That’s what I want to hear, what I want to believe. Consistently horrid past performances mean nothing. The Cubs are not necessarily ill-fated. They lead, three games to two, in the best-of-seven National League Championship Series. Their bats are alive again. They’ve got solid pitching. They’ve won 109 of 170 games this year, including the playoffs, for a winning percentage of .641. If the Los Angeles Dodgers were just an average opponent, the chances of the Cubs losing both games would be less than 13 percent.So argues the math and the letter in the drawer. But then there are three men who beg to differ: Clayton Kershaw, Rich Hill and George Santayana.AdvertisementKershaw and Hill are the Dodgers’ Game 6 and, if necessary, Game 7 starters, and they have already shut out the Cubs in this series. Santayana is the Spanish-born philosopher who first warned, “Those who cannot remember the past are condemned to repeat it.”AdvertisementI can do nothing to neutralize the two aces from Los Angeles. But I can remind the Cubs of their very specific failures in the past, to inoculate them for the challenge ahead. This is what they must remember and avoid, in order not to repeat:The Fatigue Factor in 1969The Cubs were 84-52 on Sept. 2, 1969, then dropped 18 of their next 25 games to squander the National League East, to the Mets, and a probable trip to the World Series.Virtually everyone on that Hall of Fame-laden roster contributed to the downfall. The team simply ran out of gas from overuse. Leo Durocher employed five of his regulars in more than 150 games. Ferguson Jenkins and Bill Hands threw 300 or more innings apiece because Durocher didn’t really believe in middle relief.Joe Maddon hasn’t been shy about using the same lineup guys, either, even while he switches around their positions. Anthony Rizzo, Addison Russell and Kris Bryant each played in more than 150 games in the regular season, while Ben Zobrist and Jason Heyward each appeared in more than 140. But these men are younger than the 1969 versions of Ernie Banks, Ron Santo and Billy Williams. Meanwhile, Jake Arrieta pitched a more modest 197 ⅓ innings, while Kyle Hendricks threw 190 and John Lackey 188 ⅓.Get the big sports news, highlights and analysis from Times journalists, with distinctive takes on games and some behind-the-scenes surprises, delivered to your inbox every week.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.The 1984 Choke JobThis one is a bit more applicable. A well-rounded Cubs team traveled to Jack Murphy Stadium in San Diego with a 2-0 playoff lead over the Padres, needing just one victory in the next three games to advance to the World Series.Like this Cubs team, that one owned a dominant closer, Lee Smith. But in Game 4 in San Diego, with the score tied in the ninth inning, Smith gave up a two-run, game-ending home run to Steve Garvey. In Game 5, the Cubs staked their ace, Rick Sutcliffe, to a 3-0 lead that held up through six innings. The death knell arrived in the seventh, when Tim Flannery’s ground ball squirted between Leon Durham’s legs at first base, leading to a four-run Padres rally.Durham, in his own way, was Bill Buckner before Buckner became Buckner in 1986. And yes, Buckner sometimes played first base for the Cubs in 1984 before he was traded in midseason to Boston.Rizzo, an above-average fielder, must keep his eye on all sharp grounders.The Implosion of 2003That 2003 club had a solid, four-deep rotation set for the playoffs, not too different from the current version. Then Steve Bartman interfered with a foul ball in Game 6 of the N.L.C.S. when the Cubs held a 3-2 series lead and a 3-0 lead in the eighth inning.AdvertisementThe loss wasn’t Bartman’s fault, of course. The Cubs’ shortstop, Alex Gonzalez, booted a double-play grounder. The Cubs’ bullpen turned a tie game into a disaster. And then the Cubs lost again in Game 7 after handing Kerry Wood a 5-3 lead through four innings. Just as in 1984, a top pitcher couldn’t bring them home.Frankly, neither Hendricks nor Arrieta has looked sharp in this series. Pitches are floating up in the zone. The two pitchers’ control is off, and they’re both all about control. In Game 7, if necessary, I’d go with Jon Lester on two days’ rest for as long as possible.2015: Tough Times Against Tough PitchersMany of these same Cubs looked completely overwhelmed by the Mets’ starters when Chicago was swept in last year’s N.L.C.S. Against Matt Harvey, Noah Syndergaard, Jacob deGrom and Bartolo Colon, the Cubs scored all of eight runs and batted .164. The Dodgers do not have that kind of rotation depth, but Kershaw and Hill are arguably a better one-two punch than anything the Mets offered.There was a lot of undisciplined flailing in the 2015 N.L.C.S. by many of these same Cubs batters, including Rizzo, Bryant and Javier Baez. Maybe these young guys have grown as hitters, but that surely wasn’t the case in Games 2 and 3.Excuse me while I read that investment letter again.A version of this article appears in print on October 22, 2016, on Page D3 of the New York edition with the headline: Santayana? Couldn’t Hit the Slider.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.See More »