By BEN BERKONMARCH 4, 2016
Jenrry Mejia, the Mets pitcher who was permanently barred from baseball after three failed doping tests, says that he was the victim of a witch hunt by Major League Baseball and that the players’ union did not properly advocate on his behalf.Baseball’s drug-testing program, which is jointly administered with the players’ union, caught Mejia using anabolic steroids three times. He was penalized twice in 2015, then received the permanent suspension last month.But Mejia, 26, said in an interview Thursday that he was guilty only of the first doping offense. After the second positive test, which Mejia said was inaccurate, he was pressured by Major League Baseball officials to share information about his doping connections, he said.Mejia said that baseball officials told him that if he appealed the punishment for the second doping offense, “they will find a way to find a third positive,” Mejia, who is from the Dominican Republic, said through an interpreter. “I felt there was a conspiracy against me. I feel that they were trying to find something to bring me down in my career.”AdvertisementBaseball officials denied making any such threats. “No one at M.L.B. or representing M.L.B. has met with Mejia regarding any of these drug violations,” Pat Courtney, a league spokesman, said.The players’ union and Mejia’s agent, Peter Greenberg, declined to comment, citing confidentiality provisions in baseball’s drug-testing policy.AdvertisementBaseball’s antidoping protocols allow for Mejia to apply for reinstatement after a year, in 2017. But the minimum penalty is two years, so regardless of Commissioner Rob Manfred’s decision, Mejia would not be eligible to play again until 2018.His hopes of reinstatement will probably not be helped by his claims that Major League Baseball fabricated a positive drug test to get him out of the sport.Mejia also said that he asked the players’ union for help, but representatives told him there were no grounds for an appeal.“The association should have done more,” Mejia said, adding that he thought the union “should have been there to defend me — because that’s what they’re there for. They should have found something to appeal for.”Mejia originally signed with the Mets when he was a teenager, in 2007. He made his major league debut in 2010 amid expectations that he would become an impact pitcher. But in the seasons that followed he was plagued by arm injuries and at one point had Tommy John surgery.Get the big sports news, highlights and analysis from Times journalists, with distinctive takes on games and some behind-the-scenes surprises, delivered to your inbox every week.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.Only in 2014 did he find real success as a Met, as their new closer, making 28 saves in 31 chances and even developing a signature gesture — raising both hands over his head and bringing them down as if he were breaking a board over his knee — when he recorded the final out of a game.AdvertisementBut then came 2015 and the onset of his positive drug tests. Although he now admits taking an illegal substance in the first instance, he did not at the time.And the substances he tested positive for have long been easy to detect in a urine sample. Two of his positive tests involved boldenone, a steroid that has been used in horse racing.Over his career, Mejia has earned about $3.6 million, but he will forfeit his $2.4 million salary for 2016. The Mets had re-signed him to a new deal last December, even though he had already tested positive twice and was not going to be eligible to return to the team until late July of this season, after serving out the 99 games remaining from his second suspension.Mejia has retained a lawyer, Vincent White, who specializes in labor disputes.White said he was unsure what, if any, legal avenues Mejia would pursue. “For us, this is a collective bargaining issue, this is a labor issue, this is an employer who we see perhaps overstepping,” White said.Mejia said he had no regrets. “I wouldn’t change a thing,” he said. “If the situation was meant to happen, then it was meant to happen. If God wanted it that way, it’s going to happen.”He added: “All you have to do is admit your guilt when you are guilty. And stay positive when you’re not.”A version of this article appears in print on March 5, 2016, on Page D1 of the New York edition with the headline: Mejia Says Lifetime Ban Was Orchestrated .  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.See More »