AdvertisementSupported byBy The Associated PressBERKELEY, Calif. — Savannah Rennie realized last summer that something was terribly wrong.Her health concerns began back home and continued once she arrived in Berkeley to start classes at the University of California and prepare to join the Golden Bears volleyball team as a freshman. She had unbearable headaches and high fevers. Nausea and loss of appetite. Soreness and then pain in her abdomen. Body aches and weight loss.Not just the flu. Rennie knew that much.Months later, she is headed to Indiana University to await a liver transplant because of a rare disease that has kept her off the court for Cal and thrown her a curveball at 19. She remains steadfast, determined to play volleyball again, surrounded by a campus community that has supported her through the tears, the missed classes, the isolation and the fear of leaving her friends behind with no firm return date.“Volleyball’s my rock,” Rennie told her doctors, who assured her that her chances of playing again were strong. “I will be back. People are like, ‘It’s goodbye.’ It’s not bye. See you later.”In September, Rennie was found to have congenital hepatic fibrosis with portal hypertension. The disease typically affects newborns and the elderly, not people her age.Rennie tells herself each day just to stay healthy enough that she will be ready the moment a liver becomes available.“Last year at this time, I was perfectly normal,” she said. “I look normal on the outside. People say, ‘You look great.’ But I’m not, at all, by no means, nowhere near O.K. Every day, I pray that I don’t get sick again. That’s how it’s been since the summer. Physically, it’s just a toll because I don’t know ever what’s going to happen.”Recovery time after the surgery is about three months — less than that for reconstruction of an anterior cruciate ligament, Rennie noted.The three-time beach volleyball gold medalist Kerri Walsh Jennings has offered support on Twitter, as have the indoor volleyball Olympians Jordan Larson, Kelsey Robinson and Tori Dixon.“We are all behind you!” Larson wrote. The gold-medal-winning beach and indoor volleyball star Karch Kiraly sent prayers and thoughts from the Olympics-bound women’s national team, which he coaches.Rennie’s mother started a GoFundMe page to raise money for the medical expenses. The effort had raised more than $70,000 toward the $100,000 goal as of Thursday night. Steve Kerr, coach of the Golden State Warriors, and his wife, Margot, donated $1,500.Once at Indiana University, Rennie will wait. She will be treated by a renowned liver transplant doctor — and she has been told the process should not take more than a few months. In the Bay Area, by comparison, it could be several years, she said.Last weekend, she visited basketball games and the baseball field to root for fellow student-athletes.“There’s no place I’d rather be than here,” Rennie said through tears at Haas Pavilion. “Even though I can’t play volleyball or do anything like that, being in practice and being in weights is what drives me, like, ‘I want to do this again.’ It keeps me going. It’s my little chunk of time in the day I’m super happy.”Rennie reminds herself that she will soon be on the path to recovery. And, she hopes, back to playing volleyball for the Bears come fall.“I’m just preparing myself for the comeback that’s not going to be easy,” she said. “I just have to keep reminding myself this is for more than just myself. It’s for my family, my friends, my sisters on the volleyball court, my coaches, my community, my college, for anybody who has a transplant or needs one. To represent a liver disease that’s very rare. I want to make it a point that anything’s possible. You can come back from anything if you really want to, and not to give up.”Advertisement