By BEN ROTHENBERGJAN. 18, 2017
MELBOURNE, Australia — The second round of the Australian Open features a rematch of a recent Grand Slam final, with Serena Williams and Lucie Safarova facing off Thursday for the first time since the 2015 French Open final. At first glance, a third-round match might also look like a Grand Slam rematch.In last year’s United States Open final, Angelique Kerber defeated Karolina Pliskova. On Friday, the top-seeded Kerber will face Pliskova’s twin, Kristyna.Kerber and Karolina Pliskova, the No. 5 seed in Melbourne, have established one of the more active rivalries atop the women’s game, meeting in four finals in the last 19 months. Kerber won three of the matches in three sets, while Pliskova dominated in a 6-3, 6-1 win in Cincinnati.Kristyna Pliskova and Kerber have never played each other, although Kerber mistakenly said that she thought they had. Such mix-ups happen often, but there are clear differences between the two, including Karolina being right-handed and Kristyna left-handed.Advertisement“We are twins,” Kristyna said, “but we don’t have the same coach, and we play different styles, different tournaments. There are differences, but I’m trying to learn from her a bit, so we talk a lot.”Jiri Fencl, the coach of Lucie Hradecka of the Czech Republic, suggested that the contrasting styles of the twins, who are also from the Czech Republic, might be converging as they adapt to each other’s strengths.Advertisement“I actually don’t think they are mirror images,” Fencl said. “Gamewise, they are actually very different. But for me, the interesting fact is that they are working towards to be a bit more like the other one.“I think Kristyna made huge progress on staying in points, working for points when her nature used to be to go for it early,” Fencl said. “On the other hand, Karolina added a more killer 1-2 punch into her game, and that wasn’t always her thing. She liked to build points and use her tennis IQ.”The sisters, 24, were standouts as juniors. In 2010, both won junior titles at Grand Slam events, Karolina at the Australian Open and Kristyna at Wimbledon.Both have powerful serves. Karolina led the WTA last season with 530 aces; Kristyna was fifth, but had three of the top six single-match ace totals, including a record 31 in a loss at last year’s Australian Open.But their career trajectories have diverged. Fifth-ranked Karolina began to solidify herself as a top player in 2015 and reached the top five for the first time last year after reaching the United States Open final, beating Venus Williams and Serena Williams en route.Get the big sports news, highlights and analysis from Times journalists, with distinctive takes on games and some behind-the-scenes surprises, delivered to your inbox every week.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.Kristyna, meanwhile, struggled to stay within the top 100. After Karolina reached her first Grand Slam final in New York, Kristyna surged. She has won 21 of 26 matches since, a lower-level tournament in Dailan, China, and her first WTA title in Tashkent, Uzbekistan. Her ranking has risen to No. 58 from No. 122.AdvertisementKristyna was not directly inspired by watching Karolina’s United States Open final.“I was in China, so I was asleep,” Kristyna said. “I was at a tournament. I had my own tournament, so I don’t really care what she’s doing at that time.”Although they remain close, Kristyna balked at a question about possible frustration over her sister’s career outpacing hers.“I’m not going to answer this one,” she said. “Next question?”More important questions will come Friday when she faces Kerber, the defending champion who defeated 51st-ranked Lesia Tsurenko and 89th-ranked Carina Witthöeft in her first two matches. Kerber had won only one of three matches this season before arriving at Melbourne.After Kristyna won her second-round match Wednesday against 27th-seeded Irina-Camelia Begu to set up the meeting with Kerber, she said she had asked her sister for advice, hoping that Karolina would soon respond to the messages that had gone unanswered to that point.“I hope she’s on her phone soon,” Kristyna said, laughing.A version of this article appears in print on January 19, 2017, on Page B13 of the New York edition with the headline: Kerber Encounters a Pliskova Test, but Not the Usual One.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.