AdvertisementSupported byBy Andrew DasThe M.L.S. season that opens Sunday will be the league’s 21st, a fitting number for a year that will feature the debut of the 21-year-old striker Jordan Morris. Morris, who joined the Seattle Sounders in January after a brief flirtation with Germany’s Werder Bremen, was the most noteworthy pickup for M.L.S. in a budget-conscious off-season. A former Stanford all-American, he arrives with a salary-cap-friendly contract and the unenviable task of replacing Obafemi Martins, a highlight-reel regular who was lured away by the deeper pockets of China’s Super League.Morris’s ability to forge an attacking connection with Clint Dempsey in Seattle will have major implications for both the Sounders’ title hopes and the United States national team’s 2018 World Cup qualifying campaign. But it is not the only story line to follow this season.■ If M.L.S. made waves in 2015 for its splashy signings of a handful of multimillion-dollar players, this off-season was more about buying off the sale rack, and the Los Angeles Galaxy did most of the shopping. The Galaxy added three veteran Europeans — the former England defender Ashley Cole and the bone-crunching tacklers Nigel de Jong and Jelle Van Damme — to a team that already had Steven Gerrard, Giovani dos Santos and Robbie Keane in attack. If anyone can make it work, it is Coach Bruce Arena, but the early returns have been mixed: The Galaxy were thumped, 4-0, by Santos Laguna of Mexico last week on their way out of the Concacaf Champions League.■ New York City F.C. enters its second season with its second coach, the former World Cup winner Patrick Vieira of France, and the expectation of a playoff berth. (The team’s failure to make the postseason in Year 1 is most likely the main reason that Vieira, and not Jason Kreis, is coaching in Year 2.) Vieira, for one, seems to think a playoff spot is possible. “I believe last year the team didn’t play at their level of potential,” he told Goal.com during the preseason. But N.Y.C.F.C. allowed 58 goals in 2015, tied for the most in the league, and got forgettable partial seasons from the expensive signings Frank Lampard and Andrea Pirlo. Both are expected to be better after a full preseason, but the verdict on Lampard, 37, will have to wait: He will most likely miss Sunday’s opener at Chicago with a calf strain.■ Portland and Columbus kick off the season with a rematch of last year’s M.L.S. Cup final, won by the Timbers. But the team to watch this season may be F.C. Dallas, which with investments in youth development and smart signings has built one of the league’s strongest rosters. Coach Oscar Pareja helped stock the Dallas academy after retiring as a player, and now he is reaping the rewards; in one game last year, Dallas, which won the Western Conference, started five former academy players. Talented young players, arranged around a midfield led by the Argentine playmaker Mauro Diaz and the speedy Colombian Fabian Castillo, could make this Dallas’s year — but only if it can find a goal-poacher to convert all the chances that will be created.Advertisement