By VICTOR MATHERMARCH 4, 2016
The Ultimate Fighting Championship has two of its biggest new stars in action on Saturday in Las Vegas. Unfortunately, neither will be in the fights everyone was hoping for.Conor McGregor, the flamboyant fighter who has rapidly risen to be the U.F.C.’s biggest star, is the headliner.In December, McGregor, known as the Notorious, faced the longtime featherweight champion José Aldo, who at the time was ranked as the best pound-for-pound fighter in the U.F.C. He knocked him out in just 13 seconds, cementing his superstardom.“I believe there are many great fighters,” the brash McGregor said afterward. “But when you combine the whole package, I think there’s nobody better than me.”AdvertisementHow could McGregor top a victory like that over a legend? How about trying to become the first person in U.F.C. history to hold two belts simultaneously?AdvertisementPlans were announced for McGregor to move up in weight and challenge the lightweight champion, Rafael dos Anjos. But that superfight was derailed last month by a foot injury to dos Anjos. McGregor said that both Aldo and the former champion Frankie Edgar turned down a chance to fight him on short notice, leaving the U.F.C. to reach down to the No. 5 contender Nate Diaz to fill in for a nontitle fight.The two combatants have tried to stoke the fire with some mouthing off, and Diaz is a tough customer. But he has lost three of his last five bouts and is likely to struggle against the ascendant McGregor.Get the big sports news, highlights and analysis from Times journalists, with distinctive takes on games and some behind-the-scenes surprises, delivered to your inbox every week.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.No fight sent bigger shock waves through the sport than Holly Holm’s stunning upset of Ronda Rousey in November, and a rematch was expected to be one of the highlights of 2016. That fight is still possible for the end of the year, but with Rousey recovering from her loss, and filming a movie, “Road House,” next month, it will not happen this weekend.Instead, Holm’s first defense will be against the No. 2 contender, Miesha Tate. That bout should be far less exciting. Tate has lost to Rousey twice, though she has won her last four fights.McGregor is a 4-1 favorite in his bout on Saturday, and Holm is a 3-1 favorite, so while upsets are not impossible, they are unlikely. If fans have to sit through two blowouts, they will be forgiven for thinking about the bouts that might have been.We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.