By TYLER KEPNERMAY 17, 2016
The National League championship ring is big, Daniel Murphy said on Tuesday, and very nice. Wearing it would be bad form around the Washington Nationals — considering the Mets logo on the face — but Murphy would have every right to do so, if he chose. More than anyone else in uniform, he was responsible for the Mets’ march to the World Series last fall.“I made it clear to Murph that without his substantial contribution, none of us would be wearing that ring today,” General Manager Sandy Alderson said.Murphy said he appreciated the words but had not done it alone, despite his .421 average and seven homers in the N.L. playoffs. There were too many others to name, Murphy said, but he listed a few, beginning with the Mets’ foundation: their extraordinary starting rotation.That group is showing signs of vulnerability lately, though most teams would welcome such problems. The Mets’ young starters — all bargain-priced — have helped the rotation to a 3.30 E.R.A., after Noah Syndergaard’s seven shutout innings in Tuesday’s 2-0 victory.AdvertisementYet Jacob deGrom has not been putting hitters away, Steven Matz missed his last start with elbow discomfort and Matt Harvey has been a mystery. Manager Terry Collins acknowledged Tuesday that he wondered if this was the new normal. He is trying to give extra rest to some starters now, hoping to trigger the lightning of October.Alderson spoke about the pitchers, too, but not before talking about his own health concerns, which are far more serious. Alderson has an unspecified form of cancer, and he said he had surgery for it last Wednesday as part of the plan his doctors devised last December.Advertisement“The surgery itself was, I’m going to say, fantastically successful,” Alderson said. “The doctors were able to do everything they had hoped to do and were able to avoid everything they had hoped to avoid. So from that standpoint, everything worked out extremely well. From where we were to where we are today — still on a road to full recovery.”Alderson, 68, said he would be at Citi Field for some portion of every day, and is in regular contact with ownership and his baseball operations staff. There was no reason to push himself to work full days now, Alderson said, but he could if he had to, and plans to soon resume his regular schedule. He said doctors were discussing whether he needs further chemotherapy, but his focus now is recovering from the operation.“We know he’s not feeling well, and yet that’s never been in the way,” Collins said. “I’ve never been around somebody stronger that’s ever been through something like this before. Ever. The fact that he’s here today after he just had surgery a few days ago tells you how tough he is. It was great to see him, we’re glad he’s doing well and we can’t wait till he’s back here full time.”Alderson’s decision to let Murphy leave last winter, without a multiyear offer, has not hurt the Mets much. Murphy’s replacement at second base, Neil Walker, has 10 home runs, and the long-term heir, Dilson Herrera, is hitting .303 at Class AAA.But Murphy, who was 1 for 3 on Tuesday, is leading the majors with a .399 average — unsustainable, to be sure, but a sign that his playoff joy ride might have a lasting impact. He said he continued to emphasize the adjustments he made with the Mets hitting coach Kevin Long: moving closer to the plate to attack outside pitches and trying to pull balls in the air rather than serving singles to left.Get the big sports news, highlights and analysis from Times journalists, with distinctive takes on games and some behind-the-scenes surprises, delivered to your inbox every week.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.“I think the playoffs helped elevate him to another level,” Nationals Manager Dusty Baker said. “His confidence is at an all-time high. He has an idea, and he has a plan on what he’s looking for.”AdvertisementBesides the ring, the Mets gave Murphy a video tribute before Tuesday’s game, and he said he was still close to his old teammates. He sent Matz a text message after learning that the pitcher got good news on his elbow, and has spoken with the injured catcher Travis d’Arnaud. Murphy also said he was looking forward to meeting deGrom’s infant son on Wednesday.“You spend almost a decade in the Mets’ organization, so I don’t know if that’s something I will completely wash off,” said Murphy, who signed a three-year, $37.5 million contract with Washington. “The relationships my wife and our family were able to build will go far beyond baseball. But the red gets more comfortable each day.”Life with the Nationals is just fine, Murphy said. He did not have a yard in New York but has one now in Alexandria, Va., and his son loves it. The biggest surprise, he said, is the extent of Bryce Harper’s talent; for a baseball addict like Murphy, watching Harper every day is a joy.As for his gaudy average, Murphy said, he is simply looking for a pitch in his zone “and trying to hit it as hard as humanly possible.” He had only five homers before this series, and may never again combine the average and power he showed in the playoffs. But those shining moments made a lasting impact, reflected in the N.L. ring.As grand as it is, Murphy knows, it could have been even more impressive.“It was a fun ride,” he said. “I wish I had cracked a couple of homers in the World Series.”A version of this article appears in print on May 18, 2016, on Page B11 of the New York edition with the headline: Murphy Visits Mets, and Gets Ring and Video Tribute to Go.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.