By THE ASSOCIATED PRESSMAY 17, 2016
Jim McMillian, a former Columbia University star who helped the Los Angeles Lakers to a 33-game winning streak and the 1972 N.B.A. championship as a second-year pro playing with Wilt Chamberlain and Jerry West, died on Monday in Winston-Salem, N.C. He was 68.The cause was complications of heart failure, a sister-in-law, Denise Sheridan, said.The Lakers made McMillian the 13th overall pick in the first round of the 1970 draft. He was also drafted in the first round by the New York Nets of the American Basketball Association, but he chose the Lakers. He averaged 15.3 points during three seasons in Los Angeles.McMillian, a 6-foot-5 forward, was a key member of the Lakers’ first championship team after their move from Minneapolis. Replacing Elgin Baylor, who had retired, he averaged 19.1 points a game in the playoffs. Besides Chamberlain and West, the team’s roster included Gail Goodrich, Happy Hairston, Keith Erickson and Pat Riley. The Lakers were coached by Bill Sharman.Despite his relative youth, McMillian fit in seamlessly with his veteran teammates. “Jim could run and fill the lanes with the best of them,” Erickson said. “He had a great 15-foot jump shot” and was “a perfect complement on our team.”AdvertisementAfter McMillian played one more season in Los Angeles, the Lakers traded him to the Buffalo Braves for Elmore Smith. McMillian remained in Buffalo for three seasons. He later played two seasons with the Knicks and one with the Portland Trail Blazers before ending his nine-year N.B.A. career in 1979.Get the big sports news, highlights and analysis from Times journalists, with distinctive takes on games and some behind-the-scenes surprises, delivered to your inbox every week.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.After leaving the league, he moved to Italy and played two years for a team in Bologna. He returned to the United States to work in a wholesale retail business before founding his own clothing business. He later worked for a clothing manufacturing company.AdvertisementJames M. McMillian was born on March 11, 1948, in Raeford, N.C., and grew up in Brooklyn, where he starred at Thomas Jefferson High School before going on to Columbia.He led Columbia to a 63-14 record during three seasons and as a sophomore starred in the Lions’ last N.C.A.A. tournament appearance, in 1968. In a three-game tournament run, he averaged 17 points and 11 rebounds.Columbia lost to Davidson in overtime in the East Regional semifinal before beating St. Bonaventure in the consolation game. McMillian is second on the university’s career scoring list with 22.9 points a game and still holds the marks for field goals in a season (253) and a career (677).Nicknamed Jimmy Mac, McMillian was a three-time all-American and All-Ivy League player.Jonathan Schiller, chairman of Columbia’s board of trustees and a former teammate of his, said McMillian would “always be remembered as one of the most gifted student-athletes to attend Columbia University.”He is survived by his wife of 43 years, Alexis; his son, Aron; his daughters, Erica and Emon; and seven grandchildren.A version of this article appears in print on May 18, 2016, on Page B16 of the New York edition with the headline: Jim McMillian, 68, Key Player for Lakers Title Team.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.