By BILLY WITZMAY 16, 2016
PHOENIX — When Conor Mullee was approached at his locker on Monday, he apologized for not being able to speak with a reporter at the moment. There was a pitchers’ meeting in four minutes, and he could not afford to be late.“I’m just trying to keep my head down and do my work and figure out how things work here,” Mullee said when he returned about 20 minutes later.He was not the only player in the Yankees’ clubhouse this month to face a steep learning curve. For all the familiar names there, like C. C. Sabathia, Alex Rodriguez, Mark Teixeira, Jacoby Ellsbury and Carlos Beltran, there has also been a steady stream of little-known players like Mullee, 28, a rookie who overcame three elbow operations before being called up last week from Class AAA Scranton/Wilkes-Barre.The Yankees have used the last few spots on their 25-man roster to shuffle players to and from Scranton/Wilkes-Barre, not only because of injuries — in addition to Rodriguez, Sabathia and Luis Severino, who are on the disabled list, Ellsbury and Teixeira have missed several games — but also to fill specific needs game to game.AdvertisementWhen Ellsbury was hurt and Beltran replaced Rodriguez as the designated hitter, the Yankees were short in the outfield. So they recalled Ben Gamel and sent down pitcher James Pazos, who had been called up the day before.AdvertisementWith the team’s bullpen depleted, Gamel was sent down on Thursday, and reliever Tyler Olson was recalled. The next day, with two left-handed pitchers awaiting, Olson was sent down, and Gary Sanchez, a right-handed, power-hitting catcher, was summoned.Sanchez went 0 for 4 on Friday and was sent back down, and Mullee arrived Saturday morning, along with pitcher Chad Green, after Severino was placed on the disabled list.Green — who was acquired in the off-season in a deal that sent Justin Wilson, a valuable bullpen cog, to Detroit — started on Monday night against the Arizona Diamondbacks, making his major league debut.Another move could be made Tuesday, with Green most likely out of commission for several days and the Yankees in need of another position player because the series against the Diamondbacks is in a National League ballpark. But that player — Rob Refsnyder or Aaron Judge, perhaps — may not be up for long because Rodriguez is due to come off the disabled list on Thursday.Several hours before Monday’s game, Green stepped out of the dugout with Mullee to look around the ballpark. It was a Toto-we’re-not-in-Scranton moment for the two of them.“You try to control those ‘ah’ moments,” said Mullee, who then noted that his locker in the visitors’ clubhouse was between Andrew Miller’s and Aroldis Chapman’s. “It’s a little bit different here.”Gamel, Sanchez, Olson, Pazos and Green all spent most of spring training with the Yankees, and Mullee got into two spring games. But few of them have the confidence to chat up the more established major leaguers.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.“It can be intimidating walking into a room where there’s so many big names,” said outfielder Brett Gardner, who was called up for the first time in 2008, into a locker room that included Derek Jeter, Mariano Rivera, Rodriguez and Jorge Posada.AdvertisementThe backup catcher Austin Romine, who spent virtually all of the last two seasons at Scranton/Wilkes-Barre, now serves as something like a concierge for the newcomers, dragging Gamel to the auxiliary batting cages in Baltimore and being a familiar presence for the pitchers, most of whom threw to him in the minor leagues.“Everybody that comes up, I know what it’s like,” Romine said. “You just talk to them. When anybody gets called up, it’s not like you necessarily fit in. I think everybody remembers what that’s like, the emotions, what you’re thinking about.”Gardner spent a little more than three weeks with the Yankees in his first stint. Despite the welcoming presence of Johnny Damon, he was hitting just .153 when he was sent back down, with the team acquiring Xavier Nady just before the trading deadline. After he was recalled in mid-August, Gardner batted .294, and he has been a fixture since.“I think I just knew what to expect,” Gardner said. “That’s one of the things the Yankees do a good job of: bringing a lot of guys to big league camp to get them used to it and feel more comfortable. That’s how you get the best out of young guys, is making them feel comfortable.”This year, few of the young players have made an impact in their cameos. Gamel and Sanchez did not hit in their brief opportunities, Olson did not even get into a game in his most recent stint, and Mullee had not yet pitched entering Monday. Pazos was sent down without pitching — on his birthday.Manager Joe Girardi said the experience — even if it was fleeting — was helpful for the young players.“At some point you’re probably going to need them again, and each time, I think, they come up, they feel more comfortable and understand what they have to do to be successful up here,” Girardi said. “I’m sure they’ve had many friends tell them how great it is, but until you actually go through it — and then the other part is getting sent down, how difficult that is. Until you go through it, you don’t understand that as well.”A version of this article appears in print on May 17, 2016, on Page B11 of the New York edition with the headline: Constant Churn at Bottom of Yanks’ Roster.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.