
Keeping Score By                     
JAY SCHREIBER

MAY 15, 2016
So now the Mets are coming home to play the Washington Nationals on Tuesday in the first meeting this season between the two best teams in the National League East.Except for the inconvenient fact that the Mets are in third place, trailing the first-place Nationals and the surprising Philadelphia Phillies, and feeling a little down after going 4-7 on a long trip out West.The Mets still have a 21-16 record this season, a game and a half behind the Nationals, and things might have been better had they managed to beat the Rockies in Denver on Sunday to avoid a weekend sweep. Instead, they lost, 4-3.With Jacob deGrom on the mound, the Mets took a 3-2 lead into the bottom of the seventh. But with one out and a runner on second, Manager Terry Collins pulled deGrom and brought in Jim Henderson, who promptly surrendered a two-run pinch-hit homer to Ryan Raburn that gave the Rockies the lead, and the game.AdvertisementA half-inning later, the Mets had a rally of sorts going — Juan Lagares on second and Yoenis Cespedes on first with one out — when Lucas Duda hit a roller to Colorado third baseman Nolan Arenado.Arenado reached to tag Lagares as he ran toward third but clearly missed him, then threw to first to get Duda. The third-base umpire, Carlos Torres, did not signal that Lagares had run out of the baseline to dodge Arenado’s tag attempt, so it seemed he was safe at third, Cespedes was on second and there were two outs.However, the second-base umpire, Rob Drake, ruled that Lagares had indeed run out of the baseline and called him out. Double play, inning over and, shortly after, the game as well.Get the big sports news, highlights and analysis from Times journalists, with distinctive takes on games and some behind-the-scenes surprises, delivered to your inbox every week.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.Replays showed that Lagares appeared to have stayed in the baseline, but the call was not reviewable.It was that kind of weekend for the Mets. Drake was apparently wrong on Sunday, and on Saturday night, it was Torres, umpiring behind the plate, who hurt the Mets with a bad call. He ruled that the Rockies’ Tony Wolters had foul-tipped a two-strike pitch from the Mets’ Logan Verrett.AdvertisementReplays showed that Wolters had clearly swung and missed at a pitch in the dirt and should have been out. But a foul-tip ruling is not reviewable, either. Wolters, given another chance, hit a two-run, bases-loaded double that gave the Rockies a 5-1 lead.After that game, which the Mets lost, 7-4, Collins was steamed about the foul-tip call. On Sunday, after the ruling that went against Lagares, he was more subdued. Maybe he, and his team, were tapped out by the long trip.It was a trip that included a major highlight — the first home run of Bartolo Colon’s career, at the age of 42 — and a powerful performance by pitcher Noah Syndergaard, who beat the Los Angeles Dodgers in a game in which he also hit two home runs.But the trip also included disconcerting news: The left-hander Steven Matz’s arm was sore, so was David Wright’s shoulder, and Syndergaard had had his right elbow checked. Matz said on Saturday that he felt fine, but a medical exam awaits him in New York. Wright’s soreness could explain the low-intensity, submarine-style throws he now often makes to first base.Wright is not hitting much, either, but he does have a strong on-base percentage (.373) because he is drawing walks (25). Matz has been pitching well, and so has Syndergaard. DeGrom is 3-1 this season with a 2.50 earned run average after Sunday’s game, but he has not looked anywhere near as overpowering as he did in 2015, perhaps because he, like Matt Harvey, is dealing with the effects of a heavy workload last season.On Sunday, deGrom gave up four hits and struck out three batters. There were also a bunch of hard-hit balls that were caught.In other words, deGrom was decent, but nothing special. As are the third-place Mets.David Waldstein contributed reporting.A version of this article appears in print on May 16, 2016, on Page D5 of the New York edition with the headline: Mets Running Third in a 2-Team Race.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.See More »