By THE ASSOCIATED PRESSJAN. 19, 2017
MELBOURNE, Australia — Serena Williams kept her chase for an Open-era record 23rd major title on track with a 6-3, 6-4 victory over Lucie Safarova on Thursday night at the Australian Open.It was their first meeting since Williams won their French Open final in 2015.Safarova had saved nine match points in her first-round match, but there were no such theatrics in this one.Safarova double-faulted on break point in the seventh game of the second set, and Williams clinched the match three games later.Williams will play her fellow American Nicole Gibbs in the third round.“It’s never easy to play in the second round someone you’ve seen in the final of the biggest stage in tennis,” Williams said. “I’m happy to have gotten through it.”AdvertisementThird-ranked Agnieszka Radwanska was not so fortunate, losing her second-round match to Mirjana Lucic-Baroni, 6-3, 6-2. Radwanska reached the semifinals in Melbourne last year; Lucic-Baroni, ranked 79th, had not won an Australian Open match since 1998 until her first-round win this week.AdvertisementNineteen years was a long wait between victories. But Lucic-Baroni, 34, is getting used to moments like these since she returned to tennis full time in 2008 after a long hiatus.“I know I have some good tennis in me still,” she said. “That’s the reason I’m still out here at 34. I’m not a spring chicken for sure. I’m playing because I’m enjoying it and I know that I can still get some really big wins and really great results.”Comebacks are common these days in women’s tennis, but few players have worked harder — and longer — to get back to an elite level than Lucic-Baroni.She made a memorable debut at the 1998 Australian Open at age 15. She won only one match in singles, but she and Martina Hingis captured the doubles title, an achievement she still finds amazing.“Just kind of a little kid having fun,” she said. “Everything was normal, winning big matches, playing on big court, winning the title, like it’s nothing. It’s crazy when you look at it now.”After a remarkable run to the Wimbledon singles semifinals in 1999, however, Lucic-Baroni’s career suddenly fell apart. She stopped playing for several years and struggled financially.She returned to the lower-tier women’s tour in the late 2000s to try to resume her career, but it would take another couple of years before she would make it back to a Grand Slam tournament at Wimbledon in 2010. She upset second-seeded Simona Halep at the 2014 United States Open.AdvertisementWhen her power game is clicking, though, Lucic-Baroni can compete with anyone, as she proved against Radwanska. She smacked 33 winners to eight for Radwanska and wrapped up the match in 63 minutes by breaking the Pole for the sixth time.“I went in there with a game plan today to win the match,” she said. “I didn’t go to see, enjoy the court. I’m way too old and I’ve been around way too long to just gain experience.”Get the big sports news, highlights and analysis from Times journalists, with distinctive takes on games and some behind-the-scenes surprises, delivered to your inbox every week.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.Now, she’ll try to back up her big win with another over 21-year-old Maria Sakkari of Greece in the third round.“I missed quite a few years on tour; I missed a lot,” she said. “I feel like this time around, I don’t really have anything left to prove to anybody. I’m just enjoying myself, playing for myself.”No. 28 Alizé Cornet and No. 31 Yulia Putintseva were the other seeded women to lose on Day 4.Among those advancing were the United States Open finalist Karolina Pliskova, the WTA Finals champion Dominika Cibulkova, the 2016 Australian Open semifinalist Johanna Konta, 14th-seeded Elena Vesnina, 16th-seeded Barbora Strycova and 22nd-seeded Daria Gavrilova, who is Australia’s last hope in the women’s draw.In a men’s draw shaken by No. 2 Novak Djokovic’s upset loss, ninth-seeded Rafael Nadal capped a long day with a 6-3, 6-1, 6-3 victory over Marcos Baghdatis, a finalist here in 2006.Both players have had late nights at Melbourne Park — Nadal losing the latest-finishing final in Grand Slam history; Baghdatis losing to Lleyton Hewitt in a third-round match in 2008 that finished at 4:34 a.m.Returning from an extended injury layoff, Nadal did not let this one get out of hand — finishing at 12:08 a.m.He will play No. 24 Alexander Zverev next. Others advancing included No. 3 Milos Raonic, No. 6 Gaël Monfils, No. 8 Dominic Thiem, No. 11 David Goffin, No. 13 Roberto Bautista Agut, No. 15 Grigor Dimitrov and No. 18 Richard Gasquet.AdvertisementNo. 20 Ivo Karlovic followed his tournament-record 84-game first-round win with a straight-sets victory over the wild-card entry Andrew Whittington.We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.