AdvertisementSupported byBy The Associated PressThe Chicago Cubs gave Theo Epstein, the club’s president for baseball operations, a five-year contract extension on Wednesday, rewarding him for an overhaul that has the franchise aiming for its first championship since 1908.The news of the extension came as the Cubs were wrapping up one of the best regular seasons in franchise history and had their fans believing that this might be the team to end a 108-year World Series title drought.“Our mission has not been accomplished yet,” said Epstein, who was in the final season of the five-year deal he signed when he left Boston in October 2011.ROSE MAKES HIS CASE AGAIN Pete Rose appealed directly to baseball’s Hall of Fame to restore his eligibility, arguing that the lifetime ban he agreed to in 1989 was never intended to keep him out of Cooperstown. The Hall of Fame changed its bylaws two years after Rose’s banishment.CYCLING TO VICTORY John Jaso hit for the cycle and drove in five runs to lead the host Pittsburgh Pirates over the Chicago Cubs, 8-4. The last Pirate to hit for the cycle was Daryle Ward on May 26, 2004, in St. Louis.AROUND THE MAJORS Kansas City, the reigning World Series champion, rallied past visiting Minnesota, 5-2, but was eliminated from postseason contention. Hyun Soo Kim hit a pinch-hit, two-run homer in the ninth, and Baltimore won at Toronto, 3-2, to move one game behind the Blue Jays in the American League wild-card race. Robinson Cano hit a three-run homer, and visiting Seattle beat Houston, 12-4, to stay in the A.L. wild-card hunt. Daniel Castro drove in three runs as host Atlanta beat Philadelphia, 12-2.Houston placed defensive end J. J. Watt, a three-time N.F.L. defensive player of the year, on injured reserve with a back injury that could keep him out for the rest of the year.Watt, who led the N.F.L. with 17 ½ sacks last season, had an operation in July to repair a herniated disk in his back. He was hurt again Thursday against New England.WORKING HIS BEAT Buffalo Coach Rex Ryan joined a conference call with reporters and New England receiver Julian Edelman to ask if Edelman would play quarterback on Sunday against the Bills. Ryan introduced himself as “Walt Patulski from The Buffalo News” — a reference to the Bills’ No. 1 draft pick in 1972 — and asked if Edelman, a college quarterback, would line up under center for the short-handed Patriots. Edelman demurred.N.F.L. RECEIVES DIVERSITY REPORT CARD The Institute for Diversity and Ethics in Sport gave the N.F.L. its seventh consecutive A for its racial hiring practices but a C+ for its efforts to hire women in 2016, its same grade as in 2015.SUPREME COURT ASKED AGAIN ABOUT CONCUSSIONS A second petition has been filed asking the United States Supreme Court to reject the $1 billion settlement of N.F.L. concussion lawsuits because of how it would treat current brain injuries compared with those diagnosed in the future. The petition was filed by players including the 1996 Super Bowl’s most valuable player, Larry Brown.Manchester City came from behind three times to draw, 3-3, with host Celtic in the Champions League, but the result ended City’s 10-game winning streak under its new coach, Pep Guardiola.City had won six matches in the Premier League, three in the Champions League and one in the English League Cup since Guardiola took over.AROUND THE CHAMPIONS LEAGUE A first-half goal by Yannick Carrasco lifted Atlético Madrid over Bayern Munich, 1-0. Bayern has not scored in its last four Champions League trips to Spain. Theo Walcott scored twice in the first half, and host Arsenal beat Basel, 2-0. Barcelona, without the injured Lionel Messi, rallied past host Borussia Mönchengladbach, 2-1. Napoli scored three goals in seven minutes and beat visiting Benfica, 4-2.Joshua Chetty, a South African player ranked No. 1,857 in the world, was barred from the sport for life for trying to fix matches. The Tennis Integrity Unit said that Chetty, 21, had offered a player $2,000 to underperform in a singles match and $600 in a doubles match during a Futures event in Stellenbosch, South Africa, in November 2015. That player rejected the offers and reported the matter.The San Antonio Stars won the No. 1 overall pick in April’s W.N.B.A. draft, giving a franchise that has won 15 games in the last two seasons a shot at a turnaround.Advertisement