By SCOTT CACCIOLAMARCH 4, 2016
BOSTON —  Carmelo Anthony was already having a difficult week before he showed up Friday at TD Garden with the rest of the Knicks. Where to begin?On Tuesday, toward the end of a blowout loss to the Portland Trail Blazers, Anthony told a heckler at Madison Square Garden to ask James L. Dolan, the team’s owner, for a refund. On Wednesday, the team issued an apology on Anthony’s behalf. On Thursday, Anthony expressed zero regret over his actions, and clarified that Dolan had commissioned the apology.So there he was for the 63rd game of a season that has soured, plying his usual trade — scoring, rebounding and even defending a bit — against the Celtics, a divisional rival on the rise. It was not a favorable situation for the Knicks, who found a sliver of sunshine before storm clouds gathered once again.Anthony misfired on a 27-footer at the buzzer as the Celtics escaped with a 105-104 victory to hand the Knicks their 16th loss in their last 19 games.AdvertisementIt was the final sequence in a series of late-game miscues committed by the Knicks (25-38), who blew an 8-point lead with less than four minutes to play. It was only a moral victory in the sense that they avoided getting blown out. Anthony finished with 30 points and 7 rebounds as the Knicks continued to free-fall.Advertisement“I thought we did everything but win the basketball game,” Anthony said after sitting in silence for 15 minutes on a trainer’s table in the locker room.Arron Afflalo added 17 points for the Knicks, and Kristaps Porzingis finished with 15 but watched most of the second half from the bench.Isaiah Thomas scored 32 points to lead the Celtics (38-25), and Jae Crowder added 20 — many of them late to help spur his team’s comeback.On most days, the Celtics are everything the Knicks aspire to be, all their energetic parts forming a unified whole. More important, they have shaped themselves into a contender under Coach Brad Stevens, who said before the game that he was still amused by his team. The Celtics are unpredictable. He never knows, he said, what they will do next.They were not at their best against the Knicks. The Celtics went into the second half trailing by 58-53, and they were nearly undone by shooting 4 of 20 from 3-point range for the game. When Langston Galloway scored on a layup late in the fourth quarter, the Knicks went ahead by 8.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.But it was only a matter of time before their fragile chemistry crumpled like an accordion.The Celtics mounted a rally that included back-to-back buckets by Crowder in transition. Anthony later managed to put the Knicks back on top, 104-103, by hitting a turnaround jumper with 21.4 seconds left. But Avery Bradley cut right to the hoop for a layup with 17.7 seconds remaining, giving the Celtics a 1-point lead.And while the Celtics had a foul to give, Anthony did not attack the basket until time was winding down. Crowder deliberately fouled him with 3.3 seconds left, forcing the Knicks to reset their offense by inbounding the ball. Making matters worse, the Knicks were out of timeouts — and Kurt Rambis, the interim coach, said he had trouble shouting instructions over the din of the crowd.Anthony had no choice but to launch a contested shot from 27 feet, and the ball caromed wildly off the backboard.Advertisement“That’s on me for not having enough timeouts at the end of a close ballgame,” Rambis said, “and not being able to get them organized to get a high-quality look. I feel bad for the guys because they did so many good things out there.”At the team’s morning shootaround, Anthony told reporters, for the umpteenth time, that the season had morphed into a psychological and physical test — his frustration officially a theme at this stage. In some ways, he said, the team’s recent stretch of futility has been even more trying for him than last season.Once upon a time, Anthony was a perennial presence in the playoffs, making 10 straight postseason appearances — with the Denver Nuggets, and then in his first three seasons in New York. But barring a miracle of biblical proportions, the Knicks are poised to miss out on the playoffs for the third straight season. Anthony said it was tough to accept.“I do look at my peers and say, ‘Damn, what am I doing wrong?’ ” he told reporters before the game, referring to friends like LeBron James of the Cleveland Cavaliers and Chris Paul of the Los Angeles Clippers. “There was one point in time where they were looking at me like that.”He added, “It’s a rough patch for me, so I’m trying to figure out a way to get out of it.”Despite an enthusiastic and determined effort here, the search continues.A version of this article appears in print on March 5, 2016, on Page D4 of the New York edition with the headline: Anthony Misses, and a Bad Week Continues.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.