By THE ASSOCIATED PRESSMARCH 5, 2016
Valeri Nichushkin had a goal and an assist on his 21st birthday, and the Dallas Stars stopped a four-game slide with a 4-2 victory at home over the Devils on Friday night.Vernon Fiddler, Jason Spezza and Colton Sceviour also scored for Dallas, and Kari Lehtonen made 18 saves. Fiddler’s goal, a short-handed score into an empty net with 20 seconds left, was the 100th of his career.With about a month left in the season, Dallas, Chicago and St. Louis are locked up in a tough race for the Central Division title. The Stars (39-20-7) and the Blackhawks (40-21-5) each have 85 points, and the Blues (37-20-9) have 83.The Devils have lost seven of nine. Adam Henrique and Devante Smith-Pelly scored for the Devils, and Cory Schneider had 15 saves before leaving at 2 minutes 5 seconds of the third because of an injury. Keith Kinkaid made six saves.AdvertisementThe Devils remained tied for ninth place in the Eastern Conference, 5 points away from the second wild-card spot.AdvertisementNichushkin scored his ninth goal of the season at 8:01 of the first period. He took a pass from Mattias Janmark in the neutral zone, skated down the right side, crossed in front of Schneider and slid the puck into the lower left corner of the net.The Devils nearly had a tying goal with 2 seconds left in the first. The puck came to Henrique in front. He tried a backhand, but Lehtonen trapped the puck between his left arm and his side.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.The teams exchanged goals in a 71-second stretch of the second period.Henrique tied the score at 1-1 with his 23rd goal of the season at 5:14. Lehtonen was out of position during a scramble near the goal, and Henrique flipped a backhand into the upper right corner.At 6:25, Janmark set up another goal. Spezza redirected Janmark’s pass from the left corner past Schneider.The Stars’ lead grew to 3-1 at 11:24 when Sceviour deflected in a shot from the top of the slot by Alex Goligoski.Smith-Pelly’s goal came with 4:19 to play. He tapped in a pass across the goal mouth from Damon Severson.SLAP SHOTSDallas defenseman John Klingberg left in the first period because of a lower-body injury. ... Stars left wing Patrick Sharp (lower body) went on the injured list. To replace him, Dallas recalled Brett Ritchie from the Texas Stars of the American Hockey League. Ritchie fought with the Devils’ Adam Larsson in the second period. ... The Devils’ Adam Henrique has four goals in the last three games, including goals that tied Thursday’s game at Nashville and won it in overtime. ... Dallas’s Jason Spezza has 34 points (eight goals, 26 assists) in 34 career games against the Devils. ... The Stars’ Mattias Janmark, a rookie, had not had more than one assist in any of his first 65 games.A version of this article appears in print on March 5, 2016, on Page D7 of the New York edition with the headline: Stars Hand the Devils Their Seventh Loss in Nine Games.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.