AdvertisementSupported byBy Richard GoldsteinSammy Ellis, an All-Star pitcher for the Cincinnati Reds who forged a second career as a pitching coach and was instrumental in converting the Yankees’ young left-handed starter Dave Righetti into a reliever, a role he fulfilled brilliantly, died on Friday in Temple Terrace, Fla. He was 75.Ellis’s wife, Lynn, said the cause was cancer.In 1965, his third major league season, Ellis had a 22-10 record with 15 complete games for the fourth-place Reds and was named to the National League All-Star team. He joined Jim Maloney, who went 20-9 that season, as the last Reds right-handers to win at least 20 games in a season until Johnny Cueto went 20-9 in 2014.Ellis developed a sore arm in 1966 and never had another winning season.Decades later, he became a pitching coach for five major league teams, starting with several stints with the Yankees between 1982 and 1986, when managers and coaches were spinning in and out of the principal owner George M. Steinbrenner’s revolving door.Righetti had pitched a no-hitter on July 4, 1983, and showed great promise as a starter. But at spring training in 1984, seeing a brighter future for him as a reliever — and lacking a relief ace with the departure of Goose Gossage to the San Diego Padres as a free agent — Ellis, the coach Jeff Torborg and Yankees Manager Yogi Berra asked Righetti to switch to the bullpen.“He was my first choice from Day 1,” Ellis said at the time. “I’m concerned for his longevity as a starter because of the trouble he’s had with his shoulder. Relieving is easier on the shoulder than starting if you’re not abused, and Yogi won’t abuse him.”But with the Yankees floundering in June 1984, Righetti was deprived of Ellis’s guidance, at least for a time, when Ellis was replaced by Mark Connor, then a pitching coach in the Yankees’ minor league system.“I hope they don’t think it’s their fault,” Ellis said of his pitching staff. “They’re not the main reason we’re 19 games out.”As was customary with Steinbrenner’s Yankees back then, Ellis returned later, was deposed again, then reappeared in pinstripes. After his Yankee years, he was a pitching coach for the Chicago White Sox, the Seattle Mariners, the Boston Red Sox and the Baltimore Orioles, as well as a roving pitching instructor for the Reds.Samuel Joseph Ellis was born on Feb. 11, 1941, in Youngstown, Ohio. After pitching for Mississippi State University, he made his major league debut with Cincinnati in 1962. He pitched for five seasons for the Reds, then concluded his career with the California Angels and the White Sox, posting a record of 63-58 over seven seasons.In addition to his wife, Ellis, who lived in Dade City, Fla., and died at a hospice, is survived by a daughter, Tammy Parker; a son, Boe; his sisters, Joyce Williams and Genevieve Harris; 10 grandchildren; and a great-grandson.The Yankees did not forget Ellis. Before their game with the White Sox on Sunday at Yankee Stadium, they posted his image on their video board and asked the fans for a moment of silence.Righetti, who saved 252 games, most of them as a Yankee, is now in his 17th season as the San Francisco Giants’ pitching coach, following the second-career path of his prime mentor.Advertisement