

 Karen Crouse
 

ON GOLF
MAY 16, 2016
PONTE VEDRA BEACH, Fla. — The best golfer in the men’s game said he was obsessed with improving. After making the Players Championship his third victory of 2016, Jason Day said he had “never been more motivated.”“All the hard work that I’ve put into my game right now has paid off, but I’ve got to keep working hard to win as much as I can,” added Day, who described winning as addictive.“Nothing beats this feeling,” Day said as he eyed the crystal trophy he collected after his third wire-to-wire victory in the past nine months.Yes, Day has learned well from Tiger Woods, once his childhood idol and now his mentor and friend. Toward the end of his news conference Sunday at TPC Sawgrass, Day pulled a pacifier out of his back pocket, providing a humorous reminder that he has a life outside golf. But make no mistake: Day, 28, who is married with two small children, is not modeling his career on Jack Nicklaus, the 18-time major winner who preached a balanced work-life existence.AdvertisementHe is a hybrid of Nicklaus and Woods, growing his family even as he narrows his focus. The year that Woods turned 28, he won five of his 18 PGA Tour starts and finished second twice. By the time Woods turned 29, he was newly married, with 40 tour victories. Day, who is from Australia, has two more children and 30 fewer victories than Woods at the same age.AdvertisementWith seven victories in his past 17 starts — a stretch during which his wife, Ellie, delivered the couple’s second child, a girl — Day would appear to have figured out how to have his killer instinct and a homing instinct, too. His countryman Adam Scott described the roll that Day is on as Tiger-esque.“He’s structured so well from what I can see, the little bits of insight that I get into his whole life,” Scott said. “I think he’s got a handle on everything.”In Sunday’s final round, Day hit his 2-iron tee shot more than 300 yards on the 18th hole, an impressive display of both power and restraint. There was a time, not too long ago, when Day would not have been able to sidestep the temptation to use his driver. It takes daring, but also discipline, to manage, as Day has done, to win the last five tournaments in which he has held the 54-hole lead.Colin Swatton, Day’s longtime coach and caddie, likened Day to a Formula One driver. It goes against his nature to brake.“He just wants to have the hammer down all the time,” Swatton said, adding: “It’s hard at times for him not to hit the driver. That showed a lot of patience, a lot of commitment and trust.”Swatton added: “He hung in there, stuck to the game plan. Normally he would get a little frustrated and push things to make something happen. He’s tending to dial it back, take his time, make good decisions and stay in the moment.”It has helped Day enormously to have Swatton on his bag and Woods in his ear.“He’s arguably the best player in the world,” Swatton said of Woods, a 79-time tour winner. “And that has been my advice in the past: to lean on people who can make you better. I definitely think Tiger can do that.”Get the big sports news, highlights and analysis from Times journalists, with distinctive takes on games and some behind-the-scenes surprises, delivered to your inbox every week.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.Woods’s influence on Day is obvious to Swatton, who said: “I’ve definitely seen a change, not necessarily in how he plays or how he goes about his business, but definitely I see a little bit more trust and belief in himself. Definitely I can see a lot more confidence, and that’s a very, very hard thing to get.”AdvertisementThe No. 1 ranking is difficult to achieve, and even harder to hold.“It’s very stressful,” Day said. “You’re in the limelight a lot. You’ve got more things to do when you get to tournaments, more things to do off-weeks.”He was exulting, not complaining.“I wouldn’t change it in any way, because this is exactly where I want to be,” Day said, “and I want to try to stay here as long as I can while I can, because nothing beats this feeling.”His level of desire, he added, has never been higher.“I want it so bad right now,” he said. “I want to win every single tournament that I’m playing in.”Day’s competitors can consider themselves warned. Match his desire or accept that they are playing for No. 2. Day will defer to no one, not even Woods, who has been sidelined since August after having had multiple back operations.Day said he intended to “keep pushing, keep pushing, because Tiger says he’s going to kick my butt when he comes back.”Day laughed and added, “If he does come back, and he’s turned into Tiger Woods again, I’ve got to kind of watch my behind.”A version of this article appears in print on May 17, 2016, on Page B14 of the New York edition with the headline: Day’s Motivation Grows Even as His Family Does, Too.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.See More »