By SETH BERKMANMAY 15, 2016
The Liberty finished with the W.N.B.A.’s best record last season, but there was little pomp before their home opener Sunday at Madison Square Garden.No rings were handed out. Not even a conference championship banner was raised to the rafters to join the three already there.The Liberty enter their 20th season as the only original franchise without a league title. Last September, they held a 15-point halftime lead against the Indiana Fever in Game 2 of the Eastern Conference finals, 20 minutes from clinching their fifth W.N.B.A. finals appearance.But the Liberty collapsed in the second half, eventually falling, 70-64. Then, in the decisive Game 3 at the Garden, the Fever pulled away to a 66-51 victory.AdvertisementBefore last season, Coach Bill Laimbeer thought the Liberty might be headed for the draft lottery. This year, the team’s collective mind-set has matured.With loftier goals and N.B.A. Commissioner Adam Silver and the W.N.B.A. president, Lisa M. Borders, in attendance, the Liberty defeated the Dallas Wings, 79-71, on Sunday, led by a career-high 24 points from Sugar Rodgers, a positive early showing in their quest to accomplish one of professional basketball’s rarest feats: bringing a title to New York.“There is a goal by this team, led by Tina Charles, and that’s compete for the championship,” Laimbeer said after the win.Get the big sports news, highlights and analysis from Times journalists, with distinctive takes on games and some behind-the-scenes surprises, delivered to your inbox every week.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.Amanda Zahui B., who was acquired in a trade with the Wings on Wednesday, said that last season she viewed the Liberty as “a very physical team with an edge.” During her first practice, Zahui B., the second overall pick in the 2015 draft, said she noticed the attitude of a championship contender.Zahui B. adds frontcourt depth with Carolyn Swords and Kiah Stokes, who was an All-Rookie team selection last season. In addition, the Liberty traded for the two-time All-Star Shoni Schimmel earlier this month and signed the veteran free agents Lindsey Harding and Shavonte Zellous.Advertisement“The thing since Bill got there is he keeps it interesting,” said the ESPN analyst and former Liberty center Rebecca Lobo, who added that size would help in playoff matches against Western Conference contenders. “He’s just always been known for making really good moves and trades.”The Liberty also drafted Florida State center Adut Bulgak in the first round of the 2016 draft.More than the other new arrivals, Laimbeer said, Bulgak and Schimmel needed time to acclimate to the team’s system. Before Schimmel was traded to the Liberty, her coach with the Atlanta Dream, Michael Cooper, criticized her for showing up to training camp out of shape for a second straight year.Laimbeer said this month that in the team’s first meeting with Schimmel, he laid out his expectations and characterized her as a “value pick.”“Just the environment was totally different than being down there in Atlanta,” Schimmel said. “It’s a good type of different.”After not playing in Saturday’s 87-76 season-opening win over the Washington Mystics, Schimmel, who starred at Louisville, entered Sunday’s game in the first quarter. She quickly electrified the crowd with a 3-pointer that gave the Liberty a 25-10 lead.Harding, the No. 1 over all selection from the 2007 draft, last played in the league in 2014, with the Los Angeles Sparks, and has averaged 10.4 points through her W.N.B.A. career. For a majority of her time on the floor Sunday, she filled in well at point guard, the one position where the Liberty seem unsettled. That may change this summer when Epiphanny Prince — who can play both guard positions — returns from a torn anterior cruciate ligament in her right knee.Zellous, though, was perhaps the most notable acquisition. She played parts of the last six seasons with the Fever, winning a championship in 2012, and helping eliminate the Liberty last season.Entering free agency last winter, Zellous said the Liberty’s hunger to win a championship swayed her decision.Advertisement“She’s a tough guard,” Lobo said of Zellous, who scored 8 points. “One of the reasons Indiana won that series, I felt, they played a tougher game. Usually, Bill’s teams, they’re the toughest team. She brings real toughness on the perimeter, creates her own shot, can be a really good defender.”Minnesota Lynx forward Maya Moore, the league’s most valuable player in 2014, said Zellous’s versatility would help the team jell. She also praised Schimmel’s 3-point shooting and court vision. “That’s something I’m sure they’re going to find a way to capitalize on and other teams are going to have to be ready for,” she said.Even with the talented newcomers, Charles remains the Liberty’s engine. She scored the game’s first 8 points, starting an 11-0 run, and finished with 24 points and 11 rebounds.Laimbeer said Charles, the 2012 M.V.P., had yet to reach her full potential.“I think her drive to get to a championship is intense,” Laimbeer said. “She realized last year, especially in the playoffs, that her impact on the game can be so much greater than it has in the past. It’s just that she has to exert her will to get that done.”A version of this article appears in print on May 16, 2016, on Page D2 of the New York edition with the headline: Liberty  Deliver  a Message  at Home.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.