
On Pro Basketball By                     
 HARVEY ARATON
 
JAN. 10, 2016
Just about the time the San Antonio Spurs had finished a workout at Baruch College early Sunday afternoon came news that they would be facing a team in Brooklyn on Monday night in deep leadership turmoil.Tom James, the Spurs’ senior director of communications, spread the word that the Nets had fired another coach, Lionel Hollins, and reassigned General Manager Billy King after the team’s 27th defeat in 37 games.In other words, Mikhail D. Prokhorov, the Nets’ very rich Russian owner, had spoken.Even more newsworthy, the Nets announced that Prokhorov would actually be surfacing at a Monday morning news conference, hopefully to explain how his audacious five-year championship guarantee had disintegrated into a qualitative mess of seismic proportions.In one of those scheduling quirks of fate, the Spurs, the N.B.A.’s best-run team over the last decade and a half, will roll into Barclays Center to probably inflict more damage on a discombobulated, deflated franchise that had earnest designs on becoming San Antonio Northeast at the dawn of the Prokhorov era.AdvertisementWith Prokhorov, the league’s first majority owner not from North America, the Nets hoped to become another pillar of the league’s expanding global community, competitively exemplified by the Spurs and their innovating coach, Gregg Popovich. Who can forget Prokhorov standing up tall — 6 feet 8 inches — at his introductory news conference in May 2010 to slyly say, “America, I come in peace”?AdvertisementThen Prokhorov, after staging an entertaining show designed to launch a war with the Knicks for the hearts and minds of basketball New York, pretty much left the deliverance of his bold (or pompous) promise of a title to the imagination and execution of King.Left no choice but to wildly swing for the fences, King struck out with risk-filled trades when conventional wisdom would have dictated more gradual team building along with a Brooklyn fan base. The Nets made the playoffs in each of their first three seasons in Brooklyn but have sunk to near the bottom of the league and won’t have control of their first-round draft pick until 2019.
            Get the latest tweets from @NYTSports, including breaking news, analysis and live updates.        Once heralded as the Russian Mark Cuban for running an N.B.A.-like operation with his CSKA Moscow team, Prokhorov became more of an anti-Cuban.He spent like a drunken banker, allowing King to ignore salary-cap constraints and to establish records for punitive taxes. But while Cuban has been as much the face of the Dallas franchise as any player, Dirk Nowitzki included, Prokhorov became the essence of absenteeism, dropping by on rare occasions to observe from a Barclays luxury suite, even as he moved to tighten ownership control of the team and the arena.Given the sad state of what should be an ascendant franchise, Commissioner Adam Silver said he had already had discussions with Prokhorov about what it meant to him to own an N.B.A. franchise whose estimated worth had soared to $1.5 billion, sixth best in the N.B.A., even as it was losing nearly $100 million last year, according to Forbes.com.In an email, Silver wrote that Prokhorov “and his partner, Dmitry Razumov, have told me that they intend to be more involved in the management of the franchise throughout the transition and moving forward.”When Prokhorov first appeared as a rescue operator for Bruce C. Ratner’s cash-starved ownership in New Jersey, he was described by Ettore Messina, a former CSKA coach, as a hands-off owner.Advertisement“He says, ‘I select the specialists, they do their job, and at the end I evaluate,’ ” said Messina, now an assistant coach on Popovich’s San Antonio staff and perhaps a contender for the Nets job next season. “In the four years I was there, he never made a call on basketball.”What has he done in Brooklyn? Who knows? As Silver said: “Many successful franchises have owners who step back and largely delegate the day-to-day management of their teams; others are obviously more hands-on — and which is which isn’t necessarily dictated by the physical location of the owner.”Get the big sports news, highlights and analysis from Times journalists, with distinctive takes on games and some behind-the-scenes surprises, delivered to your inbox every week.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.There is also a fine line for ownership of a professional sports franchise, an approach that stops short of interfering with team executives but remains present and accountable for what ultimately occurs.In Midtown Manhattan, James L. Dolan has had no shortage of critics over the last decade-plus for his emotional and occasionally ruinous incursions into team-functioning territory.Conversely, Dolan’s presence and commitment cannot be questioned. And the Nets cannot claim to have been better off with Prokhorov at the other ownership extreme, even with King and company within texting proximity and a Russian proxy or two entrenched in Brooklyn.Hollins’s assistant, Tony Brown, will take over on Monday night as an interim replacement, the Nets’ fifth coach since the move to Brooklyn. More important will be Prokhorov’s making his first personnel-directing hire to replace King.Does he talk to league people enough to know who the best candidates are? Does he have a network of owners and league executives he can trust? Almost six years since Prokhorov made his grand entrance, all we know about him is that he and his money talk a good game.“We have learned a great deal during the past six years, and our experiences will guide us for the future,” he said Sunday in his statement.He can begin by delivering on his promise to Silver to stick around for the transition process, even if being in New York is a painful reminder of how the Nets not only failed to upstage the Knicks, but also watched Dolan’s team claim the international sizzle with the drafting of the Latvian rookie Kristaps Porzingis.AdvertisementForget the Spurs. In a cruel twist, the Nets have a long way to go to just be the Knicks.Because of an editing error, the On Pro Basketball column on Monday, about Mikhail D. Prokhorov’s handling of the Nets, misstated the surname of his business partner in some copies. He is Dmitry Razumov, not Ravumov.A version of this article appears in print on January 11, 2016, on Page D1 of the New York edition with the headline: With a Distant Owner, the Nets Have Lost Their Way.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.See More »