By BILLY WITZSEPT. 28, 2016
When Mark Teixeira paused to admire his ninth-inning, game-tying home run Monday night, which he then punctuated with an ostentatious flip of the bat, it was a cause for celebration of an infrequent type — for him and the Yankees — when leaving the batter’s box this season.As the Yankees finish out the regular season at home this week and try to stave off elimination from the wild-card race, they know that, more than anything else, their offense failed them this year.After being second in baseball in runs scored last season, the Yankees had plummeted to 22nd entering Wednesday’s games. Their on-base-plus-slugging percentage, which ranked fifth in baseball last season, had sunk to 24th. After being fourth in home runs last season, they were 19th.The Yankees reached a low point last week when they were shut out in three consecutive games — a scoreless streak that reached 33 innings — while scrambling to remain in contention for the postseason. Over all, they have been shut out six times this month.AdvertisementNaturally, such a drastic falloff would invite intense scrutiny of the hitting coach, but General Manager Brian Cashman on Monday placed the blame on the hitters rather than the two people who supervise them: Alan Cockrell and his assistant, Marcus Thames. Both men are in their first year in their current roles.Advertisement“They’re entirely capable of leading horses to water,” Cashman said. “Hopefully, we’ll have a lot more horses for them next year.”While Cashman would not say definitively that Cockrell would be back — conversations with the team’s owners had not yet taken place, he said — he praised Cockrell’s and Thames’s work ethic.“I think they’ve done everything in their power,” said Cashman, who added that the contracts for all of the team’s coaches were in effect through 2017, as were his and Manager Joe Girardi’s. “This year, guys aren’t producing. Most of the downgrades have been due to health and age.”The Yankees’ offensive woes are underscored by Cashman’s firing of last year’s hitting coach, Jeff Pentland, who had replaced Kevin Long, who was fired after the 2014 season. That is three hitting coaches in three seasons. Cashman said Pentland had been hired as a short-term solution so that Cockrell (who served as Pentland’s assistant last season), Thames and the minor league hitting coordinator James Rowson could gain “seasoning.” Cashman credited Cockrell with having had a hand in last season’s success.Although Pentland had a reputation for bringing out power in hitters — Gary Sheffield and Matt Kemp are among those who have raved about him — his folksy manner did not click with some Yankees, among them Teixeira.Hitting coaches may have the most fragile job in baseball — and maybe the most difficult one to assess. Using runs as a barometer is simplistic. With the prevalence of video, it has become a two-man job in many cases. An understanding of hitting mechanics is essential, but long gone are the days of coaches like Charley Lau, the hitting guru of the 1970s and ’80s, who promoted one type of swing. Being able to communicate with players about their varying hitting styles is critical.When Long was fired by the Yankees after eight seasons, he went to the Mets and helped Curtis Granderson, whom he had coached with the Yankees, rediscover his power stroke and Daniel Murphy unearth his. With Long contributing, the Mets reached the World Series last year.AdvertisementAsked what made a good hitting coach, Teixeira said, “Good players.”Chase Headley said Cockrell and Thames deserved credit for staying positive with him when he began this season terribly. Headley was batting .140 on April 29 and did not have an extra-base hit until May 12. Dating to that game, Headley has hit .268 with 14 home runs and a .769 O.P.S.“We had a lot of conversations of what I’m trying to do, what I’m trying to feel,” Headley said. “It’s a tricky thing because you can see something as a hitting coach but hitting is a very feel-oriented task, so sometimes they can see something, and if you can’t feel what they’re saying, it’s not easy to correct. He was great. The last thing you need is somebody to jump on the pile.”Cockrell, 53, expressed disappointment that the Yankees’ offense had hit a September lull for the second consecutive season. He called the development of shortstop Didi Gregorius, who began the season hitting ninth but has often batted cleanup lately, a bright spot. And he lamented what had become of the opening-day heart of the order: Alex Rodriguez, Teixeira and Carlos Beltran.The Yankees were 28th in home runs hit on the road entering Wednesday’s games, which helped explain their 36-45 road record, their worst since 1992.“I look at the year Didi put together, and you say, ‘O.K., that’s a huge step forward for your everyday guy,’” Cockrell said. “Also, you look at the fact our three-hole hitter got released, our four-hole hitter is retiring, and we traded our five-hole hitter. It’s been up and down.”One area in which the Yankees have been poor is situational hitting. They were 27th in baseball going into Wednesday’s games in scoring runners from third with fewer than two outs and were 21st in advancing runners from second with no outs. A recent example occurred Sunday against Toronto when Brett Gardner led off with a double in the eighth inning of a tied game. Jacoby Ellsbury, ahead in the count by 3-0, took a strike and then — with Gary Sanchez on deck — lifted a fly ball to left field without advancing Gardner.Get the big sports news, highlights and analysis from Times journalists, with distinctive takes on games and some behind-the-scenes surprises, delivered to your inbox every week.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.Although Sanchez and then Gregorius struck out, the dynamic of the inning might have changed if Ellsbury had moved Gardner to third; the infield would probably have moved in, for example.“It’s really important that every guy tries to do his job and not try to do too much,” Girardi said. “Your first hope is that he gets a hit there. Your second hope is that he at least gets him over or takes a walk.”AdvertisementSpeaking about situational hitting, Headley said: “That’s always a big deal. We can do better. And I think the confidence you get from that trickles down, and for the next 10 at-bats, there’s less pressure on the next guy. You’re not always going to get the job done, but I like to see intent, like a guy trying to get the head out so he can get the ball to the right side.”Cashman said Greg Bird’s return from injury and the development of Aaron Judge would bring different types of hitters to the Yankees’ lineup. But Cockrell suggested there would need to be more changes than just personnel.“There’s some things that can be improved upon, and it has more to do with the mind-set and the culture, but it definitely needs to be addressed,” said Cockrell, who added that work habits were not one of them. “We’ve got to do different things to create more runs.”A version of this article appears in print on September 29, 2016, on Page B14 of the New York edition with the headline: Yanks’ Hitting Coach Wins Praise in Slump.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.