By BILLY WITZMARCH 3, 2016
TAMPA, Fla. —  On his first swing of the exhibition season, Alex Rodriguez launched a drive down the left-field line that was so deep and majestic he felt compelled to hold his follow-through for a moment, pausing to admire it.As the ball sailed over the wall, the otherwise quiet crowd at Steinbrenner Field rose to applaud as Rodriguez made his familiar, loping, no-hurry-to-get-there jog around the bases.The sight was a comforting one for the Yankees, who have had few others during their first two games, knowing that their lineup’s 40-year-old anchor arrived with his sharp eye and smooth swing as intact as his flair for the dramatic.“It was nice to see,” said Manager Joe Girardi, whose team lost to Philadelphia, 13-4, on Thursday. “I hope it happens a lot more.”AdvertisementRodriguez, who hit his homer off the left-hander Adam Morgan, struck out and walked in his other two plate appearances. He expressed surprise that his first swing against live pitching had sent the ball out of the park.AdvertisementWhen asked if that was why he stood and watched the ball, he laughed.“I mean, I’ve been doing that for a long time,” Rodriguez said. “I do the same thing on a pop-up to short.”He added: “Obviously, you’re not looking to hit home runs this early in the spring or even to drive the ball. You’re looking to see the ball well, put good swings on it. There’s going to be some good days and bad days. I think, for me, the biggest thing for me is I don’t have any distractions. I’m clearheaded. I’m coming in with a good attitude every day and I understand how to have a purpose.”Rodriguez was underscoring the contrast between this year and last, when he arrived to a litany of questions after being suspended for the 2014 season for his role in the Biogenesis scandal.While a healthy, productive Rodriguez would be a boon to the Yankees, a handful of developments could turn out to be worrisome if they persist.Jacoby Ellsbury, the oft-injured center fielder who has missed the tail end of his two previous spring trainings with injuries, will not make his debut until Saturday after asking for a few more days to get his legs in shape.“It’s important that that doesn’t happen,” Girardi said of another Ellsbury injury. “That he is strong going into the season and not have something nagging, so that he gets a lot of at-bats the last couple weeks.”Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.A bullpen that must make do without closer Aroldis Chapman for the first 30 games, after his suspension in a domestic violence case, has had few encouraging performances in the first two games. After Nick Rumbelow and Nick Goody were cuffed around by the Tigers on Wednesday, Anthony Swarzak and James Pazos were hit hard by the Phillies. But at least their pitches were close enough to the plate to get hit: Jacob Lindgren, returning from surgery to clear bone spurs from his elbow — the same operation that Masahiro Tanaka underwent — faced five batters, walking three and hitting another.“I’m sure there were some nerves,” Girardi said. “I’m sure he was overthrowing a little bit.”AdvertisementThe Yankees have used 15 pitchers in two games and only one — the right-hander Mark Montgomery — has had a clean score line.Dellin Betances, who used a strong spring in 2014 to make the Yankees, can empathize with the relievers competing for what could be three vacancies in the bullpen. He was once one of them.“It’s a big difference,” Betances said. “I can enjoy spring training a little more. I’m more at ease. You don’t stress a bad outing. It’s just about getting ready as opposed to trying to come out of the gate hot. I think these guys all know there are some spots available.”Meanwhile, Rodriguez’s ease was visible in his swing, in his trot around the bases and in his mood afterward. Now is just preparing for the tests ahead. He will have Friday off.“One thing is proving that you can do it and the other thing is proving that your health can be maintained for a long time,” Rodriguez said.He added: “I think with me, health is of the essence and, obviously, pacing yourself. I understand the job that I have to do, and I know how to get it done.”INSIDE PITCHMasahiro Tanaka will make his first start of spring training Sunday at the Phillies. Michael Pineda will pitch Monday against Houston, C. C. Sabathia will pitch Tuesday at the Marlins and Ivan Nova will pitch against the Mets on Wednesday in Port St. Lucie. Nathan Eovaldi, who felt tightness in his groin last week, will start March 10 in a split-squad game against Toronto. ... Nova, battling for a spot in the starting rotation, gave up a run-scoring double in the first inning but pitched well after that, retiring the next four batters he faced.A version of this article appears in print on March 4, 2016, on Page B9 of the New York edition with the headline: Rodriguez Has Impressive Start, Soothing the Yankees and Himself, for Now .  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.