AdvertisementSupported byBy The Associated PressSPOKANE, Wash. — Gonzaga’s streak of 17 consecutive N.C.A.A. tournaments is the longest for any midmajor program in history. But that streak is in jeopardy this season, and the Bulldogs probably have to win the West Coast Conference tournament to qualify.Their record of 23-7 is not bad, but the chances of an at-large bid are hampered by an R.P.I. of 64 and a low strength of schedule. They lack statement wins, and their three losses in the lightly regarded W.C.C. do not help matters.Once listed as high as No. 9, the Bulldogs fell out of the rankings after a series of rare home losses, including setbacks against No. 18 Arizona and U.C.L.A. in December.Gonzaga’s next game is Saturday night against Portland in the quarterfinals of the W.C.C. tournament in Las Vegas.“We just have to win out in this tournament to get a bid into the N.C.A.A. tournament,” guard Silas Melson said.While the team tries not to focus on the streak, which began when some of them were still in diapers, it can be hard to ignore.“To be honest, it would suck for us to go 17 years in a row and then not make it,” Melson said.Gonzaga is tied with Kentucky and Wisconsin for the fifth-longest appearance streak in the tournament’s history, trailing North Carolina (27), Kansas (26), Duke (20) and Indiana and Michigan State (18 each). No other midmajor program is even close.The streak has been in peril before, in the 2003, 2007 and 2011 seasons. Each time the Bulldogs rallied to win the W.C.C. tournament or got an at-large bid.The streak began in 1999, when Gonzaga came out of nowhere to make the tournament quarterfinals under Coach Dan Monson. He left after that for Minnesota, and the assistant Mark Few became coach.Few has never missed the tournament in his 16 seasons at the helm, including last year’s run to the quarterfinals.Few said the streak did not add any extra pressure beyond what was normal toward the end of the season.“The pressure is on everybody this time of year,” Few said. “We’ve just got to win the next game, especially in an elimination tournament like this.”It has been an unusual season for Gonzaga. The Bulldogs’ first game, against Pittsburgh at an American military base in Okinawa, was called off at halftime because of a slippery floor that was a hazard to the players. They lost by a point to No. 20 Texas A&M, but beat Connecticut, Washington and Tennessee in nonconference play.The senior center Przemek Karnowski was lost to a back injury early in the year, but forwards Kyle Wiltjer (20.8 points per game) and Domantas Sabonis (17 points, 11 rebounds per game) stepped up to play well. The guard play — by Melson, Eric McClellan, Josh Perkins and Kyle Dranginis — was inconsistent early, but has improved.Still, they lost twice to Saint Mary’s and once to Brigham Young in conference play.“There’s teams that feel they’ve got a pretty good chance against us,” Few said.This season was the first since 1990-91 in which the Bulldogs had more than two home losses.But Gonzaga rallied to win nine of its last 11 games to clinch a share of the W.C.C. regular-season title, its 15th in the past 16 years“Our goal wasn’t to play our best basketball in November,” McClellan said. “Our goal was to play our best basketball now.”McClellan insisted the N.C.A.A. streak did not loom large among his teammates.“It’s in the back of our minds, but that’s not our focus,” McClellan said.The goal is to be prepared and confident about winning, he said.“If we are dialed in, we are a tough team to beat,” McClellan said.Advertisement