By THE ASSOCIATED PRESSMARCH 2, 2016
COLLEGE PARK, Md. —  Maryland is struggling at a time when it should be nearing its peak.Coach Mark Turgeon apparently is not at all worried, given his response Wednesday when he was reminded that the 14th-ranked Terrapins had lost three of four.“We’ve won one out of two, haven’t we?” Turgeon said with a grin.True enough, yet Maryland fell out of contention for the Big Ten title with a loss at Purdue on Saturday. The defeat also blunted the momentum created by a win over Michigan.So the Terrapins (23-6, 11-5) have indeed won one of two heading into Thursday night’s home finale against Illinois. Before that, however, Maryland lost a home to Wisconsin and on the road against lowly Minnesota.“It’s time for us to take the next step forward and just start playing,” said the senior forward Jake Layman, who will be among those honored Thursday before his final home game.AdvertisementTurgeon said he believed there was time for Maryland to catch fire before the N.C.A.A. tournament begins later this month.Advertisement“I feel good about our team,” he said. “Hopefully, what we went through is going to make us a better team in March. That’s all you can hope for.”The schedule of late has been kind to the Terrapins, who have played only once since Feb. 21. That means plenty of time in the gym, working out the kinks in lengthy practice sessions.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.“We’ve got to be where we’re playing our best basketball, and we’re making some pretty good strides toward that,” Turgeon said. “I know it doesn’t look that way, maybe, if you look at what we’ve done. But we’ve had some time to practice and I feel like we’re getting ready to really start playing well, whether it’s going to be this week, next week or the week after.”Turgeon hopes the time off will be helpful to guard Melo Trimble, the sophomore guard who is 11 for 37 from the field in his last four games. Trimble logged 146 of 160 possible minutes over that span and needed a break.“This week in practice he shot it well,” Turgeon said. “I think he’s getting his legs back underneath him.”The Terrapins are also looking for a bounce-back performance from the junior forward Robert Carter, who has reached double figures in only one of his last five games.“We need him,” Turgeon said. “When he plays well, we win.”Trimble and Carter are important contributors, but it will take a collective effort for the Terrapins to make something good happen in March and overcome the disappointment of being eliminated from the Big Ten title chase.“We still have some things we know we can be better at and we still have some goals we can achieve this year,” the senior Rasheed Sulaimon said. “We’re just going to try to finish the best we can.”We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.