By THE ASSOCIATED PRESSMAY 13, 2016
ARLINGTON, Tex. — The Texas Rangers promoted the hard-throwing reliever Matt Bush from Class AA Frisco on Friday, making him available for his major league debut seven months after he was released from prison and 12 years after he was the No. 1 overall pick.Bush signed a minor league deal with the Rangers in December after completing a 39-month prison term in October for a drunken-driving accident in Florida that left a man seriously injured. Bush, a 30-year-old right-hander, made two appearances in spring training and impressed his coaches with his array of pitches, including a fastball of nearly 100 miles per hour. He was 0-2 with a 2.65 E.R.A. in 17 innings for Frisco, and converted all five of his save chances in his first regular action since 2011, striking out 18, walking four and holding opponents to a .158 batting average (9 of 57).“I think baseball’s a little easier for me because it’s just what I’m gifted at, what I’m blessed to be able to do — throw a fastball and be able to locate,” said Bush. “Those things that are natural. The off the field, it’s a battle in its own, but it’s also — I’ve been through a lot, put myself through a lot. I’ve realized a lot about myself, and I just continue to take it one day at a time.”To make room on the 25-man roster, the Rangers sent center fielder Delino DeShields to Class AAA Round Rock. They had a 40-man roster spot after trading Anthony Ranaudo to the Chicago White Sox on Thursday.AdvertisementLast December, Bush said he had been sober since the March 2012 accident after years of alcohol problems. At the time, Rangers General Manager Jon Daniels said that Bush would be accompanied throughout spring training and beyond by his father. Bush was expected to continue in an Alcoholics Anonymous program, among other requirements, including community service.Get the big sports news, highlights and analysis from Times journalists, with distinctive takes on games and some behind-the-scenes surprises, delivered to your inbox every week.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.“We feel he’s done very well,” Daniels said Friday. “He’s been an outstanding teammate. He has followed all the conditions that we’ve laid out with him.”Bush was drafted No. 1 as a shortstop by his hometown team, the San Diego Padres, in 2004, just ahead of Justin Verlander. He had several alcohol-related incidents and was traded five years later to Toronto. After being released by the Blue Jays, he signed a minor league deal as a pitcher with Tampa Bay.AdvertisementBush went to prison after a no-contest plea in Charlotte County, in Florida., for driving under the influence with serious bodily injury. The authorities said that Bush’s blood alcohol level was more than twice the legal limit when he hit a 72-year-old man on a motorcycle and left the scene. There was no probation for Bush, whose sentence ended with a nine-month work-release program.Bush said the victim had since expressed his forgiveness and wished him the best in turning things around and overcoming his alcoholism.“I realized I’m not the same person when I drink,” Bush said. “I tend to make horrible choices. I don’t ever want to be that person again. I like myself today and being sober. I feel like I’m living a dream, and I don’t ever want this to stop.”The Rangers took a look at Bush on a recommendation from Roy Silver, a player development assistant for the team who has helped others come back from troubled pasts. Silver had a big effect on the slugger Josh Hamilton, a former No. 1 overall pick who was out of baseball for more than three years because of cocaine and alcohol addictions.Hamilton is back with the Rangers and is on the 60-day disabled list as he continues rehabilitation work after off-season surgery on his left knee.A version of this article appears in print on May 14, 2016, on Page D2 of the New York edition with the headline: After Delay, No. 1 Pick Reaches The Majors.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.