By ANDREW KNOLLMAY 13, 2016
The St. Louis Blues and the San Jose Sharks took similar routes to the Western Conference finals, which are set to begin Sunday in St. Louis. Each team was pushed to seven games in the second round of the postseason but emerged with a Game 7 rout.The Blues are seeking their first berth in the Stanley Cup finals since 1970. They are the last of the five remaining franchises that entered the league in 1967 to have never won the Cup.The Sharks hope to make their first appearance in the Cup finals and shake off a shorter but no less futile history of postseason disappointment.Both teams feature outstanding defensemen, sound goaltending, formidable size and no shortage of offensive depth. The Sharks are perhaps the strongest-skating team in the playoffs while the Blues have made tight checking their calling card.The Blues entered the season amid high tension. Coach Ken Hitchcock was retained on a one-year contract, the popular forward T. J. Oshie was traded, and the not-so-subtle undertone of the season seemed to be “win or else.”AdvertisementDespite a spate of injuries, the Blues fell just 2 points shy of the Central Division crown and the best record in the West. They leapt out to a 3-1 series lead against the defending champion Chicago Blackhawks in the first round, only to have to weather a nerve-racking Game 7 in St. Louis to advance. Their series against the Stars came down to a deciding game in Dallas, which the Blues won handily, 6-1.AdvertisementSt. Louis has six players with 10 or more points in the postseason: forwards Vladimir Tarasenko, Robby Fabbri, David Backes, Jaden Schwartz and Troy Brouwer, and defenseman Kevin Shattenkirk.Center Paul Stastny has also contributed a complete performance. He was tasked with shadowing Chicago center Jonathan Toews and Dallas’s explosive forward Jamie Benn. He led a group of defensively responsible forwards that managed to frustrate and nullify a potent group of Stars defensemen. Offensively, Stastny has 9 points in his last nine games, including 3 in the clincher in Dallas. He has also won 50 more face-offs than any other player in these playoffs, at an efficient rate of 59 percent.The Blues’ formidable defense includes the multitalented Alex Pietrangelo, the offense-minded Shattenkirk, the towering rookie Colton Parayko and the dependable and durable Jay Bouwmeester. Four regular defenders stand at least 6 feet 3 inches and weigh more than 200 pounds, which will come in handy against big San Jose forwards like Joe Thornton, Tomas Hertl, Patrick Marleau and Joel Ward.After some jockeying during the season, the Blues seem to have settled on Brian Elliott as their goaltender. Elliott has had some challenging games, but he has battled hard, made crucial saves and provided stability. Though the Blues’ penalty kill has dropped to the middle of the pack after being excellent during the regular season, their power play remains among the best in the N.H.L., scoring on 27.5 percent of opportunities.The Sharks got off to a slow start and maintained a low profile, finishing third in the Pacific Division. They eliminated the second-place Los Angeles Kings in five games in the first round, while the division champion Anaheim Ducks lost their opening series to Nashville.The Sharks have had four double-digit scorers in the playoffs, including the top two: forward Logan Couture (17 points) and defenseman Brent Burns (15), who is tied with the Stars’ Benn for the second spot. Their 3.42 goals per game tops the N.H.L. this postseason. It is hard to identify a weakness in their lineup, which features a blend of core scorers, emerging young players and gap-filling veterans.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.Up front, the Sharks’ skill may be surpassed only by their versatility. Couture, Thornton, Marleau, Hertl and Joe Pavelski, who had five goals in five games against the Kings, play multiple positions. They have combined to produce 55 points in 12 playoff games. The rookie Joonas Donskoi and the veteran Ward, a free-agent acquisition, have added speed and power. The experienced two-way defenseman Paul Martin has also helped solidify San Jose’s supporting cast under the former Devils coach Peter DeBoer during his first year with the team.On defense, the Sharks feature one of the most dynamic players in Burns, who has the offensive ability of a top-line forward — which he once was — with the imposing size of a defensive defenseman. His daring is complemented by the steady, comprehensive game of Marc-Eduoard Vlasic. Known as a shutdown defender, Vlasic had a career-high 39 points this season despite missing 15 games and finished with a positive rating for the ninth time in his 10 seasons.Goaltender Martin Jones is in his first full season as a starter, but he is the only goalie of the remaining four who has played every minute this postseason. He also has the lowest save percentage, .913, of any remaining goalie. That has not been an issue as the Sharks have been strong at even strength and dominant on the power play. Their 30.9 percent conversion rate leads the league.A version of this article appears in print on May 15, 2016, on Page SP4 of the New York edition with the headline: Opponents Both Seek a New Kind of Success.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.