By DAVID WALDSTEINMAY 15, 2016
DENVER — Last week, in the middle of the Mets’ longest trip of the season, Manager Terry Collins was discussing how instant replay had all but eliminated arguments from baseball, a spectacle he seemed to miss.But there are still instances when managers can argue, and even be ejected from a ballgame, and Collins found one on Saturday night during the Mets’ 7-4 loss to the Colorado Rockies at Coors Field.It was a matter of a foul tip — or not a foul tip, as Collins and the Mets saw it — in the third inning, and it proved to be the decisive play in the game.A player who might have been out was instead given a reprieve and hit a two-run double, and the Rockies scored four runs after the disputed play, going on to win by three.Advertisement“It cost us the game,” Collins said. “End of story.”The Rockies had the bases loaded with one out in the third. It was a dicey situation, but Mets starter Logan Verrett still had a reasonable hope of getting out of the jam. The next batter was Tony Wolters, a catcher and the No. 8 hitter, who was batting .172 entering Saturday. Rockies starter Eddie Butler was due up after Wolters.AdvertisementIf Verrett could get Wolters, he could easily strand all three runners.Wolters worked the count to 2-2, and then Verrett threw a breaking ball in the dirt. Wolters swung and missed, and the ball skipped into the glove of catcher Kevin Plawecki, apparently for strike three.But Carlos Torres, the home-plate umpire, instantly threw up his hands to call a foul tip, prolonging Wolters’s at-bat. Plawecki argued, and Collins quickly trotted out of the dugout to join the protest.The play was not reviewable, so an argument ensued. Collins’s temper flared, and Torres ejected him.Torres told Collins that he had heard the bat tip the ball, Collins said. “I said, ‘You couldn’t have heard it because he didn’t foul it off,’” Collins exclaimed after the game.Collins seemed to have reason to object. Television replays appeared to show that Wolters’s bat never touched the ball.Wolters even acknowledged to Plawecki during the at-bat that his bat did not touch the ball, Plawecki said.Get the big sports news, highlights and analysis from Times journalists, with distinctive takes on games and some behind-the-scenes surprises, delivered to your inbox every week.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.“But he didn’t have to tell me,” Plawecki added. “I knew. Everyone in the ballpark knew, except the guy standing behind me.”AdvertisementAsked if Torres said anything else about the play during the course of the game, Plawecki responded, “Our line of communication kind of stopped after that.”The Mets’ anger soon turned to dismay. With new life, Wolters, a rookie, worked the count full and then swatted a two-run double to right-center field. It was his second hit of the game and the 12th hit of his young career.And the Rockies were not done. After Butler was out on a bunt attempt, Charlie Blackmon lined a single into right field to score two more runs, and the Rockies led, 7-1.The call was critical, but Verrett did not do a good job of limiting the damage.“Poor execution on my part,” said Verrett, who, starting in place of the injured Steven Matz, lasted two and two-thirds innings, giving up seven runs and 10 hits and walking three.The Mets began to chip away at the lead. In the fourth, Neil Walker hit his 10th home run, a solo shot, and the Mets scored two more runs in the sixth after Yoenis Cespedes led off with a double.David Wright led off the seventh with a double for his second hit but was stranded. Wright went 2 for 5 and struck out twice, including in the ninth inning against closer Jake McGee.Wright now has 44 strikeouts in 108 at-bats, and he had two hits in his past 24 at-bats before Saturday. Still, his on-base percentage was reasonably healthy over that span, at .353, because he walked 10 times.Collins said Wright’s on-base percentage was keeping him from moving Wright out of the second spot in the batting order. But Collins indicated that could be pending.Advertisement“At some point, if he continues to struggle, we’ll address that,” Collins said before the game. “He leads the team in on-base. When you’re talking about the two hole, you’re talking about guys getting on base.”The hits by Wright were encouraging. But after the game, which left the Mets 4-6 on their trip, the team was more focused on the call that went against them.“It’s unfair,” Collins said. “There’s no reason for it.”A version of this article appears in print on May 15, 2016, on Page SP4 of the New York edition with the headline: A Disputed Foul Tip Leaves a Manager Upset and the Mets Upended.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.