By BILLY WITZMARCH 2, 2016
TAMPA, Fla. —  While it is all giggles and guffaws for the Mets now, wondering what outlandish craft Yoenis Cespedes might show up to work in tomorrow — a spaceship? a rowboat? — it was not that long ago that there was a different player who symbolized the Mets.His name was John Mayberry Jr.When Manager Terry Collins placed Mayberry, then hitting .170, in the cleanup spot on July 23 against the Dodgers’ Clayton Kershaw, the reigning Cy Young Award winner and National League most valuable player, it was symbolic of just how futile the Mets’ offense had become.It also became a flashpoint for fans and newspaper columnists in urging General Manager Sandy Alderson to do something — anything — as the non-waiver trade deadline approached.One day later, Alderson added the veterans Juan Uribe and Kelly Johnson, and Mayberry was designated for assignment. Within a week, the Mets acquired Cespedes, starting a roll that did not end until they reached the World Series.AdvertisementMayberry watched that streak from afar, having signed a minor league contract with the Chicago White Sox, but he was released by the end of August.Advertisement“I would have rather been contributing, but I never stopped pulling for them,” Mayberry said. “Obviously, they got Yoenis Cespedes, and he became Babe Ruth, and that helped. It was fun to see that run they were on.”Mayberry was speaking Wednesday from the visitors’ clubhouse at Steinbrenner Field after the Yankees beat his new team, the Detroit Tigers, 10-9, when left fielder Jason Krizan dropped a two-out fly ball, allowing Tyler Wade to score the winning run.Mayberry, batting fifth for a split-squad Tigers team, singled to center field against Luis Severino, which unhinged the young Yankees starter. He hit the next batter, walked two more, then allowed a grand slam to Bryan Holaday. Mayberry struck out and grounded out in his next two at-bats.It was an encouraging start for a player trying to find his footing and keep his career afloat.Mayberry, a former first-round draft pick, is on his fifth team in less than two years, having signed a minor league contract in January in part on the recommendation of the pitching coach Rich Dubee and the bullpen coach Mick Billmeyer, who were familiar with him from their years in Philadelphia. Mayberry hopes he can show the Tigers enough this spring to find a place on the roster as a spare right-handed-hitting outfielder and first baseman.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.“There are numerous instances of guys finding themselves when they get the right opportunity,” Mayberry said. “I’m just trying to be prepared for that next opportunity. A certain element of it is being in the right place at the right time.”That appeared to be the case when Mayberry, playing for the Phillies, made his major league debut at Yankee Stadium in 2009, hitting a three-run homer off Andy Pettitte with his parents in the stands. Even Alex Rodriguez’s game-ending home run could not dampen the mood.“My mother and father had the two biggest smiles I’ve ever seen,” Mayberry said. “It’s one of the great thrills I’ve had.”There were no such moments like that in 2015. Expected to hit left-handed pitching well, something he had done for much of his career, Mayberry floundered the way many of the Mets’ hitters did in the first four months.Advertisement“Obviously, you want to be the best you can be, but it got to the point where collectively the group was trying to do too much,” Mayberry said. “You have one bad at-bat, and it’s like it would all start again.”Mayberry said it did not help that the Mets went nearly three weeks without facing a left-handed starter.Then, it seemed as if whenever they did face a left-hander, it was someone like Kershaw.“Or Gio or Lester,” Mayberry said referring to the Nationals’ Gio Gonzalez and the Cubs’ Jon Lester. “Those guys are no picnic.”INSIDE PITCHAroldis Chapman, who was suspended Tuesday for 30 games under Major League Baseball’s domestic violence policy, said Wednesday that he no longer has the gun that was used in the altercation, or any other guns. He could be asked by an M.L.B.-appointed domestic violence counselor to forfeit any weapons, according to the policy. ... Brett Gardner, who has a bone bruise on his wrist, is not expected to play until at least March 15. ... The Yankees signed outfielder Chris Denorfia, a right-handed hitter, to a minor league contract. ... Austin Romine, competing for the backup catcher’s job with Gary Sanchez and Carlos Corporan, had two hits, including an infield single to score Jorge Mateo with the tying run in the ninth.A version of this article appears in print on March 3, 2016, on Page B13 of the New York edition with the headline: Symbol of Mets’ Troubles Tries to Find New Life in Detroit.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.