
On Tennis By                     
 CHRISTOPHER CLAREY
 
MARCH 3, 2016
Lleyton Hewitt’s retirement now looks more like an early-season break. After an emotional farewell at the Australian Open in January, Hewitt was supposed to make a transition into a role as Australia’s nonplaying Davis Cup captain.Instead, Hewitt is back on the Australian team as a player for this week’s first-round encounter with the United States in Melbourne, Australia. Nick Kyrgios, the young star who was supposed to be one of Hewitt’s trump cards on the temporary grass court at Kooyong Tennis Club, came down with a virus after suffering back problems and had to withdraw.“It’s bad timing, but it was really out of our hands in the end,” Hewitt said.Playing captains are exceedingly rare at the highest levels of the Davis Cup, the leading men’s team tennis event. Ivan Ljubicic briefly held the dual role with Croatia in the 2000s, but then Ljubicic was an outlier with a civic streak who also managed to serve briefly on the ATP board of directors while still active on tour.It remains unlikely that Hewitt will name himself to play, even if he is now officially part of the four-man Australian squad. Hewitt selected Bernard Tomic and Sam Groth for Friday’s opening singles. Groth lost to John Isner, 7-6 (2), 6-2, 6-2, but Tomic ground down Jack Sock, 7-6 (2), 6-3, 3-6, 6-4, to level the competition at 1-1. Groth and John Peers have been named to play doubles on Saturday against Bob and Mike Bryan, who have struggled in the early stages of 2016 but who still have a 23-4 record together in Davis Cup.AdvertisementIn an interview from Melbourne, Mike Bryan said the Americans had practiced next to the Australians all week and had never seen a combination other than Groth and Peers. But lineups can be changed before a match, and Groth and Hewitt played together in this year’s Australian Open.AdvertisementThere is also the matter of Sunday’s reverse singles. If Groth is weary or struggling, that might prove tough for Hewitt to pass up, with his love of grass and a high-stakes tussle.“We’ll just see how it pans out,” said Hewitt, who turned 35 last month. “We’ve got to put our best options forward every single day.”The question is why the Australians are playing the Americans on grass at all in this match, which, even without Kyrgios, looks like one of the best of the eight opening-round encounters. (Others include Britain and the new father Andy Murray hosting Japan and Kei Nishikori in Birmingham, England; and Serbia and top-ranked Novak Djokovic hosting Kazakhstan in Belgrade, Serbia.)The Australians and the Americans last played in 1999 in a quarterfinal that was used to celebrate 100 years of Davis Cup. It was scheduled at the site of the original Davis Cup match — Longwood Cricket Club in the Boston area — long before it was known whom the Americans would face.It turned out to be Australia, and though it was actually Australia’s turn to host the United States, the International Tennis Federation stuck with the plan to play the commemorative match at Longwood. In exchange, it was agreed that the Australians would host the next two matches between the nations, but the Australians and their then-captain, John Newcombe, upset with the schedule shuffling, demanded more in return and received it.The Americans had planned to play the Australians on clay at Longwood, but the Australians appealed to the I.T.F., and the Americans were instead required to stage the match on a hardcourt.The Australian team, which included the 18-year-old Hewitt, went on to win the quarterfinal and eventually the 1999 Cup.AdvertisementNews reports at the time indicated that as part of the bargain, the Australians had agreed to use a hardcourt surface when they next hosted the Americans in Australia. And yet, 17 years later, as the rivalry resumes in Melbourne, the surface underfoot is grass.Oversight? Miscommunication? Selective Australian memory? A bungle certainly seems possible in a sport where the Croatian umpire Denis Pitner was suspended from officiating last August and still managed to work at the United States Open.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.“We certainly did not waive any clause related to this tie,” said Jim Courier, the United States Davis Cup captain who played in that 1999 match in Longwood and would have preferred it to be on clay.Chris Widmaier, a spokesman for the United States Tennis Association, said that the U.S.T.A. was examining the situation.“We are looking through it now, looking through I.T.F. committee notes and asking the I.T.F. to do the same,” Widmaier said Wednesday night. “But I will also say, the team is ready to go.”Clearly, the right thing in this case — even if it is confirmed that the hardcourt agreement did exist — would not be to rip up the grass at Kooyong Stadium and revert to the cushioned acrylic surface underneath. But it would seem more than fair for the Australians to stage the next Davis Cup match with the Americans in Australia on a hardcourt.The Australians have apparently not forgotten everything about 1999, as the entertainment at Wednesday night’s official team dinner made clear.“They were showing highlights of all the great matches between the U.S. and Australia, and they showed a bunch of highlights from Boston,” Mike Bryan said. “I don’t know, but it maybe left a little bit of a bad taste. They kept showing match point over and over again.”It was a strange quarterfinal, in part because Pete Sampras, who had asked to join the American team after skipping the first round, was not used in singles despite being the highest-ranked player on the squad. Sampras did not want to step on Courier’s or Todd Martin’s turf by playing singles, but on the final Sunday he was drafted by Tom Gullikson, the team’s captain, after Martin was initially declared unfit by the team doctor because of heatstroke.AdvertisementNewcombe and the Australians were skeptical. Davis Cup rules at that stage forbade substitutions unless a player was incapacitated by illness or injury, and a doctor refused to confirm that Martin was unfit to play. After receiving fluids, Martin took the court and was in tears at one stage at having had his integrity questioned before the match. He went on to lose to Patrick Rafter in five sets, which gave Australia an insurmountable 3-1 lead, a defeat that eventually cost Gullikson his captaincy.That narrowed the Americans’ lead over the Australians to 25-20 in the prolific rivalry that long defined the game. The Americans have won the Cup a record 32 times; the Australians have won 28. They once met in 16 straight finals in the days of the Challenge Round, when defending champions had to play only the final.“We are historians of the game,” Bob Bryan said Thursday. “We have read all the articles, read the books and watched the tapes. There is not a mystery that this match has historic implications.”But there are certainly mysteries still to be solved at Kooyong. Can the Americans win a big one for Courier, whose record in his sixth year is an underwhelming 6-5? And will the unretired captain Hewitt rise up from his new chair and try to win another big one for Australia and himself?“He’s clutch,” Mike Bryan conceded. “Hopefully, it’s not a fairy tale for the Aussies.”A version of this article appears in print on March 4, 2016, on Page B14 of the New York edition with the headline: Hewitt’s Short-Lived Retirement .  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.See More »