By THE ASSOCIATED PRESSMARCH 4, 2016
OAKLAND, Calif. —  Stephen Curry scored 33 points in his return from an ankle injury and the Golden State Warriors tied an N.B.A. record by winning their 44th straight regular-season home game, 121-106, over the Oklahoma City Thunder on Thursday night.Five days after tying an N.B.A. record with 12 3-pointers in an overtime win at Oklahoma City, Curry went 5 of 15 from long range in the rematch. But he got more than enough help from his bench to help the Warriors (55-5) tie one record set by Chicago as they chase the Bulls’ single-season mark for victories.The Bulls won 44 consecutive home games from March 30, 1995, until April 4, 1996. That helped them set the record with 72 wins in 1995-96, a mark the Warriors remain on pace to surpass after beating the Thunder for the third time in as many tries this season.Kevin Durant scored 32 points, Russell Westbrook had 22 and Serge Ibaka added 20 for the Thunder, who have lost six of eight since the All-Star break.AdvertisementKlay Thompson scored 21 for the Warriors, and Shaun Livingston had 11 points and 8 assists off the bench.AdvertisementThe Warriors trailed, 80-71, midway through the third quarter before racing past a Thunder team playing for the second night in a row. Golden State cut the deficit to a single point after three quarters and took over in the fourth.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.With four starters on the bench to start the period, Golden State scored the first seven points with the help of a 3-pointer by Marreese Speights and strong play from Livingston to take a 6-point lead.Golden State extended the lead once the starters returned, going up by 106-97 on Curry’s 3-point play with just more than four minutes to play. Andrew Bogut then stole the ball from Durant, leading to a dunk by Thompson that gave the Warriors a 12-point lead.Curry added two late 3-pointers to seal the outcome.After missing Tuesday night’s overtime win against Atlanta with a sprained left ankle, Curry was a late addition to the lineup against the Thunder. He showed few ill effects early from the injury, beating Durant with a nifty crossover for a layup for his first basket and hitting two 3-pointers in the first quarter to extend his streak to 130 straight games with a 3.Curry had 10 points in the quarter and Golden State led, 29-28, after one. He hit a 33-footer in the final minute of the half, and the Warriors led, 63-61, at the break.We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.