By BILL PENNINGTONMARCH 2, 2016
In a jarring crash on Saturday, Lindsey Vonn, the women’s overall World Cup leader this season, sustained a hairline fracture in her left knee. Remarkably, even for someone whose career has been marked by dramatic comebacks, Vonn was back racing the next day and led the Alpine combined at the halfway mark of the event in Andorra.Vonn finished 13th in that race, but afterward, still concerned about her knee, she headed to Spain for additional tests. A closer examination revealed three fractures of the leg’s tibial plateau, not one.On Wednesday, for the third time in the last four years, Vonn announced that her ski season would be cut short by injury, ending her chase for a fifth World Cup overall title. Vonn wrote on her Facebook page that the newly discovered fractures were significant enough that her leg was “not sufficiently stable to permit me to safely continue skiing.”Vonn continued: “Further damage to any of the fragments could result in a serious surgery that would risk my future in ski racing. With the world championships in St. Moritz next year and the Winter Olympics in South Korea the following year, I cannot take that risk.”AdvertisementAs the 31-year-old Vonn chases a host of World Cup records and what would be her first appearance at the Winter Olympics in eight years, the question is increasingly whether her often-injured lower body can withstand the rigors of her sport. Moreover, is her racing style suited to staying healthy?AdvertisementVonn has won 20 World Cup season-long titles, two Olympic medals and 76 World Cup races not only because of her wealth of talent but also because of the way she doggedly attacks every racecourse with a fearlessness that ignores the perils of skiing at 70 miles an hour.Since she was 21, that strategy has led to dominant performances. Vonn is within 10 World Cup victories of the career record set by Ingemar Stenmark, a mark once thought to be all but unassailable.But since 2013, Vonn has torn three knee ligaments, has endured two substantial knee reconstructions, has twice broken her tibia and has broken an ankle.When healthy, in the speed events of super-G and the downhill, she is an almost unbeatable force.Doug Lewis, a two-time Alpine Olympian and longtime World Cup analyst, said before this season began: “The only thing stopping Vonn, and everyone knows this, is Vonn herself. She is so aggressive and fearless, even in training, she gets hurt.”Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.Because she is leading the World Cup overall standings, Vonn on Wednesday called her decision to stop racing “one of the toughest” of her career.“While I am confident that I’m making the right decision, it still doesn’t make this decision any easier,” Vonn wrote. “Thanks to everyone who supported me and stood by me through it all.”Vonn becomes yet another ski racing star to exit this season’s competition. Anna Fenninger of Austria, the defending women’s overall champion, injured her knee in October and has missed the season. Aksel Lund Svindal was leading the men’s overall standings when he crashed and tore his anterior cruciate ligament in January. Other stars, like Tina Maze of Slovenia and the American Bode Miller, have chosen to sit out the season.Vonn will unquestionably forge on and mount another comeback next winter. It has always been her approach. At the 2006 Turin Olympics, she limped from her hospital bed to finish eighth in the women’s downhill two days after a harrowing, nearly life-threatening crash.AdvertisementOnce her leg fractures heal, she is likely to be back training again, probably by the summer in New Zealand or South America.As Vonn said in an interview in Vail, Colo., her hometown, in November, “I’m the last one standing of my generation of racers.”She continued: “After my second knee surgery, pretty much everyone in my family said, ‘Lindsey, don’t you want to walk when you’re older?’ And I said, ‘Don’t worry; there’s going to be some new medical procedure, and I’ll have new knees, and it’ll be no problem.’ It never crossed my mind to retire.”A version of this article appears in print on March 3, 2016, on Page B14 of the New York edition with the headline: For Third Time in Four Years, an Injury Ends Vonn’s Season .  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.