AdvertisementSupported byBy Ben RothenbergROME — Now that the expectations surrounding her have subsided, Madison Keys has exceeded them on the surface where they were lowest: slow European clay.The 24th-ranked Keys beat third-seeded Garbiñe Muguruza, 7-6 (5), 6-4, on a drizzly Saturday afternoon to reach the final of the Italian Open. She will face top-seeded Serena Williams, who beat 35th-ranked Irina-Camelia Begu, 6-4, 6-1, in the other semifinal. Their meeting Sunday will be the first all-American women’s final on a clay court since Williams beat her sister Venus to win the 2002 French Open.Keys, 21, who had lost in the second round in her previous two trips to Rome, had not made a semifinal on any surface in more than a year. She said this unexpected surge on what she considered her weakest surface should give her confidence a boost.“I mean, I can play on clay? Yes!” Keys said. “It’s something I’m really proud of myself for, and hopefully I can take the experience and use it in the next couple of weeks. It’s definitely going to be something that I remind myself of going into every clay-court season: ‘Yeah, I made the final of a red-clay tournament. I can do this thing.’”Muguruza said she sensed from across the net that the free-swinging Keys felt unburdened.”I felt she was very loose today,” Muguruza said. “I think maybe because she doesn’t like clay? I don’t know. But I felt she was playing great.”Keys has shown remarkable focus throughout the event, which she attributed in part to her new coach, Thomas Hogstedt.“Sometimes I have lapses of attention, and I can lose some points very quickly — that’s been a big thing for him,” Keys said. “So if I feel myself slipping a little bit, I’m catching myself very quickly.”Keys’s agent, Max Eisenbud, recommended Hogstedt, an exacting Swedish coach who had worked with the Eisenbud clients Li Na and Maria Sharapova. Hogstedt began working with Keys in the last week of April, at IMG Academy in Bradenton, Fla.“There was a lot of work to be done,” Hogstedt said.Hogstedt said Keys had weapons that could transfer to clay effectively — a particularly important point with the French Open set to begin on May 22.“I think clay actually suits her quite well,” Hogstedt said. “She has a great kick serve she can build up, and she has one of the biggest forehands on the women’s tour, so I think it suits her well, and I think she’s shown here some very good patience. She’s been very impressive.”Hogstedt has experience helping players who are feeling uncomfortable, having transformed Sharapova from a self-described “cow on ice” to an eventual two-time French Open champion; she won the first under his guidance.“When I worked with Maria, it was getting her to learn how to play on clay — and then she dominated clay,” Hogstedt said. “It’s a lot of belief, and the right training, and getting the player to use their game the best way. This, Madison has done very well this week.”Keys acknowledged that it had been easier to develop her game under a dimmer spotlight this year, compared with the hype around her after she reached the semifinals at last year’s Australian Open, where she lost to Serena Williams. “That was a lot for me to handle,” Keys said.Keys said strong results from other Americans — like Sloane Stephens’s three WTA titles this year and Louisa Chirico’s run to the Madrid semifinals last week — had helped reduce the external pressure on her.“Being an American, we’re very lucky that all of the attention is very rarely just on one person,” Keys said. “Unless you’re Serena — then it’s on you all the time.”Williams last won a title in August, at the Cincinnati Masters, and this is only her fifth tournament since. Despite that lack of match play, reaching the final in Rome — her first clay-court tournament this year — seemed to come as no shock to Williams.“Even though I haven’t been playing tournaments, I spend a lot of time on the court, trying to develop my game even at this age and this stage in my career,” Williams said. “So am I surprised? I don’t know if I should say I’m surprised. I feel like if you put in the work, you should get the results.”Advertisement