By DAVID WALDSTEINMAY 14, 2016
DENVER — The last time Matt Harvey could recall struggling as a baseball pitcher — the only time, really — was in 2009 when he was a sophomore at the University of North Carolina.Opposing hitters were punishing him to the rate of a 5.40 E.R.A. But, Harvey said, the poor spell left as quickly as it came, and from there forward he has excelled.Until this year.For the first time in Harvey’s professional career, he is enduring bad results for an extended time, and he does not have an answer. After his latest disappointing outing Friday night — a 5-2 loss to the Colorado Rockies at Coors Field — Harvey said he just feels uncomfortable on the mound.More than anything, he seemed bewildered.“Certain pitches, it’s fine,” he said. “Throughout the game, it’s progressively getting worse.”AdvertisementThat is troubling for Harvey, who gave up 11 hits and five earned runs in five and two-thirds innings against the Rockies in his eighth start of the season. He is 3-5 with a 4.93 E.R.A. In his major league career, he has never ended a season with an E.R.A. above 2.73.After a successful start in San Diego last Sunday, the velocity on Harvey’s pitches dipped on Friday. He began well against the Rockies, but then he began to leave pitches up in the strike zone and over the plate — a familiar pattern so far this season.They were hittable pitches, as the Rockies demonstrated. The only other time he has surrendered more hits was against the Tigers in 2013, when he gave up 13 in his last start before having Tommy John surgery.Get the big sports news, highlights and analysis from Times journalists, with distinctive takes on games and some behind-the-scenes surprises, delivered to your inbox every week.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.Harvey threw a career-high 216 innings last season, so there are concerns that he feels fatigued. But Harvey denies having physical problems. There is no pain in his elbow, he said, and he does not feel tired or weak.Manager Terry Collins was asked if he was concerned about Harvey’s dip in velocity on Friday, as well as in some of his other starts. Collins paused five seconds before answering that Harvey had shown a wide range of speeds on his fastball even during some of his most successful seasons.AdvertisementWhatever the problem is, it has left Harvey disconcerted.“It’s something I’ve obviously done my whole life,” Harvey said, “stand on the mound and throw a baseball, and right now it’s not an easy task. I’ve got to keep my head down and keep focused and keep pushing to figure it out.”In his first three seasons in the majors, Harvey did not have to spend a lot of time tinkering with his pitching motion, staring at videotape, brainstorming with the pitching coach Dan Warthen about what to try next, or walking off the mound dejected and frustrated after handing the ball to Collins.“It is hard,” Collins said. “A great statement I heard the other day: There’s two kinds of players in this league — ones who have been humbled, and those who will be. When it’s your turn, it gets tough to take sometimes, because you’ve got to learn how to adjust to it and learn how to bounce back from it.”Collins said that Warthen had spotted a few things on video, particularly the release point on Harvey’s pitches — where his hand is when he lets go of the ball. Collins said Harvey and Warthen had been working on it in the bullpen between starts, but Harvey dismissed that as the cause of his problems.“There’s a lot of unknowns,” he said.His first foray into the world of problem-solving for pitchers could also be taking a mental toll. At times, Harvey acknowledged, he is thinking too much about what he is doing when he delivers the baseball. For a dominant pitcher like Harvey, it tends to work better when he just rears back and fires away.“You start overthinking pretty much everything,” he said. “That’s the way it kind of feels every pitch. So, hopefully, we can get past that.”A version of this article appears in print on May 15, 2016, on Page SP4 of the New York edition with the headline: Harvey Bewildered by His Woes.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.