By JACQUELINE WILLIAMSMAY 14, 2016
Christy O’Connor Sr., an Irish golfer who played on 10 consecutive Ryder Cup teams and was inducted into the World Golf Hall of Fame, died on Saturday. He was 91.His death, which was confirmed by the European Tour, follows that of his nephew, the Irish golfer Christy O’Connor Jr., who died in January while on vacation in the Canary Islands.Information about the location and cause of the elder O’Connor’s death, and about his survivors, was not immediately available.O’Connor, whose career spanned four decades and who was known as “himself” because of the way he embraced life, was a dominant force in European golf, winning 24 times on the European Tour, including the British Masters twice. He played 15 times in what is now the World Cup, teaming with Harry Bradshaw to win for Ireland in 1958. He held the record for most Ryder Cup appearances until Nick Faldo surpassed it in 1997.Get the big sports news, highlights and analysis from Times journalists, with distinctive takes on games and some behind-the-scenes surprises, delivered to your inbox every week.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.President Michael D. Higgins of Ireland said O’Connor had opened the world of golf to countless people in Ireland and elsewhere. O’Connor was inducted into the World Golf Hall of Fame in 2009.AdvertisementRichard Hills, the Ryder Cup director, who first told O’Connor of his election, said in a statement Saturday that O’Connor was “built like a bull but had incredible hands for golf.”“Christy did so much for the game of golf, and his legacy will long live on,” Hills said. “After the tragic, sudden death of his nephew, Christy O’Connor Jr., in January, golf has lost two of its greatest men.”AdvertisementChristy O’Connor Sr. was born on Dec. 21, 1924, in Knocknacarra, in County Galway. His legacy is expected to be celebrated at the Irish Open, which begins Thursday.A version of this article appears in print on May 15, 2016, on Page A21 of the New York edition with the headline: Christy O’Connor Sr., 91, Storied Irish Golfer.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.