By BILLY WITZMAY 14, 2016
The seats had mostly emptied late Tuesday, but some fans could not bring themselves to leave Yankee Stadium. Their mad dash to the subway had come to a halt, and they congregated four and five deep along the field-level concourse.What kept them anchored was the man standing on the pitcher’s mound: Aroldis Chapman.Chapman, the newest Yankee, who became eligible Monday after serving a 30-game domestic violence suspension, has brought a buzz to the late innings at the often somnolent stadium with a fastball that rides steadily at 100 miles an hour.When Chapman enters through the bullpen gate, he is accompanied by a beat-thumping music medley and a montage of flaming scoreboard graphics, which awaken the crowd as would one of his fastballs under the chin.“Even though Yankee Stadium is empty, it’s like there’s life back in it,” Elan Wilkenfeld said Tuesday as he stood in the right-field corner with his friend Ross Rubin, watching Chapman work the final inning of a 10-7 Yankees victory.AdvertisementFor a team that has been competitive but not dynamic — and devoid of much personality — in recent seasons, Chapman may be the Yankees’ most captivating presence as they try to crawl out of last place in the American League East.AdvertisementBut because he is a closer — used almost exclusively when the Yankees have a lead but not too large a lead — it is uncertain each night if Chapman will appear.On Thursday night, Gregg Fein, who was seated in the right-field bleachers, peered down into the bullpen with his two young sons to watch Chapman warm up while the Yankees extended their lead with two late runs on the way to a 7-3 victory.“I’m kind of torn,” Fein said. “If we score a bunch of runs here, Chapman won’t come into the game.”Indeed, with a comfortable margin, the Yankees saved him for another day.The Yankees have a rich tradition of closers, from Sparky Lyle and Goose Gossage to Mariano Rivera and, since Rivera’s retirement, David Robertson and Andrew Miller, who was the American League reliever of the year last season but was moved out of the closer’s role to make way for Chapman.But Chapman is unlike them in one respect: Nobody in baseball throws harder.Chapman, whose fastball was once clocked at 105 m.p.h. while he was pitching for Cincinnati, threw the 77 fastest pitches in baseball last season, according to Statcast pitch-tracking data. So when Chapman comes in to pitch, there is a curiosity in observing him do something no one else can do, akin to watching Stephen Curry shoot basketballs.When Chapman entered on Saturday to close out the Yankees’ 2-1 win over the Chicago White Sox, the crowd greeted him with its loudest cheers of the day. The fans roared when he struck out Todd Frazier with a 101-m.p.h. fastball to end a tense, eight-pitch at-bat and roared again when he whiffed pinch-hitter Jerry Sands. The entire crowd rose to its feet when he got two strikes on Brett Lawrie, who flied out to end the game.Chapman combined with Miller and Dellin Betances to strike out eight of the last 11 White Sox batters.Advertisement“What did Max Scherzer say the other day? ‘Strikeouts are sexy,’” Miller said, referring to the Washington pitcher who tied a major league record on Wednesday by striking out 20 batters in a nine-inning game. “Strikeouts are fun. The fans like them.”It is not just fans who rubberneck toward the scoreboard after each pitch, checking for a velocity reading. Betances, Chapman’s fellow reliever, whose fastball is regularly around 98 m.p.h., was giddy about watching Chapman warm up for his debut on Monday. He said there was wagering over how fast Chapman would throw.Even Manager Joe Girardi, typically impervious to such frivolousness, acknowledged that he was acting like a fan, checking the scoreboard for Chapman’s velocity.“His stuff is electric, and it’s exciting, and I think people like that,” Girardi said. “I think players are curious on our side, too. It’s not something you see every day, three digits on the board.”Chapman said there were no radar gun readings on scoreboards in Cuba, but they have been staples at major league ballparks since he arrived in 2010.“Some stadiums, it’s easier than others to see the velocity,” he said through an interpreter. “Once in a while, you might take a peek, but my job is to focus on the pitch and hit the target.”Chapman has not been infallible in his three appearances. On Monday, Royals pinch-hitter Paulo Orlando ripped a double off him and later scored, although his hit came on a 90-m.p.h. slider, which may have prompted Chapman to throw nothing but fastballs in the 21 pitches he delivered the next night. He has struck out three of the nine batters he has faced.But at-bats against him are hardly considered comfortable.Chapman shattered Cheslor Cuthbert’s bat with a 102-m.p.h. fastball on Tuesday.Advertisement“You just don’t want to make it ugly,” Orlando said. “His fastball is straight, and you can recognize it but don’t have much time.”Get the big sports news, highlights and analysis from Times journalists, with distinctive takes on games and some behind-the-scenes surprises, delivered to your inbox every week.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.When Chapman prepares to pitch, he settles into a familiar routine: He loosens up using surgical tubing to do arm circles and then plays catch with a weighted ball before stepping onto the rubber to begin his warm-up pitches.Charged with corralling them is Roman Rodriguez, a former minor league infielder who is the Yankees’ longtime bullpen catcher. Unlike Miller and Betances, who can throw fastballs in the upper 90s, Chapman does not slowly build up. He is throwing hard with his first pitch.“It’s uncomfortable,” said Rodriguez, who wears a mask and shin guards. “If I don’t catch it, it’s going to hurt my body. You have to concentrate. It doesn’t look good if the bullpen catcher goes on the disabled list.”Rodriguez, as he does with all the other pitchers, draws a small circle in the dirt where any bounced pitch lands. He did so with several of Chapman’s on Tuesday. One did not bounce but sailed past Rodriguez, hitting a padded wall behind him with a thump that reverberated. It was enough for one man, with his young son, to back away from the protective fencing behind Rodriguez.When Chapman begins to throw in the bullpen, fans seated nearby rise to watch, many taking out their phones to record an intimate view of his fastball. They can also hear it pop in Rodriguez’s mitt.“Everybody is so anxious to see him,” said Kirby Yates, a Yankees reliever. “It’s really cool: You can feel the excitement.”When the Yankees make the final out in the eighth inning, the bullpen gate swings open. Chapman exchanges a fist bump with the bullpen coach Mike Harkey, draws a long swig from a water bottle and walks onto the field. Once he clears the warning track, Chapman spits a stream of water onto the grass and jogs to the mound.AdvertisementA closer’s entrance has turned into a theatrical production in many stadiums. For years, Rivera entered games to the Metallica song “Enter Sandman.” When Miller asserted himself as the team’s closer last year, Johnny Cash’s “God’s Gonna Cut You Down” accompanied him. The songs seemed to fit both Rivera, for his inevitability, and Miller, for his ruthlessness, with baseball’s second-highest strikeout rate last season, behind Chapman’s.Chapman enters to the screaming guitars of Rage Against the Machine’s “Wake Up.” That segues into the dance-happy “La Gozadera” by Gente de Zona, a song featuring Marc Anthony, whose entertainment agency represents Chapman. The music is accompanied by a video montage of a menacing Chapman with smoke and flames surrounding him. Flames flash on the ribbon board along the facing to the upper deck.Asked what he thought of the production, Chapman smiled.“It’s very nice,” he said. “It’s a lot of fire, but I like it.”While Chapman said he was well versed in tuning out the distractions of the crowd — and the radar reading and the theatrical production — he is aware that he is keeping people in the stadium and bringing them out of their seats.“A lot of fans like to see the big number on the board,” Chapman said. “If I can, whenever it’s possible, I like to put on a show for the fans.”Seth Berkman contributed reporting.A version of this article appears in print on May 15, 2016, on Page SP3 of the New York edition with the headline: Yankees’ New Fireballer Is Kindling Fans’ Excitement.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.