By BILLY WITZMARCH 1, 2016
TAMPA, Fla. — When Aroldis Chapman stood at his locker in the Yankees’ spring training clubhouse last week, he was resolute in defending himself. He knew that Major League Baseball was investigating his actions in an October episode in which, according to a police report, he placed his hands around his girlfriend’s neck during an argument and fired a gun eight times. He knew he was in great danger of being suspended.Still, he struck a defiant note.“I’ve never hurt anybody, never in my life,” Chapman told reporters in Spanish, maintaining that he would fight any suspension that was imposed on him. “That’s not my character or who I am.”But Chapman took a far different stance on Tuesday when he agreed to accept a 30-game suspension handed down by Commissioner Rob Manfred that will begin on opening day. It is the first suspension under baseball’s new domestic violence policy, which was written in concert with the players’ union and enacted last August.Chapman, who will lose about $1.86 million from his 2016 salary of $11.3 million, is eligible to return to the Yankees on May 9. Until then, he can participate in spring training and play in the team’s exhibition games, which begin Wednesday. But once the regular season begins, Chapman, one of the game’s premier relievers and its hardest thrower, will be restricted to working out at the Yankees’ complex here. Whether he will be ready to pitch on May 9 remains to be seen.AdvertisementShortly after the ruling was announced, Chapman issued a statement that began with him maintaining that he did not “in any way” harm his girlfriend.Advertisement“However,” the statement went on to say, “I should have exercised better judgment with respect to my actions, and for that I am sorry.” He added that “the decision to accept a suspension, as opposed to appealing one, was made after careful consideration” and was done to “minimize the distractions that an appeal would cause the Yankees, my new teammates and, most importantly, my family.”He added, “I have learned from this matter.”Chapman’s change of heart came after nearly a week of negotiations among Major League Baseball’s chief legal officer, Dan Halem; the chief counsel for the players union, Dave Prouty; and Chapman’s lawyer, Jay Reisinger, according to two people in baseball familiar with the negotiations.By arriving at a number — 30 games — that everyone could live with, Manfred established a strong precedent with the first case under his new policy and thus avoid any possibility that the suspension would be reduced or even overturned by an arbitrator. In particular, he established an immediate contrast with the chaos the N.FL. has encountered in trying to devise a coherent policy on domestic violence.In addition, by agreeing not to appeal, the union can avoid being put in the awkward position of having to defend one of its players in a domestic violence case.In his own statement after the announcement, Manfred cited the use of a firearm by Chapman during the episode and the impact it had on his girlfriend, Cristina Barnea, who, according to the police report, hid in the bushes outside his home while she phoned police dispatchers for help.Manfred called Chapman’s behavior “inappropriate” and added, “I am gratified that Mr. Chapman has taken responsibility for his conduct.”According to the police report — the case occurred in Davie, Fla. — Chapman fired the eight shots into a wall of his garage after the altercation with Barnea. She told the police that although Chapman put his hands around her neck, at no point was she unable to breathe.AdvertisementChapman’s driver told the police that Chapman fired the gun shortly after punching the window of his car and cutting his finger. The police report also said that no one other than Chapman was in the garage when the shots were fired.Even after the police chose not to press charges in the case, Broward County prosecutors twice looked into doing so. But they decided not to because of conflicting accounts and insufficient evidence after Barnea and other witnesses refused to cooperate.Nevertheless, baseball’s new policy allows Manfred to impose discipline regardless of whether a player is charged with, or convicted of, a crime. Under the policy, Chapman is also subject to counseling and possible forfeiture of weapons.Two women who are professional advocates against domestic violence had differing reactions to Tuesday’s announcement.Get the big sports news, highlights and analysis from Times journalists, with distinctive takes on games and some behind-the-scenes surprises, delivered to your inbox every week.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.“The fact that M.L.B. and the players union agreed to this says that both sides are taking this seriously,” said Kim Gandy, president of the National Network to End Domestic Violence. “It sends a message to the players, but it also sends a message to the wives and girlfriends of the players that they don’t have to see this as something that is acceptable in their world.”However, Judy Harris Kluger, the executive director of Sanctuary for Families, said she was not impressed with Chapman’s statement since he continued to maintain that he had not hurt his girlfriend during the incident.“It’s not a very contrite statement,” she said. “Abusers have the responsibility that if they’re really going to change their actions, they need to own up to what they’ve done.”Gandy said: “I rarely expect contrition from abusers, and even when I hear it, I don’t believe it, because talk is cheap. The only way you know an abuser is truly contrite is if they stop abusing.”AdvertisementOthers weighed in as well. The Yankees said they supported the suspension and were “pleased that Aroldis has accepted this discipline.” The club, which spent much of Tuesday conducting team-bonding activities that were off-limits to reporters, said other comments would have to wait until Wednesday.Meanwhile, the union said it supported Chapman’s decision “to forgo his right to appeal.”Chapman, who will become a free agent at the end of the season, was on the verge of being dealt to the Los Angeles Dodgers in early December when Yahoo disclosed the October episode. The Dodgers then backed out of the deal. The Boston Globe reported that the Red Sox stopped their pursuit of Chapman weeks earlier after learning of the case.When the Reds then drastically cut the asking price for Chapman, the Yankees decided that the opportunity to get him was too good to pass up. On Dec. 28, they acquired him for four midlevel prospects.“Given the circumstances that exist, the price point on the acquisition has been modified,” General Manager Brian Cashman said then. “We felt this was an opportunity to add a big arm to our bullpen.”The Yankees are equipped to withstand Chapman’s absence with Andrew Miller, who saved 36 games in 38 opportunities last season and is line to be an eighth-inning specialist once Chapman returns. Behind Miller is Dellin Betances, an All-Star in his first two seasons in the big leagues. Together, they may form one of the more formidable bullpens in many decades, but not until May at the earliest.A version of this article appears in print on March 2, 2016, on Page B11 of the New York edition with the headline: Yankees’ New Closer to Sit Awhile.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.