By ALLAN KREDAMARCH 1, 2016
The Devils traded their leading scorer, Lee Stempniak, to the Boston Bruins on Monday; swapped forwards with the Montreal Canadiens; and traded defenseman Eric Gelinas to the Colorado Avalanche.The Devils, who were 5 points behind the Pittsburgh Penguins for the second wild-card spot in the Eastern Conference after Monday’s play, sent Stempniak — who has 16 goals and 41 points — to the Bruins for a fourth-round pick this year and a second-round pick in 2017. It was the third straight year that Stempniak, a veteran forward, was moved at the trade deadline.Stempniak, 33, signed with the Devils as a free agent last summer after splitting last season with the Rangers and the Winnipeg Jets. He proved to be a pleasant surprise for the resurgent Devils. The previous year, Stempniak started in Calgary and was traded to Pittsburgh at the deadline.The Devils (30-26-7) also sent the former first-round draft pick Stefan Matteau to Montreal for Devante Smith-Pelly and shipped Gelinas, 24, to Colorado for a third-round pick in 2017.Advertisement“They weren’t in our lineup regularly,” Devils General Manager Ray Shero said on a conference call in reference to Gelinas and Matteau. “The draft picks are important.”AdvertisementThe Islanders, meanwhile, made only one depth move Monday, the league’s deadline day, acquiring forward Shane Prince and a seventh-round pick in this June’s draft for the Islanders’ third-round pick. Prince, 23, had three goals in 42 games for the Ottawa Senators.The Islanders also swapped minor league forwards with Colorado, acquiring the former Rangers prospect Marc-Andre Cliché for Taylor Beck.The Islanders (33-20-7) were third in the Metropolitan Division and will be seeking to advance past the first round of the playoffs for the first time since 1993.PENGUINS 6, COYOTES 0  Patric Hornqvist had his first career hat trick, beating goalie Louis Domingue three times as host Pittsburgh made quick work of Arizona. It was the Coyotes’ sixth straight loss.Get the big sports news, highlights and analysis from Times journalists, with distinctive takes on games and some behind-the-scenes surprises, delivered to your inbox every week.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.Marc-Andre Fleury stopped 30 shots for his fifth shutout of the season and the 43rd of his career.Domingue made 27 saves, but Arizona was never in it while finishing a five-game trip without a victory.The victory provided a giddy end to a relatively quiet day. Pittsburgh’s only significant move before the 3 p.m. trade deadline consisted of sending the Russian rookie forward Sergei Plotnikov to the Coyotes in the morning, ending his forgettable tenure with the Penguins. (AP)LIGHTNING 2, MAPLE LEAFS 1  Tyler Johnson scored twice, and visiting Tampa Bay beat Toronto for the Lightning’s seventh straight win. It was Johnson’s first multigoal game of the season.Nazem Kadri scored late in the third for Toronto, and Garret Sparks had 26 stops. (AP)FLYERS 5, FLAMES 3  Brayden Schenn had his first career hat trick, scoring all three goals in the first two periods and leading host Philadelphia past Calgary.AdvertisementThe Flyers remained 3 points behind Pittsburgh for the final wild-card spot in the East. (AP)A version of this article appears in print on March 1, 2016, on Page B9 of the New York edition with the headline: Devils Deal Their Top Scorer Amid Final Whirl of Trades .  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.