By THE ASSOCIATED PRESSJUNE 9, 2016
Muhammad Ali long ago began crafting the plan for his final tribute and insisted that tickets for his memorial service be free. But some people sought to turn a profit after the tickets were handed out Wednesday.It took about an hour for the thousands of tickets for Friday’s memorial service at KFC Yum Center in Louisville to be claimed on a first-come, first-served basis. Some of those who got tickets immediately looked to cash in, going online with offers to sell.Bob Gunnell, an Ali family spokesman, denounced the profiteering, saying he was “disgusted and amazed.”“I hope that those buying tickets or trying to buy tickets would stop those efforts by not purchasing,” he said. “Muhammad Ali wanted this to be a free event, an event that was open to all.”AdvertisementOthers posted online pleas to buy tickets. One wrote that he and his mother were driving in from Chicago for the service and were willing to pay $50 for two tickets. Another wrote that he was flying in from California for the service and offered to pay someone $50 to stand in line for him for tickets to both the memorial service and a traditional Muslim funeral scheduled for Thursday.AdvertisementBut others were refusing to pay for tickets.“The Greatest wanted his funeral to be accessible to everyone instead of the money hungry spectacle that will be taking place on Friday,” one wrote in requesting someone give him tickets for free. “RIP Muhammad Ali, the Greatest of all time.”The Knicks were in negotiations with Kurt Rambis, the team’s former interim coach, to have him remain on staff under Coach Jeff Hornacek, according to a person briefed on the talks.Get the big sports news, highlights and analysis from Times journalists, with distinctive takes on games and some behind-the-scenes surprises, delivered to your inbox every week.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.Rambis, a longtime confidant of Knicks President Phil Jackson, was expected to agree to become the team’s associate head coach. He took over as interim coach when Derek Fisher was fired in February after a year and a half in the position. The Knicks went 9-19 under Rambis.During the team’s recent — and extended — coaching search, Rambis was considered a front-runner to retain the job. But Jackson eventually landed Hornacek, a former coach of the Phoenix Suns, who agreed to a three-year deal.SCOTT CACCIOLAThe Philadelphia Phillies still were narrowing down their short list for the No. 1 overall pick in Thursday’s Major League Baseball draft.“We have a small group of players, both position players and pitchers, that we’re considering, and we’re hammering it out every single day,” said Johnny Almaraz, the Phillies’ scouting director.Finishing 63-99 in 2015 gave Philadelphia its choice of the top amateur talent. But there is no consensus No. 1.AdvertisementAround the MajorsThe Rangers’ Yu Darvish, in his third start since returning from Tommy John surgery in March 2015, left visiting Houston’s 3-1 win over Texas after the fifth inning because of tightness in his right shoulder. The Rangers said an examination by the team physician Dr. Keith Meister revealed no issues. • John Lackey struck out eight and extended his scoreless streak to 13⅔ innings, Kris Bryant and Ben Zobrist hit homers, and the Chicago Cubs beat host Philadelphia, 8-1.  Josh Donaldson had three hits, including a three-run homer and a triple, and R. • A. Dickey won consecutive starts for the first time since last summer as visiting Toronto stopped Detroit’s five-game winning streak, 7-2. • Corey Dickerson homered twice and the Tampa Bay Rays completed a 10-game trip with a win, 6-3, at Arizona. • Chris Tillman matched his career high with nine strikeouts to earn his seventh consecutive win, and host Baltimore sent Kansas City to its seventh straight loss, 4-0. • The Los Angeles Dodgers released Alex Guerrero, who started the season on the injured list. The Dodgers owe him nearly $8.2 million from the four-year, $28 million contract he signed in 2013.Vitaly Mutko, Russia’s sports minister, said all retested doping samples from the 2008 and 2012 Olympics should be thrown out because of flaws in the testing process.The International Olympic Committee has reported 55 positive findings in retesting of stored samples from the 2008 Beijing Games and the 2012 London Olympics. The Russian Olympic Committee has said 22 of the cases involved Russian athletes, including medalists.Russian officials said two athletes had been cleared when a second set of samples tested negative, contradicting the positive first set. Mutko said that was enough justification for the entire retesting program to be scrapped.Record-Holder Misses OutEthiopian track and field officials will not reconsider their selection criteria to allow Kenenisa Bekele on to the country’s Olympic marathon team.Bekele, the world-record holder in the 5,000 and 10,000 meters, was surprisingly left off Ethiopia’s four-man marathon team for the Rio de Janeiro Games.Aqib Talib returned to the Denver Broncos’ headquarters so team doctors could evaluate him after a bullet pierced his right thigh and calf last weekend.Coach Gary Kubiak said he had spoken briefly with Talib before the medical staff checked him out and charted a course of recovery. Talib is a Pro Bowl cornerback who is owed $8.5 million in base salary next season.AdvertisementTalib was shot early Sunday in Dallas, where he has an off-season home. The police are investigating the shooting, and Talib, who has had firearm incidents in the past, could be facing legal consequences and possible punishment from the N.F.L., which said it was looking into the matter.Super Bowl M.V.P. Rejects Offer Von Miller, the reigning Super Bowl most valuable player, turned down a contract offer that would have made him the highest paid nonquarterback in N.F.L. history.Miller was offered a six-year, $114.5 million contact — with $39.8 million in guaranteed money over the first two seasons — according to multiple media reports.Without an extension, Miller would play this coming season under the $14.129 million franchise tag tender.A version of this article appears in print on June 9, 2016, on Page B12 of the New York edition with the headline: Resellers Cashing In on Ali’s Memorial Service.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.