By VICTOR MATHERJUNE 29, 2016
When the Cleveland Cavaliers won the N.B.A. championship last week, the city’s 52-year major championship drought ended. Cleveland had never won an N.B.A. title, the Browns last won the N.F.L. championship in 1964, and the Indians have been without a World Series title since 1948.But the Cavaliers’ win may have not only broken a jinx but also ushered in a glorious new era, with Cleveland atop the sports world. The evidence is looking good so far.When the Cavaliers lifted their trophy, the Indians were riding a modest three-game winning streak. They have not lost since. Their streak stands at 12 consecutive wins, and entering Wednesday night, they were six games ahead of the second-place team in the American League Central, the Kansas City Royals.Behind a solid starting pitching staff that includes Josh Tomlin (9-1), Danny Salazar (10-3), Corey Kluber and Trevor Bauer, the Indians could be on track for their first division title in nine years.The third game of the Indians’ streak was one of the most dramatic, with Jose Ramirez hitting a game-ending single in the 10th inning to beat the visiting Chicago White Sox. Later that night, in Oakland, Calif., the Cavaliers won Game 7 of the N.B.A. finals to end Cleveland’s major title drought.AdvertisementThings had started looking up for Cleveland sports fans even before the Cavaliers’ title.Stipe Miocic, who grew up in the area and attended Cleveland State, won the Ultimate Fighting Championship heavyweight title in May with a surprise knockout of Fabrício Werdum in Brazil.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.The Lake Erie Monsters — a minor league hockey team that plays in the Cavaliers’ Quicken Loans Arena and is owned by the Cavaliers’ owner, Dan Gilbert — won their first American Hockey League title on June 11 when they swept the Hershey Bears. It was the city’s first Calder Cup since the now-defunct Cleveland Barons swept the Quebec Aces in 1964.AdvertisementThat brings us to the Browns, the team that has seemed to embody the Cleveland jinx more than any other. The Browns have not been to the playoffs since 2002 and have not won a playoff game since 1994. Last season they were 3-13.The Browns’ onetime quarterback of the future, Johnny Manziel, was released after two seasons of poor performance, off-the-field partying and domestic abuse allegations. His lawyer recently accidentally sent The Associated Press a text message expressing doubt his client could stay off drugs. Now the Browns seem ready to give Robert Griffin III, who flamed out in Washington, a shot at quarterback.At 150-1 betting odds, the Browns are considered the least likely team to win the Super Bowl.Should the Browns improbably open their season with a few wins, the jinx may be buried forever.A version of this article appears in print on June 30, 2016, on Page B12 of the New York edition with the headline: Cleveland Is Suddenly a City of Winners (and It’s Not Just the Cavaliers).  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.