JUNE 25, 2016
To Preserve a Sport, More Power to the PlayersTo The Sports Editor:Re “Tough Call in a Sport: To Referee or Not,” June 19: Pro ultimate team owners please note: Let the players make foul calls first and then turn to referees if they want, to preserve spirit of the game.Arguments that the absence of fully empowered refs slows the game down and allows boring haggling between players are wrong and shortsighted. The presence of refs teaches players to believe that they are not responsible for playing fair, only for winning. In the past, when ultimate players and teams have chosen to cheat to win, entertaining arguments have ensued, and teams and players have in the past been hounded and shunned by the community for violating the spirit of the game and for being cheaters.With refs we are taught, and learn to practice, the ethic that a foul that isn’t called is a good play, and that an intentional foul that helps the team win is a good foul. Isn’t breaking the rules intentionally in order to win another definition of cheating? Cheating is rampant and encouraged in pro sports and in many youth sports.Children are taught from the get-go that in ultimate you call your own fouls and that you are supposed to play fair. They get it, and they do it. I fear now that if ultimate lets refs take all the power, the sport will lose one of its core values.AdvertisementWillie Herndon, Austin, Tex.Play It Safe, GolfersTo the Sports Editor:Re “Leading Golfer Says He’ll Skip Rio Olympics,” June 23: Blame it on Rio. Or so we should if we accelerate the Zika outbreak by putting the globe’s finest athletes and a half-million of its citizens in harm’s way.AdvertisementWith there being evidence that the health risks go beyond damage to newborns to multiplying the possibility of contracting Guillain-Barré syndrome, who would suggest that Rio is a good place to visit?Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.For athletes who have dedicated a lifetime to this moment, the thought of a mosquito denying them their glory is ludicrous. But for Rory McIlroy, Vijay Singh and other professional golfers whose fame and fortune is already assured, the decision to withdraw from the Games seems a sane and rational course.Robert S. Nussbaum, Fort Lee, N.J.Pondering a PenaltyTo the Sports Editor:Re “At Last, Rescuing Victory From Calamity,” June 20: For a sport that is struggling to maintain its fan base, the Dustin Johnson fiasco will have just the opposite effect. I witnessed a tempest in a teapot. Johnson’s club never touched the ball, and its movement was imperceptible. The entire episode had no bearing on the next shot or, obviously, the outcome. Had the penalty stroke resulted in a different winner, the golf establishment would have been the laughingstock of sports fans everywhere.Mel Young, Lawrence, N.Y.Entering the Land of OzTo the Sports Editor:Re “James’s Story Completes Its Arc,” June 22: It was entirely accurate to identify the LeBron James odyssey as a bildungsroman. What’s troubling is the flippant dismissal of films with that theme as “middling 20th-century movies.” Filmmakers have told the coming-of-age story with frequent excellence. I’d put “The Wizard of Oz” in that category.Andy Saylor, Paxtang, Pa.A version of this letter appears in print on June 26, 2016, on Page SP6 of the New York edition with the headline: Letters to the Editor.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.