JUNE 6, 2016
Kurt Busch felt like a game show contestant who had to beat the clock to win a prize.Told that his Chevrolet was two laps shy of having enough fuel for the finishing push on Monday, Busch did all he could to save, scrimp and stretch over the final five laps to give himself a shot at the win. He coasted, he kept his foot off the gas, and he even turned his engine off when he headed into the turns at Pocono Raceway in Long Pond, Pa.“I kept finding ways to think I was saving fuel,” he said. “The way the fuel mileage played out, I didn’t know if we’d have enough.”With an interim crew chief calling the shots, Busch found enough ways to make his gas last and won the Sprint Cup race, his first victory of the season and a welcome dose of good news for Stewart-Haas Racing.Busch, the 2004 series champion, was urged by his team to step on it hard for the final lap and somehow made it work on a track with the longest front stretch in motorsports. There was no pain at the pump: Busch not only had enough fuel left to win but also had enough for victory burnouts and a celebratory lap around the track.AdvertisementDale Earnhardt Jr. was second, and Brad Keselowski, Chase Elliott and Joey Logano rounded out the top five in a race postponed one day because of rain.AdvertisementBusch won with the interim crew chief Johnny Klausmeier, the lead engineer, calling the shots as Tony Gibson served a one-race suspension.Detroit’s Michael Fulmer, a rookie right-hander, allowed two hits over six innings in another outstanding performance, and Justin Upton and James McCann homered to lift the Tigers to an 11-0 victory over the visiting Toronto Blue Jays.Fulmer (6-1) struck out five and walked three in his third straight start without allowing a run. He has won four straight starts, allowing only one run during that span.Toronto’s J. A. Happ (6-3) allowed six runs and six hits in five innings.Around the Majors Jon Lester pitched eight scoreless innings, Jason Heyward hit a two-run homer and the Chicago Cubs held off the Phillies, 6-4, in Philadelphia. Lester (7-3) struck out nine, walked none and allowed four hits.  Mark Trumbo and Matt Wieters hit solo home runs in the seventh inning to back a sparkling pitching performance by Mike Wright, and the Baltimore Orioles beat visiting Kansas City, 4-1, extending the Royals’ losing streak to five games.President Obama honored the Denver Broncos at the White House for winning Super Bowl 50 with one of the best defenses in history and one of the best quarterbacks, Peyton Manning.Get the big sports news, highlights and analysis from Times journalists, with distinctive takes on games and some behind-the-scenes surprises, delivered to your inbox every week.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.The Broncos defeated the Carolina Panthers, 24-10, to earn the invitation. Obama mentioned that the team’s victories over the course of the season were not always pretty. The Broncos, he noted, won a record 11 games by a touchdown or less.“You don’t do that without one of the greatest defenses of all time,” Obama said.Obama reminded the audience in the Rose Garden that he was a huge Bears fan and felt obliged to mention that franchise’s defense from the 1985 season, which ended with a Super Bowl victory for Chicago.Advertisement“Nobody remembers,” he said. “But I’ve got to admit this one was pretty good, too.”Obama singled out linebackers Von Miller and DeMarcus Ware for particular praise.In describing Denver’s offense, Obama said it “always seemed to come up big when it needed to.”Manning, who retired after an 18-year career, stood directly behind Obama at the ceremony.“We were all obviously a little bit disappointed to see him hang it up this spring, but as somebody who is just a little bit older than he is, I was sympathetic to the idea that running around with these guys, you know, it takes its toll,” Obama said of Manning. “But it is great to see somebody with a career like that, who always conducted himself on the field and off the field the way he did, be able to go out on top.”TALIB ON THE MEND Broncos cornerback Aqib Talib was released from a Dallas hospital and was expected to rejoin the team at a three-day minicamp set to begin Tuesday. Talib was shot in his lower right leg at a Dallas nightclub over the weekend but did not require surgery. The Dallas police are investigating the shooting.AROUND THE N.F.L. The Buffalo Bills signed their top draft pick, defensive end Shaq Lawson. The terms of the contract were not provided. Lawson was drafted 19th over all out of Clemson and was one of college football’s top pass rushers last year. He was a consensus all-American and led the nation with 25½ tackles for a loss and had 12½ sacks. Lawson is not expected to be ready for the start of the season after having surgery last month to repair a shoulder injury.  Commissioner Roger Goodell took the air out of the notion that the N.F.L. would reach a settlement with Patriots quarterback Tom Brady after Brady’s latest appeal of a four-game Deflategate suspension. “At this stage, no,” Goodell said, adding that there had been several previous bids to reach a settlement. “The courts will make their decisions, and we’ll move forward on that basis.” The comments were Goodell’s first in two weeks since Brady’s lawyers asked the United States Court of Appeals for the Second Circuit for a new hearing before an expanded panel of judges.Spain’s Olympic Committee said 3,000 bottles of insect repellent would be available to its athletes to help them avoid the Zika virus at the Rio de Janeiro Olympics this summer.At a meeting to inform the local sports federations about the virus, the committee said it had recently reached a deal with the laboratory Omega Pharma to provide its strongest repellent to the hundreds of Spanish athletes going to Rio in August.Committee doctors said there was a need to “remain engaged but not worried” about Zika, noting that only one in four people who have the disease develop its symptoms.They stressed, however, that pregnant women in the delegation should not go to Rio.A version of this article appears in print on June 7, 2016, on Page B14 of the New York edition with the headline: With Little Fuel to Spare, Kurt Busch Coasts to a Victory.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.