AdvertisementSupported byRangers 7, Yankees 1By Seth BerkmanAfter Carlos Beltran left Tuesday night’s game against the Texas Rangers with tightness in his right hamstring, a pack of reporters circled around his locker following the Yankees’ 7-1 loss, awaiting an update.Alex Rodriguez suddenly walked past his locker, next to Beltran’s, his hands folded in front of his body, smiling. The members of the news media at Yankee Stadium did not flinch. After a few silent moments, Rodriguez walked off without attracting a crowd.It could have been cunning timing, but it was also indicative of the Yankees’ offensive hierarchy. Without Beltran, who at 39 has surprisingly led the team in virtually every major offensive category, the Yankees’ season would precipitously spiral downward. Rodriguez has been mired in a long slump.“It’s not major,” Beltran said of his hamstring. “I’m happy about that.”Still, because of his age, there was concern that Beltran had limped off the field after a seemingly innocuous play.In his first at-bat, Beltran lined a ball toward the left-field wall. As Rangers left fielder Ryan Rua misread the carom, fans began booing Beltran when he did not stretch the sharp hit into a double.Moments later, the misplaced ire dissipated as Beltran took off his batting gloves and walked off the field, replaced by pinch-runner Rob Refsnyder.Beltran said that he felt a pull and a knot in his hamstring, which was still sore after the game. A magnetic resonance imaging exam was negative, and he was listed as day to day.“I was concerned,” said Beltran, whose treatment over the next few days could include massage and acupuncture. “What I felt, I have never had issues with my hamstring the way I felt it today.”While the Yankees may have averted a disaster, their confidence was not any higher. Tuesday night’s loss was their third straight, and it came after their defeat in the first game of the series, which ended at nearly 3 a.m. on Tuesday morning.Without Beltran’s punch — he is batting .297 with 19 home runs and 53 R.B.I. — the remainder of the Yankees’ lineup was flattened by starter Cole Hamels and the Rangers, who lead the majors in wins with 51.Hamels, who earned his ninth win of the season, shut out the Yankees for seven innings while the Rangers notched six runs off C. C. Sabathia in seven-plus innings. Adrian Beltre, who won Monday’s marathon game with a ninth-inning single, again hurt the Yankees with three hits and three R.B.I., including a two-run homer in the first.“We’re running out of time to prove we’re a team to contend,” said third baseman Chase Headley, who missed a ground ball that extended a five-run eighth inning for the Rangers. Headley also went 2 for 4; he was the only Yankee with more than one hit.While the Yankees have struggled all season to contend, Beltran has been the lone dependable slugger in the heart of the lineup, with his fellow veterans Rodriguez and Mark Teixeira struggling.Rodriguez was 0 for 3 on Tuesday with two strikeouts, dropping his average to .219. Trailing by 7-0, Rodriguez hit a sacrifice fly in the eighth inning to drive in the Yankees’ only run.After watching his offense sputter again, Yankees Manager Joe Girardi was clearly relieved to learn that Beltran’s injury does not appear severe.“That’s a big relief,” Girardi said. “Because when he stopped, I said, ‘Uh oh, is he hurt?’ That was my first reaction.”INSIDE PITCHJAMES KAPRIELIAN, the Yankees 2015 first round pick, visited the team physician, Dr. Christopher Ahmad, on Tuesday, and a magnetic resonance imaging exam revealed a flexor tendon strain of the right elbow. Kaprielian, who has been on the minor league disabled list since April 25, will be evaluated by an orthopedic sports surgeon … The Yankees recalled CONOR MULLEE and optioned KIRBY YATES to Class AAA Scranton/Wilkes-Barre.Advertisement