JUNE 1, 2016
Boxing’s governing body will decide Wednesday whether to let professional fighters into the Olympic ring beginning with the Rio de Janeiro Games. But the International Boxing Association will also have to answer questions about its drug-testing policies when it gathers before an International Olympic Committee executive meeting in Lausanne, Switzerland.While it is unlikely that the former heavyweight champion Wladimir Klitschko or top American fighters will compete for gold in Rio, a decision to allow professional boxers could boost the card for the 2020 Tokyo Olympics. For most professionals, it is already too late to take part in a qualifying contest for the Rio Games; the last tournament is in Venezuela in July.Although the vote is expected to easily pass, not all boxers back the new proposal. Klitschko won a gold medal at Atlanta in 1996 and had indicated he would like another try. But the former Olympic and world heavyweight titleholder Lennox Lewis said it would be “preposterous” to let professionals into the same ring as amateurs.Boxing has undergone major Olympic changes in recent years. Women were allowed into competition in 2012, and headguards are no longer compulsory.Advertisement(AGENCE FRANCE-PRESSE)Authorities say Sacramento Kings point guard Darren Collison was arrested on a charge of domestic violence after deputies responded to a report of a woman being assaulted inside a Northern California home. The Placer County Sheriff’s Office said Collison was arrested Monday after deputies found the woman injured. He was freed hours after his arrest on $55,000 bail.AdvertisementLIBERTY LOSE THIRD STRAIGHT Maya Moore scored 25 points as the Minnesota Lynx remained unbeaten with a 79-69 win over the Liberty. The Lynx (6-0) built a 23-point lead in the second half before the Liberty (2-3) staged a rally.Tina Charles, who entered the game leading the W.N.B.A. in scoring and rebounding, had 23 points and 11 boards for the Liberty, who have dropped three straight games in the regular season for the first time since 2014.“Maya was great in the first quarter, and we knew they were going to try and deliver the first punch,” Charles said.Colorado Rockies Manager Walt Weiss said shortstop Jose Reyes would report to Class AAA Albuquerque for an injury rehabilitation assignment on Wednesday, the day after Reyes was to complete his 59-game suspension for violating Major League Baseball’s domestic violence policy.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.Reyes, a former All-Star with the Mets, did not participate in spring training and was suspended through May 31 after being charged with domestic violence for an altercation with his wife in Hawaii last October.AROUND THE MAJORS Mookie Betts hit a career-high three home runs for the visiting Boston Red Sox in a 6-2 victory over the Baltimore Orioles.  Seth Smith hit two home runs, and Adam Lind and Kyle Seager hit three-run homers as the host Seattle Mariners pummeled the San Diego Padres, 16-4. San Diego’s Christian Bethancourt became the fifth player in major league history to play catcher, left field and second base and pitch in the same game.  George Springer finished a triple shy of the cycle and had four R.B.I. to lift the visiting Houston Astros to an 8-5 victory over the Arizona Diamondbacks.  Jake Peavy and four relievers threw a combined one-hitter as the visiting San Francisco Giants beat the Atlanta Braves, 4-0.New England Patriots quarterback Tom Brady has added more high-profile legal power to his Deflategate appeal. The A.F.L.-C.I.O. filed a friend of the court brief asking the United States Court of Appeals for the Second Circuit to reconsider a decision by a three-judge panel in April.Brady was suspended four games for what the N.F.L. said was a scheme to use improperly inflated footballs in the 2015 A.F.C. Championship game. Commissioner Roger Goodell rejected his initial appeal, and Brady appealed to the federal courts. In its brief, the A.F.L.-C.I.O. said Goodell “acted arbitrarily as an employer seeking to justify his own disciplinary decision rather than as a neutral arbitrator considering an appeal.”AdvertisementSOUTH CAROLINA LOSES LINEBACKER South Carolina linebacker Skai Moore, the team’s leading tackler the last three years, will miss the season because of a herniated disk in his neck.Ken Hitchcock signed another one-year deal to coach the St. Louis Blues and said it would be his last season. He will be entering his sixth season with the Blues and his 20th season as a head coach. The Blues are coming off their first appearance in the Western Conference finals since 2001, ending a string of three straight first-round playoff exits.The Golden State Warriors’ Game 7 win to complete a comeback in the Western Conference finals drew the largest television audience for an N.B.A. game on cable. The 96-88 victory over the Oklahoma City Thunder on Monday averaged 15.9 million viewers — more than several recent N.B.A. finals games. It was the most-watched telecast in TNT’s 28-year history, the network said.FOOTBALL CHANGES AT CBS Verne Lundquist will call one more season of Southeastern Conference football for CBS before Brad Nessler takes over the sport’s highest-rated TV package. Lundquist will still announce college basketball and golf, including the N.C.A.A. tournament and the Masters.All news by The Associated Press unless noted.A version of this article appears in print on June 1, 2016, on Page B12 of the New York edition with the headline: Pro Boxers Target ’20 Games, if Not This Year’s.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.