AdvertisementSupported bySports BriefingBen Zobrist hit a three-run homer, John Lackey pitched seven solid innings, and the host Chicago Cubs completed a sweep of the Philadelphia Phillies with a 7-2 victory on Sunday.Miguel Montero added a solo homer and drove in two runs as the Cubs (34-14) won their fifth straight and became the first team this season to get to 20 games over .500.Zobrist’s two-out drive to right field off Vince Velasquez (5-2) made it 5-0 in the third. It extended Zobrist’s hitting streak to 15 games and helped send the Cubs to their sixth series sweep.STRASBURG ROLLS ON Stephen Strasburg won his 12th consecutive decision dating to last season, Jayson Werth connected for a pinch-hit grand slam, and the Washington Nationals closed out the season series against the St. Louis Cardinals with a 10-2 rout at home.Strasburg (9-0) pitched six innings of one-run ball as the Nationals salvaged a split of the four-game series. Strasburg, a right-hander, improved to 12-0 in 15 starts since losing to the Mets on Sept. 9 last season, and the Nationals have won all 15 of those games.MEMORABLE HOME RUN Hyun Soo Kim’s first major league home run broke a seventh-inning tie, and the visiting Baltimore Orioles hung on for a 6-4 victory over the Cleveland Indians.Kim, signed as a free agent after playing 10 seasons in South Korea, drove a 2-2 pitch from Jeff Manship into the seats in right field with two out. Nolan Reimold added a leadoff homer in the ninth.BREWER STAYS HOT Jonathan Lucroy drove in three runs, and the Milwaukee Brewers earned a 5-4 home victory over Cincinnati.Lucroy finished with nine R.B.I. in the series. The leadoff hitter Jonathan Villar scored three runs and drove in another, and Brewers won for the fifth time in six games.INJURY SIDELINES ROYALS CATCHER The Kansas City All-Star catcher Salvador Perez was expected to be out seven to 10 days with a bruised left thigh after colliding with the rookie third baseman Cheslor Cuthbert while catching a foul pop-up on Saturday.Jordan Spieth birdied his final three holes, chipping in from behind the 17th green and closing with a 34-foot putt, and shot a five-under-par 65 to win the Dean & Deluca Invitational in Forth Worth.It was the eighth career win for Spieth, the world’s No. 2-ranked player, and came in his third tournament after blowing a five-stroke lead on the back nine last month when he was trying to win the Masters for the second year in a row. He will try to defend his United States Open title in three weeks.At 17-under 263, Spieth finished three strokes ahead of Harris English. Ryan Palmer and Webb Simpson tied for third.Spieth had two curling 20-foot birdie putts on the back nine. He also had a 14-foot par save on No. 14 right after his only bogey.ENGLISHMAN WINS BMW P.G.A. Chris Wood of England shot a front-nine 29 before overcoming a late run of bogeys to win the BMW P.G.A. Championship in Virginia Water, England, by one stroke for the biggest victory of his career, while the overnight leader, Scott Hend of Australia, imploded in the final round.Wood held a four-stroke lead after making a birdie at No. 11 but dropped shots on Nos. 14, 16 and 17, trimming his advantage to one. Wood played the par-5 18th safe to make par for a three-under 69 on the day and a nine-under 279 over all, finishing a shot ahead of Rikard Karlberg (65) at Wentworth.Hend began with a one-stroke lead and took two shots out of a fairway bunker for a double bogey on No. 1. He dropped nine shots in his first 10 holes to tumble down the leaderboard and wound up shooting 78, tying for 15th.THAI VICTORIOUS IN MICHIGAN Ariya Jutanugarn of Thailand became the first player to win three straight L.P.G.A. Tour events in three years, closing with a five-under-par 67 for a five-stroke victory at the Volvik Championship in Ann Arbor, Mich.Jutanugarn, 20, was the first player since Inbee Park in 2013 to win three straight tournaments and the first ever to make her first three career victories consecutive.Jutanugarn finished at 15-under 273 at Travis Pointe after starting the day with a one-shot edge because of a closing eagle in the third-round.Christina Kim was second after a 71.New Orleans Pelicans guard Bryce Dejean-Jones was shot and killed on his daughter’s first birthday on Saturday after kicking down the door of what he mistakenly thought was his girlfriend’s apartment in Dallas.The Dallas police said Sunday that they would not have more information about the shooting until after the Memorial Day holiday and would not say whether the man who shot Dejean-Jones, 23, would face charges. It is legal in Texas for people to use deadly force to protect themselves from intruders.Dejean-Jones was visiting his girlfriend for his daughter’s birthday and had gone for a walk early Saturday, according to his agent, Scott W. Nichols. His girlfriend lives on the fourth floor, and Dejean-Jones, who was visiting the apartment complex for the first time, went to the third.A man living in the third-floor apartment was sleeping when he heard his front door being kicked open, Senior Cpl. DeMarquis Black of the Dallas police said in a statement. When Dejean-Jones began kicking at the bedroom door, the man got a handgun and fired. Dejean-Jones collapsed in an outdoor passageway and died at a hospital.GRIZZLIES HIRE NEW COACH Memphis hired David Fizdale as its new coach and will introduce him at a news conference on Tuesday.The Grizzlies did not disclose the terms, but Yahoo Sports reported that Fizdale agreed to a four-year deal.Fizdale spent the past eight years with the Miami Heat, the past two as the assistant head coach to Erik Spoelstra.The federal and state authorities in Mexico mounted an operation to find the kidnapped soccer star Alan Pulido, who was abducted in the crime-plagued northern border state of Tamaulipas.Pulido, 25, is a forward for Olympiacos of Greece and was part of Mexico’s 2014 World Cup team, though he was not called up for the Copa América tournament, which starts this week.Riding a pink bicycle, the home favorite Vincenzo Nibali clinched a second Giro d’Italia victory and a fourth Grand Tour title, but the hopes of his countryman Giacomo Nizzolo for his first stage win were again dashed as he was disqualified.Nibali, riding for Astana, also won the Giro in 2013. A repeat seemed impossible on Friday as he started nearly five minutes behind the leader, Steven Kruijswijk of the Netherlands, but Nibali surged into the lead, aided by Kruijswijk’s crash into a snowbank.The final leg, a flat 101 miles from Cuneo to Turin, should have been a coronation procession, but it was not short on drama. With several crashes and heavy rain falling, Nibali knew he just had to finish safely to secure the title.The six-time Paralympic gold medalist David Weir of England became the first wheelchair racer to complete a mile in under three minutes, finishing the Westminster Mile in London in 2 minutes 57 seconds and beating his previous best by six seconds.Weir, who has won the London Marathon six times, said, “I’ve always said I could do it.”The Englishman Tony Bellew knocked out the Congolese Ilunga Makabu in the third round to win the World Boxing Council’s cruiserweight title in Liverpool, England.Bellew, 33, had lost two world title attempts at light heavyweight, against Nathan Cleverly in 2011 and Adonis Stevenson in 2013, but was victorious after stepping up to cruiserweight.Bellew, a Liverpudlian, played “Pretty” Ricky Conlan in Sylvester Stallone’s film “Creed.”Advertisement