By DAVID WALDSTEINJUNE 15, 2016
SEATTLE — Looking to get back into the final four of the Copa América for the first time in 21 years, the United States men’s national soccer team is expecting thunderous support from fans at Thursday night’s quarterfinal against Ecuador in Seattle.“I think it can be the difference,” the American captain, Michael Bradley, said. “We played here a few years ago against Panama, and the atmosphere was amazing. I think tomorrow has the potential to be one of the best American atmospheres we’ve seen in a while.”The Pacific Northwest is home to a fervent soccer community, and CenturyLink Field is infamous for the noise it can produce, both for soccer games and for games featuring the Seahawks of the N.F.L.The United States lucked into the location by winning Group A, a feat that did not seem likely after a 2-0 loss to the Colombia in its opening game. But Colombia sustained an unexpected loss to Costa Rica, so the United States won the group.AdvertisementOn May 25, the United States beat Ecuador, 1-0, in a Copa América tuneup in Frisco, Tex. But Ecuador did not have Antonio Valencia or Walter Ayovi, two of its best players, for that game. It will have a full complement of players Thursday while the United States will be without right back DeAndre Yedlin, who received a red card in a 1-0 win over Paraguay and must sit out Thursday’s game.Get the big sports news, highlights and analysis from Times journalists, with distinctive takes on games and some behind-the-scenes surprises, delivered to your inbox every week.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.Jurgen Klinsmann, the United States coach, did not announce a replacement for Yedlin during his news conference Wednesday, but the Americans were confident they could deal with Ecuador’s speed and skill on the flanks, with the flashy Enner Valencia on the left and the playmaking Antonio Valencia on the right.Advertisement“It changes things a little bit,” United States goalkeeper Brad Guzan said of Yedlin’s absence. “But whoever Jurgen selects to come in, we know they are going to do a great job, and there is a ton of other players on the pitch ready to help whoever it is in that position. It’s not just up to one guy; it’s up to all of us.”The winner of the game will travel to Houston for a semifinal against Argentina or Venezuela. The last time the United States reached the semifinals of the Copa América was in 1995 in Uruguay, the second time it entered the tournament.That was a different era, when South American teams did not always enter their best players for the Copa América. The United States was the surprise of the tournament in 1995, beating Mexico in a penalty shootout in the quarterfinals. (It lost to Brazil in the semifinals.)For knockout-round games besides the final, this Copa América is using the same format that 1995 tournament did, with a penalty shootout occurring immediately after the second half ends in a tie (rather than after 30 minutes of extra time). Gustavo Quinteros, the Ecuador coach, said his players had all taken three or four penalty kicks a day in preparation, and Klinsmann said his team had practiced penalty kicks as well.“It’s a bit bizarre,” United States defender Alejandro Bedoya said. “It makes things a little bit different. If it comes down to it, it could go either way.”A version of this article appears in print on June 16, 2016, on Page B15 of the New York edition with the headline: U.S. Expects Boost From Seattle Crowd.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.