JULY 29, 2016
All of Russia’s weight lifters were banned from the Rio Olympics on Friday for doping. The eight competition spots have been offered to other countries.The International Weightlifting Federation said in Budapest that the “integrity of the weight lifting sport has been seriously damaged on multiple times and levels by the Russians.” It said the punishment was an “appropriate sanction” to “preserve the status of the sport.”Weight lifting became the second sport after track and field to issue blanket bans on Russian athletes. Other sports — including rowing, wrestling, modern pentathlon and sailing — have banned one or more Russians from competing in Rio de Janeiro, but not all of the country’s eligible athletes. Russia said all three members of its taekwondo team had been approved to compete at the Rio Olympics.In justifying its actions against Russia, the weight lifting federation said retests of samples from seven Russian lifters who took part in the 2008 or 2012 Olympics resulted in positive tests, and more were expected. Two female weight lifters — Tatiana Kashirina and Anastasiia Romanova — were withdrawn by the Russian federation for earlier doping offenses.AdvertisementAROUND THE GAMES Members of the Australian delegation returned to their building at the Olympic Village after smoke from a small fire in the basement prompted an evacuation. Australia had occupied the building Wednesday; it had been scheduled to move in Sunday but declined, citing gas and plumbing leaks, electrical shorts and general filth.  Brazil’s federal government severed its $6 million contract with a security firm that was supposed to operate X-ray machines during the Olympics. Justice Minister Alexandre de Moraes said the Artel company had not delivered the 3,400 workers it promised. They are to be replaced by retired police officers, who are still to be trained. Some athletes at the Olympic Village are expressing frustration that the popular game Pokémon Go is not yet available in Brazil. “I wish I could run around in the village catching Pokémon,” a New Zealand soccer player, Anna Green, said. “I just can’t get it on the phone.” What will she do instead? “Train,” she replied.AdvertisementA state investigation into the former Red Sox pitcher Curt Schilling’s failed video game company, 38 Studios, has resulted in no criminal charges, Rhode Island authorities announced.The investigation, which lasted years, found “no provable criminal violations” of state law, Col. Steven G. O’Donnell of the State Police and Attorney General Peter Kilmartin said.Schilling’s company relocated to Rhode Island from Massachusetts in 2010 in exchange for a $75 million state loan guarantee. It later filed for bankruptcy protection, leaving taxpayers on the hook.WPRI-TV asked Schilling for his reaction. He replied on Twitter he was “disgusted” that authorities investigating the failed deal with his video game company were sent on a “witch hunt.” He also told WPRO-AM that company executives “didn’t do anything wrong but fail at business.”A federal investigation also produced no criminal charges, but the state’s economic development agency sued Schilling and others who aided the deal to try to recoup the money, and the Securities and Exchange Commission also sued, alleging that investors had been defrauded.CUBS ROUT MARINERS Jon Lester, after four bad starts, pitched six shutout innings as the host Chicago Cubs defeated the Seattle Mariners, 12-1, for their third straight win.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.A former Guatemalan soccer federation president pleaded guilty in Manhattan to federal charges related to a sprawling corruption investigation of world soccer. The former official, Brayan Jimenez, pleaded guilty to racketeering conspiracy and wire fraud conspiracy charges, each carrying up to 20 years in prison.Jimenez, 62, is among 40 people charged in a FIFA bribery scandal. Prosecutors say he accepted hundreds of thousands of dollars in bribes to award a Florida-based sports marketing company the media marketing rights to the Guatemalan soccer team’s World Cup qualifying matches in 2018 and 2022.AdvertisementAngelique Kerber, seeded second, advanced to the semifinals of the Rogers Cup in Montreal with a 6-2, 6-2 victory over unseeded Daria Kasatkina. Kerber said she had no discomfort from an elbow injury that forced her to withdraw from a match last week in Sweden.Kerber, the Australian Open winner, will face fifth-seeded Simona Halep, a 3-6, 6-1, 6-1 winner over No. 9 Svetlana Kuznetsova.DJOKOVIC IN SEMIFINAL Novak Djokovic, Stan Wawrinka, Kei Nishikori and Gaël Monfils advanced to the semifinals of the Rogers Cup in Toronto.Miami Dolphins defensive end Dion Jordan’s suspension ended just as training camp began. Jordan was reinstated by the N.F.L. on a conditional basis after sitting out last season for his latest violation of the league’s substance abuse policy.Jordan may join the Dolphins in Davie, Fla., and participate in meetings and conditioning work, the league said. Once arrangements have been confirmed regarding Jordan’s clinical resources, he will be permitted to take part in all preseason activities. Before the start of the regular season, he will meet with the league. Based on his compliance with his recovery program, he will be permitted to participate in all regular-season activities. He will be evaluated later in the season for full reinstatement.Jordan, an Oregon alumnus who was the No. 3 overall selection in the 2013 draft, is coming back from his second suspension under the league’s substance abuse policy. He missed six games in 2014 and all of last season.A Canadian rugby player collapsed and died, apparently after a heart attack, at a tournament in upstate New York. Officials told the Adirondack Daily Enterprise that Gerhard Veit collapsed late in the morning during a match at the 43rd annual Can-Am Rugby Tournament in Saranac Lake.Veit, who was in his 50s, was a member of a team from Ottawa. His teammate Pat Byrne said Veit had just walked off the field complaining that his teammates were not playing hard enough before dropping to the ground.A version of this article appears in print on July 30, 2016, on Page D4 of the New York edition with the headline: Russia’s Weight Lifters Are Barred From Rio.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.