By THE ASSOCIATED PRESSSEPT. 27, 2016
Borussia Dortmund scored a late equalizer to earn a 2-2 draw at home against Real Madrid in the Champions League on Tuesday, the latest setback for Real Madrid, which has won the tournament 11 times.After two consecutive draws in the Spanish league, Cristiano Ronaldo appeared to have ended Madrid’s winless run, scoring one goal and helping to set up another. But the Dortmund substitute André Schürrle struck in the 87th minute to give his team a point in the standings.“The players played a great match,” Real Madrid Coach Zinedine Zidane said. “The result is a difficult one to accept because we deserved a bit more, but it is not a bad result.”Ronaldo put Madrid ahead in the 17th minute and provided a cross that led to a Raphaël Varane goal in the 68th, after Pierre-Emerick Aubameyang had leveled the score for Dortmund in the 43rd.AdvertisementLEICESTER EDGES PORTO Islam Slimani kept up his hot streak against the Portuguese team Porto by scoring a first-half goal for Leicester in a 1-0 home victory in Champions League play.AdvertisementSlimani, an Algerian striker, headed home from close range off a pinpoint cross by his countryman Riyad Mahrez in the 25th minute. It was Slimani’s sixth goal in four games against Porto this year, with the other five coming for Sporting Lisbon before his off-season move to Leicester.TOTTENHAM RECOVERS  Tottenham overcame injuries to put its Champions League campaign back on track with a 1-0 victory at C.S.K.A. Moscow, with Son Heung-min scoring the winning goal.Tottenham — missing five first-team regulars, including Harry Kane — bounced back from its opening loss to Monaco. Coach Mauricio Pochettino criticized his players’ outlook after that defeat, but he was full of praise after Tuesday’s result made it four wins in a row for the team since then.MONACO GRABS A TIE Center back Kamil Glik salvaged a 1-1 draw for host Monaco against Bayer Leverkusen of Germany with a spectacular strike in the final seconds of their Champions League match.Javier Hernández had given Bayer Leverkusen the lead in the 75th minute after a bad clearance by Monaco.Multiple news media outlets reported that Houston defensive lineman J. J. Watt had reinjured his back and that the team expected him to be out until at least December, and possibly for the entire season.Watt missed training camp and Houston’s four preseason games after having surgery in July to repair a herniated disk in his back. He started in the Texans’ first three regular-season games but was hurt again Thursday against the New England Patriots.AdvertisementWatt was named the N.F.L.’s defensive player of the year for the past two seasons.Josh Donaldson hit a two-run homer, Aaron Sanchez struck out 10, and Toronto defeated visiting Baltimore, 5-1, in the opening game of a series that will be critical to the American League wild-card race.Ezequiel Carrera also homered as the Blue Jays won for the sixth time in eight games. They lead the A.L. wild-card standings by two games over the Orioles, with five to play.Get the big sports news, highlights and analysis from Times journalists, with distinctive takes on games and some behind-the-scenes surprises, delivered to your inbox every week.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.The Orioles slugger Chris Davis was ejected for arguing with the plate umpire, Will Little, after striking out against Joe Biagini in the seventh, the third time in three at-bats that Davis was caught looking. Baltimore Manager Buck Showalter was also tossed after he left the dugout to argue.TIGERS 12, INDIANS 0 Miguel Cabrera homered and drove in five runs in the first two innings, Justin Verlander struck out 12, and Detroit rolled at home against a Cleveland lineup filled with backups.The Indians clinched the A.L. Central title on Monday, so their starting lineup the next day was without Jason Kipnis, Francisco Lindor, Mike Napoli and Jose Ramirez. The Tigers took advantage, beating the Indians for only the third time this season and pulling within a game of the Orioles for the A.L.’s second wild-card berth.Verlander (16-8) went seven and two-thirds innings, with four hits and a walk.ASTROS 8, MARINERS 4 George Springer had three hits, including a two-run double during a six-run sixth inning, and host Houston knocked off Seattle.The Astros’ victory left the Mariners two games behind the Orioles for the second A.L. wild-card spot and trimmed Houston’s deficit in the race to two and a half games.TEBOW SHINES IN INTRASQUAD GAME Tim Tebow, a former Heisman Trophy winner, had two hits, scored a run and ended the game with a sliding catch in his final intrasquad game in the Mets’ instructional league in Port St. Lucie, Fla.AdvertisementTebow, who is scheduled to play his first real game on Wednesday, singled in his final two at-bats in Tuesday’s simulated game.Angelique Kerber survived a scare in her first match as the world’s top-ranked female player while the reigning French Open champion, Garbiñe Muguruza, was eliminated at the Wuhan Open in China.Kerber, who won the Australian Open and the United States Open this year and had a bye in the first round, made a convincing start before missing two set points and allowing Kristina Mladenovic to take the first set in a tiebreaker.But Kerber swept through the rest of the match, winning by 6-7 (4), 6-1, 6-4 to set up a third-round meeting with the two-time Wimbledon champion Petra Kvitova.Muguruza just could not master the former world No. 1 Jelena Jankovic, pushing her to a tiebreaker in the second set before losing, 6-4, 7-6 (2).(AGENCE FRANCE-PRESSE)Los Angeles Sparks forward Nneka Ogwumike was named the W.N.B.A.’s most valuable player.The league said that Ogwumike received 31 of the 39 first-place votes from a national media panel. She shot a league-best 66.5 percent from the field, the second-highest mark ever. Ogwumike also averaged a career-best 19.7 points and 9.1 rebounds to help Los Angeles to the second-best record in the league.Ogwumike set a W.N.B.A. record when she made 23 consecutive field goals, going 12 for 12 in a game against Dallas.The Liberty’s Tina Charles finished second, getting the other eight first-place votes.A version of this article appears in print on September 28, 2016, on Page B12 of the New York edition with the headline: Real Madrid Settles for Tie After a Late Goal.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.