AdvertisementSupported bySports BriefingDustin Pedroia used nifty base running to score from first base on David Ortiz’s double in the 10th inning, and the American League East-leading Boston Red Sox beat the host Tampa Bay Rays, 3-2, for their 11th consecutive win.Pedroia singled to start the inning then avoided the initial tag from Luke Maile but failed to touch the plate. Pedroia then scored as Maile dropped the ball.Red Sox starter Eduardo Rodriguez struck out a career-high 13 in five and one-third innings.ORIOLES SWEEP DIAMONDBACKS Hyun Soo Kim hit a two-run homer and host Baltimore beat Arizona, 2-1, to complete a three-game sweep and maintain their hold on the second A.L. wild-card spot.The Orioles begin a crucial three-game series at Toronto, the A.L. wild-card leader, on Tuesday.Baltimore’s Zach Britton picked up his American League-leading A.L.-leading 46th save in 46 chances.AROUND THE MAJORS Carlos Rodon struck out a career-high 11 over eight dominant innings and the Chicago White Sox beat the host Cleveland Indians, 3-0, and denied them any chance of clinching the A.L. Central title. Nelson Cruz homered twice as Seattle won at Minnesota, 4-3, and sent the Twins to their 100th loss. Salvador Perez homered to cap a cycle by Kansas City’s first four batters of the game, and the Royals went deep three more times to beat host Detroit, 12-9, and avoid elimination from the A.L. wild-card race. Joe Musgrove pitched seven strong innings, Evan Gattis, Tony Kemp and Tyler White homered, and host Houston beat the Los Angeles Angels, 4-1, to end a three-game losing streak and keep its playoff hopes alive. The rookie right-hander Jharel Cotton pitched seven crisp innings and the Oakland Athletics beat visiting Texas, 7-1, to bounce back from back-to-back shutouts and avoid a series sweep.Notre Dame fired the defensive coordinator Brian VanGorder after a 38-35 home loss to Duke dropped the Fighting Irish to 1-3.The Irish, who started the season ranked No. 10 in the country, have given up an average of 33.5 points in their first four games and are unranked.Greg Hudson, a former assistant head coach at Florida State, was elevated to replace VanGorder.AUBURN TREES BURNED A man was charged with desecration of a venerable object in a fire that damaged oak trees at Toomer’s Corner following Auburn’s victory over L.S.U. The trees were planted in 2015 after the original oaks were poisoned by a rival fan.Kevin Harvick pulled away after a late restart to win the Bad Boy Off Road 300 at New Hampshire Motor Speedway and assure himself a spot in the second round of the Nascar Sprint Cup playoffs.Harvick, who ran out of fuel in the same race last year, passed Matt Kenseth late and held on to join Martin Truex Jr. as drivers assured of a place in the second round.The 16-driver Chase for the Sprint Cup championship field will be cut to 12 after next week’s race in Dover, Del.Francesco Totti, who turns 40 on Tuesday, become the second player to score 250 goals in Italy’s Serie A league.Totti scored on a penalty kick about 10 minutes after entering Roma’s 3-1 victory over host Torino in the second half. He blasted his shot past Torino goalkeeper Joe Hart to join Silvio Piola as the only other player to score 250 goals.Advertisement