By THE ASSOCIATED PRESSSEPT. 25, 2016
Brad Marchand scored twice on assists from Sidney Crosby, including a go-ahead goal early in the third period, and Canada beat Russia, 5-3, on Saturday night in the World Cup of Hockey semifinals in Toronto. In the best-of-three finals, the Canadians will face the winner of Sunday’s game between Sweden and Team Europe.Crosby scored first, 7 minutes 40 seconds into the game. Sergei Bobrovsky made 16 of his 42 saves in the first period, keeping the Russians in the game.PENGUINS GOALIE SIDELINED Pittsburgh goaltender Matt Murray will be out for three to six weeks after breaking his right hand while playing for Team North America at the World Cup of Hockey. The timeline makes it unlikely that Murray, who went 15-6 with a 2.08 goals against average last postseason, will be available for opening night against the Washington Capitals on Oct. 13, when the Penguins will raise their fourth Stanley Cup banner.Trey Mancini hit his third home run in nine major league at-bats, Mark Trumbo connected for his league-leading 45th homer, and Baltimore beat visiting Arizona, 6-1. The Orioles pulled a half-game ahead of the Tigers for the American League’s second wild-card spot.AdvertisementAROUND THE MAJORS Paulo Orlando tied the score with a two-run double, and Eric Hosmer followed with a three-run homer, capping a ninth-inning comeback that led visiting Kansas City over Detroit, 7-4.  Miguel Sano hit a tiebreaking homer in the fourth inning, and Tyler Duffey pitched seven strong innings for his best start in more than a month as Minnesota beat visiting Seattle, 3-2.  Yadier Molina drove in four runs as St. Louis gave its playoff hopes a boost by getting to Jason Hammel early in a 10-4 rout of the Cubs in Chicago.  Elvis Andrus hit two two-run homers as Texas won, 5-0, at Oakland.Get the big sports news, highlights and analysis from Times journalists, with distinctive takes on games and some behind-the-scenes surprises, delivered to your inbox every week.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.The pass-rushing linebacker Clay Matthews will miss the Green Bay Packers’ game against the Detroit Lions on Sunday because of ankle and hamstring injuries. Green Bay will also be without safety Morgan Burnett, who has a groin injury, and cornerback Sam Shields, who has a concussion.AdvertisementTwo other key defensive players with knee injuries had their status downgraded from questionable to doubtful: Letroy Guion and Datone Jones.BROWNS LOSE KICKER The Cleveland Browns placed kicker Patrick Murray on injured reserve after he hurt his surgically repaired left knee in practice last week. The Browns, who have lost six starters through the season’s first two games, signed Cody Parkey to handle their kicking duties.Stan Wawrinka will try to follow up his United States Open championship with a title in the St. Petersburg Open in Russia, having beaten Roberto Bautista Agut, 7-6 (8), 6-2, in a semifinal. Wawrinka, who has won 11 straight finals, will face Alexander Zverev, a German teenager who beat Tomas Berdych, 6-4, 6-4.THIEM AND POUILLE TO MEET IN FRANCE Top-seeded Dominic Thiem rallied past the local favorite Gilles Simon, 4-6, 7-5, 6-3, to reach the Moselle Open final in Metz, France. He will face another Frenchman, Lucas Pouille, who defeated the 2014 champion, David Goffin, 7-6 (6), 6-1.Alexander Levy took a four-shot lead heading into final round of the European Open after the event in Bad Griesbach, Germany, was shortened to 54 holes because of fog.A version of this article appears in print on September 25, 2016, on Page SP10 of the New York edition with the headline: Canada Beats Russia in World Cup Semifinal.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.