JULY 26, 2016
The star closer Aroldis Chapman joined the Chicago Cubs on Tuesday, saying he could not remember what the team’s management had told him about off-the-field expectations and behavior.After Chapman’s awkward introductory news conference, Theo Epstein, the Cubs’ president of baseball operations, said that Chapman understood what the team expected of him after an off-season domestic violence case.The Cubs’ chairman, Tom Ricketts, had said he and Epstein had talked by phone with Chapman before the deal was completed and “shared with him the high expectations we set for our players,” adding that Chapman was comfortable with them.But when asked repeatedly about the phone conversation before Tuesday’s game against the Chicago White Sox, Chapman said through an interpreter that he could not recall details because he was taking a nap at the time the call came in.AdvertisementEpstein called it a misunderstanding and said Chapman was “pretty nervous” as he faced seven cameras and more than two dozen reporters.Advertisement“I was on the call, Tom was on the call, Aroldis was on the call, and Barry Praver, his agent, was on the call,” Epstein said. “It happened, and it was real.”Chapman was accused of choking his girlfriend and firing eight gunshots in the garage of a Florida home in October. The woman later changed her story, and no charges were filed. He served a 30-game suspension at the beginning of the season.ROCKIES BATTER TILLMAN Carlos Gonzalez and Trevor Story each had two R.B.I. in a four-run third inning, and the visiting Colorado Rockies beat Chris Tillman and Baltimore, 6-3, to end the Orioles’ five-game winning streak. Seeking to become the first 15-game winner in the majors, Tillman (14-3) gave up six runs and nine hits in five innings.INDIANS STUN THE NATIONALS Francisco Lindor pushed a run-scoring single through Washington’s drawn-in infield with one out in the ninth inning, during which host Cleveland rallied for three runs to defeat the Nationals, 7-6, in a matchup of division leaders.A WIN FOR HERNANDEZ Felix Hernandez settled down after a shaky start and picked up his firstwin since May 21 as the visiting Seattle Mariners beat the Pittsburgh Pirates, 7-4. Hernandez spent nearly two months on the disabled list because of a strained right calf and returned last Wednesday.Amar’e Stoudemire retired from the N.B.A. after signing his final contract with the Knicks.Stoudemire’s greatest team success came with the Phoenix Suns as Steve Nash’s pick-and-roll partner, but he chose to leave the league as a member of the Knicks, who had a lengthy playoff drought end after he signed with them in 2010.Stoudemire, 33, a power forward and center who played with Miami last season, was a six-time All-Star, but he battled knee injuries after his sensational first season in New York, when he became the first Knicks player to be voted an All-Star Game starter since Patrick Ewing.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.CAVALIERS EXTEND LUE’S CONTRACT Cleveland Coach Tyronn Lue was rewarded with a multiyear contract extension after leading the Cavaliers to an N.B.A. title. Lue took over when David Blatt was fired in January and led the Cavaliers to the championship, the first title for a major professional sports team in Cleveland since 1964. The terms of Lue’s extension were not revealed.AdvertisementSIGNINGS Shooting guard Dion Waiters signed a two-year, $5.93 million contract with the Miami Heat.  The Washington Wizards said they had re-signed shooting guard Bradley Beal. The team did not announce the terms of the deal.  The Portland Trail Blazers agreed to a four-year, $40 million deal with the restricted free agent Maurice Harkless, a small forward.Gaël Monfils of France followed up his first tournament title in more than two years by advancing to the second round of the Rogers Cup on Tuesday in Toronto.Monfils, seeded 10th and fresh off a win at the Citi Open in Washington, defeated João Sousa of Portugal, 6-3, 6-3.Four Americans reached the second round as Jared Donaldson beat the Australian John Millman, 6-4, 6-3; Dennis Novikov dispatched the Argentine Federico Delbonis, 6-4, 6-3; Rajeev Ram ousted the Latvian Ernests Gulbis, 6-4, 6-2; and Donald Young defeated the Ukranian Alexandr Dolgopolov, 7-6 (6), 6-4.(AGENCE FRANCE-PRESSE)BOUCHARD ADVANCES Eugenie Bouchard of Canada thrilled her hometown crowd with a 6-3, 3-6, 7-6 (3) victory over Lucie Safarova in the opening round of the women’s Rogers Cup in Montreal.The Seattle Seahawks and Coach Pete Carroll agreed on a contract extension, keeping Carroll, who at 64 is the oldest head coach in the N.F.L., locked up beyond the season.The team owner Paul G. Allen confirmed Carroll’s deal on Twitter.Carroll’s contract was set to expire after the season.Carroll is 60-36 in the regular season since becoming Seattle’s coach in 2010. He has taken the Seahawks to the playoffs in five of six seasons, including two Super Bowl appearances and the only title in the team’s history.Carroll’s deal was first reported by ESPN, which said the extension would run through the 2019 season.AdvertisementINJURY LIST Washington linebacker Junior Galette tore his right Achilles’ tendon and will miss the season.A version of this article appears in print on July 27, 2016, on Page B12 of the New York edition with the headline: Chapman Has Bumpy Introduction With Cubs.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.