SEPT. 23, 2016
A bill in Congress would block the I.R.S. from taxing most medals or other prizes awarded to United States Olympians.The United States Olympic Committee awards cash prizes to Olympic medal winners: $25,000 for gold, $15,000 for silver and $10,000 for bronze. Because the money is considered earned income, it is taxed.The Senate passed legislation just before the Summer Olympics in Rio de Janeiro to make the winnings tax-free. The House approved a similar bill on Thursday, 415-1, and the bill now goes back to the Senate.The House bill would allow Olympic taxes on high-profile athletes, such as the swimmer Michael Phelps, who earn more than $1 million a year.AdvertisementFor Phelps, the tax bill for his five golds and one silver from Rio could be steep — as much as $55,000. The gymnast Simone Biles faces a possible $43,000 tax bill for her haul of four golds and one bronze.AdvertisementN.B.A. referees will crack down this season on the kind of hits to the groin area that resulted in Draymond Green’s suspension during the N.B.A. finals. They also will more closely monitor traveling after complaints from coaches that players are getting away with too many steps on the perimeter.The hits to the groin — termed “unnatural acts” by the league — are a point of emphasis after several situations involving Green during the postseason. Green had a habit of flailing his arms or legs, and a few times made contact with opponents in the groin area. He was suspended after hitting LeBron James and missed Game 5 of the finals.Joe Borgia, the league’s senior vice president of replay and referee operations, said players are no longer just swinging their arms in an attempt to draw a foul when taking a shot. “Now all of a sudden legs are coming out in different directions at weird times, they’re coming higher,” he said. “Well, for the protection of the players, we’re going to stop it.”BEASLEY TRADED TO BUCKS The Milwaukee Bucks acquired forward Michael Beasley from the Houston Rockets for the backup point guard Tyler Ennis. Beasley averaged 12.8 points and 4.9 rebounds in 20 games for Houston last season. The deal could signal that the Bucks intend to keep 6-foot-11 Giannis Antetokounmpo as a primary ballhandler, a position in which he thrived last season.Get the big sports news, highlights and analysis from Times journalists, with distinctive takes on games and some behind-the-scenes surprises, delivered to your inbox every week.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.A federal judge ruled that the Rams must grant season tickets to some people who bought personal seat licenses while the team was still in St. Louis, even though the team is now in Los Angeles.Stephen Limbaugh Jr., a United States District Court judge in St. Louis, also said the Rams must refund deposits for other people who bought personal seat licenses in St. Louis. About 46,000 people had personal seat licenses, which give the holder the right to purchase season tickets, for the St. Louis Rams, some at a cost of up to $1,000.The Rams argued that their move to Los Angeles terminated personal seat license agreements sold in St. Louis. Though St. Louis-area fans might seem unlikely to travel nearly 2,000 miles for football games, the resale of personal seat licenses or season tickets could be lucrative once a planned $2 billion stadium in Inglewood, Calif., is built.AdvertisementAROUND THE N.F.L. The Cleveland Browns rookie receiver Corey Coleman, who scored two touchdowns last weekend, does not need surgery but will miss at least one month after breaking his hand during practice on Wednesday. • The Chicago Bears promoted quarterback Matt Barkley to the active roster and placed linebacker Lamarr Houston on injured reserve with a torn anterior cruciate ligament. Barkley is expected to back up Brian Hoyer on Sunday after the starter Jay Cutler sprained his right thumb. • Indianapolis Colts quarterback Andrew Luck returned to practice after missing Wednesday’s workout with a sore throwing shoulder. He did limited work and did not throw during the open portion of practice. • The Jets waived fullback Julian Howsare, who surprisingly beat out the veteran Tommy Bohanon for a roster spot in training camp.Justin Upton and Victor Martinez homered as the Detroit Tigers picked up another win in the American League wild-card chase, beating Minnesota, 9-2, in the opener of a doubleheader. Minnesota dropped to 55-97, worst in the majors and its most losses since it went 63-99 in 2011.Minnesota’s Brian Dozier led off the bottom of the first inning with his 42nd homer, setting an A.L. record with 40 homers as a second baseman, one more than Alfonso Soriano’s total with the Yankees in 2002. Only Rogers Hornsby (42 in 1922), Davey Johnson (42 in 1973) and Ryne Sandberg (40 in 1990) have hit as many as a second baseman.UEFA charged Scotland’s soccer federation for “refusal to play” a women’s under-19 European Championship qualifying match amid conflicting reports that players were sick or hung over. The Scottish team cited a teamwide illness for not playing against Serbia on Monday. The Serbian news media reported that players were affected by drinking after celebrating a win against Albania, which Scotland had defeated, 11-0, five days earlier.Milos Raonic was surprisingly ousted by Mikhail Youzhny, 2-6, 7-6 (6), 6-4, in the second round of the St. Petersburg Open in Russia. Youzhny toughed out a 10-minute final game to earn his first win over a top-10 player in more than two years. Raonic, the world No. 6, was the reigning champion and had a first-round bye but has now lost three of his past four matches on tour.Bernd Wiesberger of Austria made nine birdies and an eagle to lead the European Open after a shortened opening day in Bad Griesbach, Germany. Wiesberger finished with an eight-under-par 63, two shots ahead of Renato Paratore of Italy. Play started 3 hours 25 minutes late because of fog.AROUND GOLF Ellen Port won her third United States Senior Women’s Amateur title and her seventh United States Golf Association championship, beating Andrea Kraus, 3 and 2, at Wellesley Country Club in Wellesley, Mass. • Dave Ryan won the United States Senior Amateur for his first U.S.G.A. championship, holding off Matthew Sughrue, 2 up, at Old Warson Country Club in St. Louis.A version of this article appears in print on September 23, 2016, on Page B12 of the New York edition with the headline: Gold Medalists May Win a Tax Exemption, Too.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.