By SETH BERKMANAUG. 26, 2016
Three years ago, a Marlon Byrd T-shirt giveaway at Citi Field was most memorable because Byrd was traded from the Mets before that night’s game.Byrd was arguably the Mets’ top offensive player at the time, and his departure, which occurred nearly a month after the nonwaiver deadline, was a demarcation point for the 2013 season, all but signaling the club’s turn toward 2014 and beyond.On Saturday, the anniversary of the Byrd giveaway, the Mets have a similarly awkward promotion scheduled. They will give out Matt Harvey bobbleheads to the first 15,000 fans at Citi Field, even though Harvey decided in July to have season-ending surgery to correct thoracic outlet syndrome. His absence on his giveaway day will serve as a poignant reminder of the course of this Mets season.(In another cruel twist, the Mets will disperse Steven Matz lunch bags for Sunday’s promotion, even though Matz is on the 15-day disabled list.)AdvertisementThe Mets have encountered some untimely injuries that may induce a hollow feeling within fans when they are handed their trinkets this weekend. But Lou DePaoli, the Mets’ executive vice president and chief revenue officer, said he did not believe that the absence of Harvey and Matz will take away from the cachet of the giveaways. In some cases, the promotion dates are set almost a year in advance.Finding successful fan promotions is not an exact science. DePaoli described it as flipping a coin. When he was hired in July 2013, promotions like Byrd’s were already planned, but shortly after, the team shifted its philosophy about how to use promotions, researching extensively how to raise attendance through them, even in case of injury.AdvertisementThough the games for this weekend’s series with the Philadelphia Phillies are not yet sold out, and the Mets are clinging to postseason hopes, DePaoli said he expected large crowds, strengthened by the free products.“We survey our fans constantly — what do they like?” DePaoli said, adding that his staff also follows promotions offered by other professional sports teams.The Byrd T-shirt giveaway was on a Tuesday, but data showed that weekends are the best time to improve ticket sales. The Mets now have “Free Shirt Fridays” — Friday’s 9-4 victory over the Phillies featured white T-shirts printed with Yoenis Cespedes’s face — and attach most of their giveaways to weekend series, regardless of the opponent.“That’s when you’ll get the best R.O.I.,” DePaoli said, referring to return on investment. He also noted that tickets for the Mets’ weekend games usually cost more.There have been days when the demand was overwhelming. In April, the Mets doled out Noah Syndergaard garden gnomes that caused fans to line up in the morning for a 4:05 p.m. game. Because the figurines were limited to 15,000 and the announced attendance was 44,666, one of the largest crowds in Citi Field history, many patrons were angry for leaving without Syndergaard tchotchkes.Get the big sports news, highlights and analysis from Times journalists, with distinctive takes on games and some behind-the-scenes surprises, delivered to your inbox every week.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.DePaoli said the Mets would attempt to get sponsors for items to defray cost, but souvenirs such as bobbleheads or gnomes are expensive, and the team has to project if it can make up deficits through ticket revenue. Companies can be reluctant to get behind unusual items.AdvertisementBut that has not prevented the Mets from diversifying their offerings recently. Earlier this season, they gave away long blue socks in tribute to Curtis Granderson and copies of Cespedes’s trademark neon-yellow sleeve. Asdrubal Cabrera, who hit two home runs Friday, had a wristband giveaway in his honor earlier this year.The zenith will come on Sept. 17, when the Mets will hand out Jacob deGrom hair hats — a blue Mets cap with a wig of long hair resembling deGrom’s flowing locks. (Promotions aside, the Mets hope deGrom will be in uniform then. Before Friday’s game, Manager Terry Collins said there was a “pretty good chance he’s going to get skipped” once in the rotation amid worries of fatigue after two subpar outings.)Strangely, the Mets do not have scheduled promotions for two of their most popular players, Bartolo Colon and Wilmer Flores. On Friday, Colon pitched into the eighth inning, scored two runs and picked up two hits for the first time since Aug. 9, 2002. Flores continued to bash left-handed pitching, hitting a grand slam off Phillies starter Adam Morgan in the fifth inning.When Colon doubled earlier in the fifth, rounding first base with the stability of an adolescent on ice skates for the first time, the crowd roared with delight. The commotion was topped only by a curtain call by Flores.Mets fans will probably be placated by the mere presence of Colon and Flores in the lineup. Harvey’s bobblehead pose shows him animated and pumping a fist, a sentimental image that recalls his reactions after key strikeouts during last year’s pennant chase and postseason. Though they would much prefer to see Harvey displaying similar emotion in the flesh this fall, the miniature version with the springy, bouncy head will have to suffice.A version of this article appears in print on August 27, 2016, on Page D5 of the New York edition with the headline: Mets Win, but Prepare to Hand Out Tangible Reminders of Their Misfortune.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.