By THE ASSOCIATED PRESSNOV. 23, 2016
Alabama, Ohio State, Michigan and Clemson held the top four spots in the College Football Playoff rankings for the second straight week, and Washington moved up a spot to fifth.Wisconsin was sixth in the selection committee’s rankings, which were released Tuesday night. Louisville was the team that took a big drop. The Cardinals fell from fifth to 11th after a loss at Houston.Ohio State and Michigan play on Saturday in Columbus, Ohio, and the loser will most likely be out of the playoff race.Bryson Scott scored 18 points and John Konchar made a go-ahead free throw with 1 minute 19 seconds left in overtime to give Indiana University-Purdue University Fort Wayne (3-2) a stunning 71-68 upset at home over No. 3 Indiana (3-1).AdvertisementDeAngelo Stewart made two free throws with 2.9 seconds left to make it a 3-point lead, and Konchar picked off the ensuing inbounds pass to seal the biggest win in team history.AdvertisementThe Mastodons, who made the move to Division I in 2001-2, had lost all nine previous games against ranked teams and had not even played a Top 25 opponent in nearly four years. But on their home court, they trailed for only 90 seconds against an in-state power and pulled off the biggest stunner of this early college basketball season in style.Get the big sports news, highlights and analysis from Times journalists, with distinctive takes on games and some behind-the-scenes surprises, delivered to your inbox every week.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.Noah Syndergaard, the hard-throwing Mets right-hander who became the team’s best starter last season, was invited to the pitch for the United States in next spring’s World Baseball Classic, but he has declined because of his desire to stay healthy for the upcoming season.Syndergaard, 24, finished the 2016 season with a 2.60 E.R.A., third best in baseball. But in his first full season in the major leagues, he logged only 183 ⅔ innings, limited some over the summer by a minor bone spur in his right elbow and a tired throwing shoulder.Syndergaard’s agent, Ryan Hamill, said in a statement: “It is a tremendous honor to be considered to play for Team U.S.A., and Noah does not take the prospect of playing in the W.B.C. lightly. But he also feels strongly about his responsibility to the Mets, their fan base, and their quest to win a World Series.” JAMES WAGNERThe first 12-goal game in 25 Champions League seasons took the spotlight from the advancement of Real Madrid and Juventus to the round of 16.The game ended Borussia Dortmund 8, Legia Warsaw 4 — surpassing the Champions League’s previous best, set by Monaco’s 8-3 win over Deportivo La Coruna in November 2003.Monaco lost its place in history but won Group E with a 2-1 victory at home over Tottenham, which cannot now advance.The English champion Leicester won Group G with a game to spare by beating visiting Brugge, 2-1.Real won, 2-1, at Sporting Lisbon, while Juventus beat host Sevilla, 3-1, to take the top spot in Group H.AdvertisementMONTREAL TAKES LEAD A second-half goal by defender Ambroise Oyongo gave the Montreal Impact a 3-2 victory over Toronto F.C. in the first leg of the M.L.S. Eastern Conference finals. A sellout crowd of more than 60,000 at Montreal’s Olympic Stadium waited through a 40-minute delay to repaint the mismarked penalty areas, watched the Impact seize a three-goal edge only to watch Toronto rally in the closing minutes. AGENCE FRANCE-PRESSEA version of this article appears in print on November 23, 2016, on Page B12 of the New York edition with the headline: Top Four Spots Are Unchanged in the Playoff Rankings.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.