AdvertisementSupported bySports BriefingBy The Associated PressMackenzie Hughes holed an 18-foot par putt from off the green Monday morning to win the RSM Classic in St. Simons Island, Ga., and become the first rookie in 20 years to go wire-to-wire for his first PGA Tour victory.Hughes, a Canadian, calmed his nerves and came up big in the 42-degree chill at Sea Island. He was the only player of the four remaining in the playoff who was never on the green at the 17th hole until his ball was in the cup.“I made the putt of my life right there,” Hughes said.All four players who had to return for the third extra playoff hole missed the green. Hughes was in the toughest spot, with a pitch up the slope to a green that ran quickly away from him. It stopped a few feet short of the green, and he figured he had to make it to stay in the playoff.He poured it in for par, slamming his fist, more out of relief than celebration.Then he watched Blayne Barber, Henrik Norlander and Camilo Villegas miss par putts from 10 feet or closer.J. T. Miller scored short-handed to cap a second-period rally, helping the Rangers overcome an early two-goal deficit to win at Pittsburgh, 5-2.The Penguins’ Jake Guentzel scored twice in the first period of his first N.H.L. game, but Rick Nash and Michael Grabner made it 2-2 before Miller, a native of Pittsburgh, got his eighth of the season.Kevin Hayes added his ninth goal midway through the third, and Derek Stepan scored into an empty net. NEW RULES ON ALL-STAR CAPTAINS The N.H.L. is taking steps to avoid another John Scott situation at the All-Star Game, announcing new fan voting rules that disqualify players from being named All-Star captains if they are injured or sent to the American Hockey League. Scott, a journeyman enforcer, was voted in by fans but was demoted to the A.H.L. Now, if someone is voted captain and is hurt or in the A.H.L., the player with the second-most votes will take his place.Klay Thompson scored 25 points in 26 minutes and Stephen Curry added 22 points as visiting Golden State routed Indiana, 120-83.The Warriors, who have won eight straight, kept their starters on the bench for the entire fourth quarter after taking a 29-point lead.Indiana looked tired after earning its first road win Sunday night in overtime at Oklahoma City. The Pacers also played short-handed, with the three-time All-Star Paul George, starting center Myles Turner and backup forward C. J. Miles all out with injuries.GRIZZLIES WIN IN CHARLOTTE Mike Conley had 31 points, Marc Gasol flirted with a triple-double and Memphis defeated the Hornets, 105-90, for its fifth straight win. Gasol was dominant in the first half and finished with 13 points, 9 assists and 8 rebounds.Rodney Pryor had 26 points and 10 rebounds, and Georgetown withstood a furious second-half rally to hold on for a 65-61 victory over No. 13 Oregon in the first round of the Maui Invitational in Lahaina, Hawaii.Georgetown (1-2) led by 17 after a superb first half, capped by Pryor’s running 3-pointer at the buzzer. The Ducks (2-2) swarmed back, using pressure defense to create turnovers and easy baskets in transition, but the Hoyas weathered the storm.Georgetown advanced to the second round against No. 16 Wisconsin, which beat Tennessee, 74-62, in an earlier game.KANSAS REACHES TOURNAMENT FINAL Josh Jackson scored 22 points, Frank Mason III had 20 and Devonte Graham had 16 as No. 5 Kansas rolled to an 83-63 victory over Alabama-Birmingham in the CBE Classic semifinals in Kansas City, Mo.ARIZONA FENDS OFF IN-STATE FOE Lauri Markannen scored 17 points, Parker Jackson-Cartwright had 15 points and 11 assists and No. 8 Arizona (4-0) pulled away over the final 12 ½ minutes to beat visiting Northern Arizona (1-3) by 71-55.SOUTH CAROLINA WOMEN CRUISE A’ja Wilson had 14 points and Alaina Coates had 12 points and 14 rebounds as No. 3 South Carolina (3-0) used its height advantage to blow past visiting Maine (2-3), 79-42, in the Basketball Hall of Fame Women’s Challenge.DEFENSE BUOYS LOUISVILLE Mariya Moore scored 9 points to surpass 1,000 in her career, and No. 4 Louisville (6-0) held visiting Chattanooga (3-3) to 30 percent shooting for a 63-47 victory to wrap up site play in the Hall of Fame Challenge.Ryan Fitzpatrick will be the Jets’ starting quarterback Sunday against the New England Patriots, Coach Todd Bowles said after practice Monday. Fitzpatrick sat out the Jets’ previous game against the Los Angeles Rams on Nov. 13 with a sprained left knee.Advertisement