NOV. 21, 2016
Luke Kennard scored 24 points on Sunday to lead No. 1 Duke to the title at the Hall of Fame Tip-Off Tournament with a 75-65 win over No. 21 Rhode Island in Uncasville, Conn.Kennard, a sophomore guard, made 8 of 11 shots from the floor, including 4 of 5 from 3-point range, for the Blue Devils (4-1), who never trailed. Amile Jefferson added 17 points and 15 rebounds, his second consecutive double-double in the tournament.Jared Terrell led the Rams (4-1) with 22 points, and Martin Hassan added 15. Duke’s defense held the Rhode Island star E. C. Matthews to 9 points, more than 10 below his average.VIRGINIA THUMPS YALE Marial Shayok scored 15 points, and No. 8 Virginia (3-0) held visiting Yale (2-1) scoreless for nearly nine minutes in the second half in a 62-48 victory. Blake Reynolds led the Bulldogs with 10 points.AdvertisementDISPUTED FINISH AT MICHIGAN STATE Eron Harris had 31 points and No. 13 Michigan State (2-2) held off Florida Gulf Coast, 78-77, after a timekeeping error led to a disputed finish.AdvertisementWith 1.6 seconds remaining, F.G.C.U. threw a long inbounds pass from underneath its own basket. But the clock incorrectly started when the pass was thrown, rather than when Antravious Simmons caught the ball near the foul line at the other end of the court.As Simmons turned to attempt a game-winning shot, the buzzer sounded — too early. Officials went to a video review as players and fans waited to find out if the game was over. After the delay, the play stood, and the Spartans escaped.NOTRE DAME WOMEN WIN TOURNAMENT Arike Ogunbowale scored 17 points, Kathryn Westbeld added 14 points and 8 rebounds, and No. 1 Notre Dame (4-0) held No. 17 Washington (3-1) to 37 percent shooting in winning the Preseason W.N.I.T. in South Bend, Ind., 71-60.  Katie Lou Samuelson scored a career-high 28 points, Kia Nurse added a season-best 15 points along with 8 assists, and No. 3 UConn (3-0) defeated Louisiana State (3-1), 76-53.Vincent Trocheck and Aleksander Barkov scored in the shootout to lift the Florida Panthers over the Rangers, 3-2, at Madison Square Garden.Florida’s James Reimer made 33 saves and two more in the shootout, backing goals from Keith Yandle and Aaron Ekblad.It was the first time this season the Rangers dropped back-to-back games. They lost to Columbus on Friday.Henrik Lundqvist made 28 saves in his 700th start for the Rangers. He is only the fifth goaltender in N.H.L. history to play 700 games with one team.AdvertisementChris Kreider and Derek Stepan scored for the Rangers.Rangers forward Mika Zibanejad left the game after slamming into the boards early in the overtime period. Multiple news outlets reported that he had fractured the fibula in his left leg and might be out for two months.C. J. McCollum scored 33 points, Evan Turner had 19, and the Portland Trail Blazers defeated the Nets, 129-109, in Brooklyn.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.Portland halted a three-game losing streak and extended the Nets’ skid to four. Damian Lillard added 18 points for the Trail Blazers, and Allen Crabbe had 14.Brook Lopez scored 21 points for the Nets.Mackenzie Hughes was the third player who could have won the RSM Classic with a putt. He missed, and four players will return Monday morning to finish the playoff in St. Simons Island, Ga.The tournament, the final PGA Tour event of the year, was extended another day when a sudden-death playoff that began with five players lasted only two holes before it was too dark to continue.MacKenzie, Blayne Barber, Camilo Villegas and Henrik Norlander remain in contention.STENSON CLAIMS ANOTHER  DUBAI TITLE Henrik Stenson won the Race to Dubai title for the second time in four years, and Matthew Fitzpatrick claimed the biggest victory of his short career at the World Tour Championship in the United Arab Emirates.The fourth-ranked Stenson, of Sweden, shot a seven-under-par 65 in the final round to stay ahead of his rivals in the yearlong race. He earned a bonus of $1.25 million as the European Tour’s top player.Fitzpatrick, a 22-year-old Englishman, shot a final-round 67 to card a 17-under 271 to win the tournament. He finished one shot ahead of his countryman Tyrrell Hatton.THAI AND SOUTH KOREAN EARN L.P.G.A. HONORS Ariya Jutanugarn of Thailand is the L.P.G.A.’s player of the year, and In Gee Chun of South Korea is the tour’s scoring champion.AdvertisementJutanugarn wrapped up her season by finishing tied for fourth at the CME Group Tour Championship in Naples, Fla., to clinch the season-long Race to CME Globe points competition and a $1 million bonus.Chun finished with three consecutive birdies to win the Vare Trophy, the season scoring prize that would have gone to Lydia Ko of New Zealand if Chun’s 10-foot putt on the final hole had missed.Charley Hull of England shot a final-round 66 and finished at 19 under for her first L.P.G.A. victory.MCCARRON WINS IN CALIFORNIA Scott McCarron won the Pebble Beach Invitational, birdieing the par-5 18th hole for a four-under 68 and a one-stroke victory over his fellow PGA Tour Champions player Kevin Sutherland.Chelsea moved to the top of the Premier League after a first-half strike by Diego Costa secured a 1-0 victory at Middlesbrough.Chelsea was rewarded for its unrelenting pressure when Costa scored four minutes before the break, reacting to a loose ball in front of the goal and firing it into the net from close range. It was his 10th goal of the season.An Associated Press report in the Scoreboard column on Monday about Duke’s 75-65 win over Rhode Island in men’s college basketball misstated the number of rebounds Duke’s Amile Jefferson had. It was 15, not 11.A version of this article appears in print on November 21, 2016, on Page D6 of the New York edition with the headline: No. 1 Duke Hands Rhode Island Its First Loss.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.