By THE ASSOCIATED PRESSNOV. 18, 2016
Running back Duke Catalon scored three touchdowns, and Houston’s defense hurried and harassed the Heisman favorite Lamar Jackson all night to propel the Cougars to a stunning 36-10 victory at home on Thursday that dashed No. 3 Louisville’s playoff hopes.Louisville (9-2) entered the game ranked fifth in the College Football Playoff rankings but was outdone by a Houston team whose own playoff hopes were foiled by two losses to unranked teams after a 5-0 start.Things went wrong quickly for the mistake-prone Cardinals when they fumbled the opening kickoff to Houston (9-2). Greg Ward threw his first touchdown pass on the next play to make it 7-0. Brandon Radcliff lost a fumble later in the quarter, and Houston added a field goal on the ensuing drive to make it 10-0.Jackson threw for 211 yards and a touchdown, but it did not come until the second half.Houston scored touchdowns on three straight possessions in the second quarter to push the lead to 31-0 at halftime.AdvertisementLouisville opened the second half with a 12-yard touchdown pass by Jackson, but he fumbled in the red zone on the next possession, ruining a chance to narrow the gap.AdvertisementThe Cougars stayed in Jackson’s face, sacking him a season-high 11 times and keeping him from hurting them with his feet. He ran for a season-low 33 yards after piling up a combined 338 yards rushing in the last two games.Cam Newton threw for 192 yards and a touchdown, and the host Carolina Panthers held off New Orleans’s fourth- quarter rally to beat the Saints, 23-20, in a game marred by injuries to key players.Newton was 14 of 33 and threw a 40-yard touchdown pass to Ted Ginn Jr. to help the Panthers (4-6) win for third time in three games and pull even with the Saints for third place in the N.F.C. South.But the win did not come without a cost.The Panthers lost Luke Kuechly (concussion), Ryan Kalil (shoulder), Mario Addison (foot) and cornerback Leonard Johnson (chest) to injuries. The Saints lost running back Mark Ingram to a concussion in the third quarter.Drew Brees rallied the Saints back to 23-20 behind, connecting on touchdown passes to Brandon Coleman and Coby Fleener. Brees threw for 285 yards. STUDY TARGETS N.F.L. TEAM DOCTORS A new Harvard University study says that the N.F.L. should stop using doctors paid by a team to determine whether players are able to come back from an injury.Get the big sports news, highlights and analysis from Times journalists, with distinctive takes on games and some behind-the-scenes surprises, delivered to your inbox every week.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.The report from the Football Players Health Study, financed by the N.F.L. Players Association, also recommends a short-term injured reserve list for players recovering from concussions, much like the system baseball adopted five years ago.AdvertisementThe report, issued Thursday, includes 76 recommendations addressed to 20 stakeholders in the game, including players, teams and government regulators.Novak Djokovic is playing for a lot more than just a record-tying sixth title at the ATP World Tour Finals in London. He is also looking to reclaim the No. 1 ranking.The second-ranked Djokovic won his third straight match at the season-ending tournament on Thursday, beating David Goffin, 6-1, 6-2, at the O2 Arena to finish group play undefeated for the fourth time in the past five years.Andy Murray took over the No. 1 ranking from Djokovic this month at the Paris Masters. But if Djokovic does better than Murray this weekend at the ATP finals, he will jump back ahead and finish the season on top for the third straight time and for the fifth time in six years.John Wall scored 23 points and had 11 assists, and Otto Porter added 21 points as the host Washington Wizards won for just the third time in 11 games, beating the Knicks, 119-112.The Wizards, who had lost three straight, took the lead late in the first quarter and led by 10 at halftime and by 27 late in the third quarter.The Knicks were trailing, 108-86, with 4 minutes 33 seconds to play before scoring 12 straight points. Wall hit two late baskets and four free throws to secure the win.The Knicks were led by Derrick Rose with 27. Carmelo Anthony scored 19.A great start to the week got even better when Stewart Cink opened with a career-low 62 and was one shot behind in the RSM Classic in St. Simons Island, Ga.AdvertisementAnd his wife, Lisa, walked all 18 holes at Sea Island.Cink stepped away from the PGA Tour in May when his wife was diagnosed with Stage 4 breast cancer. After nine rounds of chemotherapy, she received what Cink said was a good report from doctors in Houston on Monday.Mackenzie Hughes, the Canadian rookie, flirted with a sub-60 round until making par on the final three holes on the Seaside course for a 61 and a one-shot lead over Cink and Jonathan Byrd. Davis Love III, the tournament’s host, shot an even-par 72.SPIETH TWO STROKES BACK IN AUSTRALIA  The United States amateur champion Curtis Luck and the rookie Lucas Herbert each shot a five-under 67 to share the Australian Open lead in Sydney, leaving Jordan Spieth two strokes back.Peter O’Malley was a shot back at Royal Sydney, along with David Klein, Adam Burdett, Ryan Fox and Benjamin Clementson.A version of this article appears in print on November 18, 2016, on Page B12 of the New York edition with the headline: No. 3 Louisville Toppled by Houston’s Swarming Defense.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.