AdvertisementSupported bySports BriefingBy The Associated PressKansas City Chiefs long snapper James Winchester, whose father was fatally shot outside an Oklahoma City airport, left the team to be with his family, Coach Andy Reid said Wednesday.Reid said he was unsure whether Winchester, who like his father played college football at Oklahoma, would return for Sunday’s game against Tampa Bay.“He’s where he needs to be, and when he comes back, he comes back,” Reid said. “But right now is his time to be with his family.”Winchester’s father, Michael, was leaving work on Tuesday when he was shot near an employee parking lot. The gunman, whom the police identified as Lloyd Dean Buie, was found dead in his pickup truck.The Chiefs have dealt with grief before. Most notably, in 2012, linebacker Jovan Belcher killed his girlfriend before fatally shooting himself outside the team’s practice complex.Chiefs punter Dustin Colquitt said he had spoken with Winchester since the shooting.“He’s in a good place right now,” Colquitt said. “There’s forgiveness in his breath.”PRESCOTT’S PLACE Dallas Cowboys quarterback Dak Prescott said his interactions with Tony Romo had not been much different since Romo conceded the starting job to him.Prescott, a rookie selected in the fourth round of the draft in April, said he felt that Romo’s heartfelt speech on Tuesday was more for public consumption than for Prescott or his teammates. “We know each other, how we feel about the situation,” he said.Romo is expected to be active Sunday against Baltimore. It would be his first game since a back injury in the preseason.Baseball’s owners began meeting in Chicago two weeks before the expiration of the collective bargaining agreement.Negotiators for the owners and the players have been meeting since spring training to discuss a replacement for the agreement, which expires Dec. 1.Some of the major issues include the owners’ desire for a draft of international amateur players, the luxury-tax threshold and whether there will be changes to the draft-pick compensation system for premier free agents.ANOTHER HONOR FOR SCULLY Vin Scully, the Hall of Fame broadcaster who spent 67 years as the voice of the Dodgers, will receive the Presidential Medal of Freedom on Tuesday.Scully, who retired last month, is one of 21 recipients, along with the N.B.A. Hall of Famers Kareem Abdul-Jabbar and Michael Jordan. The award is the nation’s highest civilian honor.Paul George scored 21 points, and Indiana took advantage of the absence of LeBron James to beat visiting Cleveland, 103-93.The Cavaliers rested James after Tuesday night’s home win over Toronto. Kevin Love led Cleveland with 27 points and 16 rebounds.WARRIORS’ STREAK AT FIVE Stephen Curry had 35 points, Kevin Durant added 30, and Golden State won at Toronto, 127-121, for its fifth straight victory. DeMar DeRozan led the Raptors with 34 points, scoring at least 30 for the ninth time this season and going 17 for 17 from the foul line.Andy Murray survived the longest three-set match in ATP Finals history by outlasting Kei Nishikori, 6-7 (9), 6-4, 6-4, in London.The top-ranked Murray needed 3 hours 20 minutes to beat Nishikori. The first set alone took 85 minutes.Murray improved to 2-0 in his group and can clinch a berth in the semifinals with a win on Friday over Stan Wawrinka, who eliminated Marin Cilic with a 7-6 (3), 7-6 (3) victory.Second-ranked Novak Djokovic, playing in the other group, already earned a semifinal spot.Tampa Bay center Steven Stamkos has a torn meniscus in his right knee that will keep him out indefinitely.Stamkos, a two-time scoring champion, was hurt Tuesday in a win over Detroit. It is his third significant injury in recent seasons.Stamkos missed all but one game of last season’s playoffs because of a blood clot and missed 45 games after breaking his right leg in 2013.CAPITALS ROUT PENGUINS Nicklas Backstrom had two goals and three assists as host Washington broke out of a funk in a big way, beating Pittsburgh, 7-1. T. J. Oshie had two goals and two assists for the Capitals, who had lost three of their last four games.Advertisement