By THE ASSOCIATED PRESSNOV. 16, 2016
Dave Roberts of the Los Angeles Dodgers won the National League Manager of the Year Award on Tuesday, while Terry Francona of the Cleveland Indians earned the American League’s honor.Roberts won in his first year as a manager.Members of the Baseball Writers’ Association of America voted at the end of the regular season. The awards were announced on MLB Network.Roberts beat out Joe Maddon, who led the Chicago Cubs to the World Series championship, and the Washington Nationals’ Dusty Baker.Roberts led Los Angeles to the N.L. West title despite the Dodgers placing 28 different players on the disabled list, more than any team in the past 30 years.AdvertisementFrancona guided a club hit by injuries and drug suspensions to a first-place finish in the A.L. Central. The Indians had a 3-1 lead in the World Series before the Cubs rallied.AdvertisementJeff Banister of the Texas Rangers finished second, and Buck Showalter of the Baltimore Orioles was third.METS HIRE A THIRD-BASE COACH The Mets hired Glenn Sherlock, who spent the previous 19 years with the Arizona Diamondbacks’ coaching staff, as the team’s new third-base coach. Sherlock, 56, will also serve as a catching instructor, which the Mets hope can help some of their players, particularly Travis d’Arnaud.Sherlock will replace Tim Teufel as the third-base coach. Teufel, who had held the position since 2012, was an infielder on the 1986 World Series champion Mets.The Mets said that Teufel had been offered another position within the organization. Sherlock, a former minor league catcher, spent the previous two seasons as the Diamondbacks’ bench coach. JAMES WAGNERKhyri Thomas scored 15 of his 18 points in the second half, breaking open a close game with a three-point play and a 3-pointer on consecutive possessions, and No. 22 Creighton (2-0) defeated No. 9 Wisconsin (1-1), 79-67, in Omaha.Maurice Watson Jr. had 17 points and 10 assists and Marcus Foster added 15 points for the Bluejays.Bronson Koenig scored 21 points and Nigel Hayes had 16 to lead the Badgers, who made only 3 of 26 3-pointers after starting 8 of 13 from beyond the arc.BAYLOR 66, OREGON 49 Johnathan Motley scored 17 points in his season debut, and Baylor (2-0) got a big early season victory in Waco, Tex., over No. 4 Oregon (1-1), which was playing without its preseason all-American, Dillon Brooks, a 6-foot-7 junior forward who is recovering from off-season foot surgery.AdvertisementSYRACUSE 90, HOLY CROSS 46 Andrew White scored 19 points, Tyler Lydon had 17, and No. 18 Syracuse (2-0) went on a 14-0 run in the first half to take control and overpower visiting Holy Cross (0-2).LeBron James had 28 points and 14 assists, Kyrie Irving scored 24 points, and the Cleveland Cavaliers beat the visiting Toronto Raptors, 121-117, to match their best start in franchise history after 10 games.It was another tense matchup between the teams that met in last season’s Eastern Conference finals.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.Channing Frye’s 3-pointer from the top of the key with 59 seconds left put the Cavaliers up by 1. Cleveland then buckled down on defense, holding Toronto scoreless until Kyle Lowry made a layup with 2.8 seconds left.Kevin Love added 19 points and 13 rebounds for the Cavs, who are 9-1 for the first time since 1976-77.Lowry scored 28 points for the Raptors.HAWKS 93, HEAT 90 Dennis Schroder scored 18 points, Paul Millsap and Tim Hardaway Jr. each finished with 15, and visiting Atlanta pushed its winning streak to five games by outlasting reeling Miami.HORNETS 115, TIMBERWOLVES 108 Kemba Walker scored 30 points, and Charlotte blitzed Minnesota in the third quarter to earn a victory in Minneapolis.Adam Henrique scored 44 seconds into overtime to give the Devils a 2-1 victory in Dallas.Henrique and Kyle Palmieri skated in on Stars goalie Antti Niemi in a two-on-one. Palmieri sent a pass from the right side to Henrique at the edge of the left face-off circle, and Henrique put the puck into the net.Cory Schneider had 23 saves for the Devils.MAPLE LEAFS 6, PREDATORS 2 James van Riemsdyk scored three goals, Tyler Bozak had four assists, and host Toronto routed Nashville.AdvertisementPANTHERS 4, CANADIENS 3 Aaron Ekblad broke his stick on an awkward slap shot that sneaked by goaltender Carey Price in overtime, and visiting Florida defeated Montreal.LIGHTNING 4, RED WINGS 3 Nikita Kucherov scored his second goal of the game with 1:10 left as Tampa Bay won in Detroit.Multiple news media outlets reported that quarterback Jared Goff will make his N.F.L. debut on Sunday, when Goff, the No. 1 overall pick in the 2016 draft, starts for the Los Angeles Rams.Goff watched the first nine games of his rookie season on the sideline for the Rams (4-5), who have struggled on offense. The veteran Case Keenum has started every game.But the Rams decided it is time to see what they have in Goff after their offense failed to score a touchdown in last weekend’s 9-6 victory over the Jets.Novak Djokovic edged closer to the year-end No. 1 ranking in London.Djokovic, ranked No. 2, defeated Milos Raonic, 7-6 (6), 7-6 (5), to qualify for the semifinals of the ATP World Tour Finals and improve his record against Raonic to 8-0.Djokovic is 2-0 at the season-ending tournament, and he will retake the top ranking from Andy Murray if he does better this week. Murray is 1-0 so far, and he will play his second match on Wednesday against Kei Nishikori.All news by The Associated Press unless noted.A version of this article appears in print on November 16, 2016, on Page B12 of the New York edition with the headline: Roberts and Francona Win Manager Awards.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.