NOV. 13, 2016
After more than three hours of racing, Nascar’s four-driver championship field was decided Sunday during two frenzied overtime restarts at Phoenix International Raceway in Avondale, Ariz.Matt Kenseth looked likely to win and earn an automatic berth into next Sunday’s title-deciding race. But the first attempt at a two-lap sprint to the finish went haywire, and Kenseth collided with Alex Bowman.Just like that, Joey Logano was the new leader, and the defending Nascar champion Kyle Busch was second. Logano and Busch, who entered the race tied in the standings, finished in that order.Logano will race for his first Sprint Cup title against Busch, Carl Edwards and Jimmie Johnson, who is seeking a record-tying seventh championship. Eliminated from the playoffs were Kenseth, Kevin Harvick, Kurt Busch and Denny Hamlin.AdvertisementFORMULA ONE TITLE AWAITS Lewis Hamilton, a three-time Formula One champion, won the rain-delayed Brazilian Grand Prix in São Paulo, forcing a showdown for the drivers’ title with his Mercedes teammate Nico Rosberg.AdvertisementRosberg, who has been the runner-up behind Hamilton for three straight races, would win his first title if he again finishes second — or even third — to Hamilton in the season finale on Nov. 27 in Abu Dhabi. Rosberg leads the standings with 367 points; Hamilton is second with 355.Cristiano Ronaldo scored one penalty in the first half, missed another in the second, scored again and then struck the crossbar with a late header in Portugal’s 4-1 win over visiting Latvia in World Cup qualifying.Portugal still trails Switzerland by 3 points in Group B. Only group winners will advance directly to the 2018 World Cup in Russia, while four runners-up in Europe will qualify through a playoff round.Switzerland labored to win its fourth straight game, beating the visiting Faroe Islands, 2-0, on goals from Eren Derdiyok and the captain Stephan Lichtsteiner.AROUND WORLD CUP QUALIFYING Belgium beat Estonia, 8-1, in Brussels to join Switzerland as the only unbeaten European teams in group play.  Memphis Depay scored twice for the Netherlands in a 3-1 win at Luxembourg.  A last-gasp goal by Giorgos Tzavelas allowed host Greece to escape with a 1-1 draw against Bosnia and Herzegovina.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.HOWARD TO MISS U.S. QUALIFIER Goalkeeper Tim Howard did not travel with the United States for Tuesday’s World Cup qualifier at Costa Rica after injuring the adductor muscle in his right leg. Howard was hurt while making a goal kick in Friday’s 2-1 loss to Mexico in Columbus, Ohio, and was replaced by Brad Guzan in the 40th minute. COSMOS WIN SECOND STRAIGHT TITLE The Cosmos defended their North American Soccer League title by beating the visiting Indy Eleven in penalty kicks, 4-2, after scoreless regulation and overtime periods. The Cosmos extended their home unbeaten streak to 23 games.The Czech Republic retained its Fed Cup title when Barbora Strycova and Karolina Pliskova beat France in a decisive doubles match in Strasbourg. They defeated Caroline Garcia and Kristina Mladenovic, 7-5, 7-5, to secure a 3-2 win. It was the fifth title in six years for the Czech Republic, which became the first team to win three consecutive Fed Cups since Spain did so from 1993 to 1995.AdvertisementDJOKOVIC RALLIES Second-ranked Novak Djokovic rallied to beat Dominic Thiem, 6-7 (10), 6-0, 6-2, in his opening match at the season-ending ATP World Tour Finals in London.Michael Grabner scored two goals, and Antti Raanta had 38 saves as the visiting Rangers beat the Edmonton Oilers, 3-1. Dan Girardi had the Rangers’ other goal. Cam Talbot had 24 saves for the Oilers.Paul Goydos completed a wire-to-wire victory in the PGA Tour Champions’ season-ending Charles Schwab Cup Championship in Scottsdale, Ariz., and Bernhard Langer finished second to win his third straight season points title. Goydos shot a four-under-par 66 to finish at 15-under 195.AROUND GOLF Pat Perez won the OHL Classic at Mayakoba in Playa Del Carmen, Mexico, in his third start since shoulder surgery. He closed with a four-under 67 for a two-stroke victory over the third-round leader Gary Woodland.  Carlota Ciganda, who has five straight top-10 finishes, shot a four-under 68 for a two-stroke victory over six players at the Citibanamex Lorena Ochoa Invitational in Mexico City.Lourdes Gurriel Jr., the younger brother of Houston Astros infielder Yulieski Gurriel, agreed to a $22 million, seven-year deal with the Toronto Blue Jays.According to the Blue Jays, Lourdes Gurriel, 23, hit .344 with 17 doubles and 10 home runs in 59 games in 2015, the last of his six seasons in Cuba’s Serie Nacional. He is primarily a shortstop and center fielder.A version of this article appears in print on November 14, 2016, on Page D4 of the New York edition with the headline: Amid Late Chaos, Nascar Whittles Title Field.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.