By THE ASSOCIATED PRESSNOV. 15, 2016
Taking the court as the top-ranked player for the first time, Andy Murray got the job done. He was tested for much of his opening match at the ATP World Tour Finals but still came out on top, beating Marin Cilic, 6-3, 6-2, on Monday at the O2 Arena in London.Murray struggled to win his service games in the first set against Cilic, but still ended up saving all but one of the five break points he faced in the match. On the other side, he converted four of his five break points.In the early match, Stan Wawrinka finally lost a match at the season-ending ATP finals to someone who was not ranked No. 1 in the world. Wawrinka, who has reached the semifinals of the tournament for the last three years, was beaten by Kei Nishikori, 6-2, 6-3.Monday’s loss does not mean that Wawrinka is out of the tournament, but it hurts his chances of finishing the year as the No. 3-ranked player. Wawrinka, Nishikori and Milos Raonic all have a chance to end up one spot behind Murray and Novak Djokovic.AdvertisementAlshon Jeffery, the Chicago Bears’ star receiver, was suspended for four games without pay for violating the N.F.L.’s policy on performance-enhancing substances. Jeffery said on Twitter that he had taken a supplement for inflammation containing a substance banned by the league.AdvertisementAndrei Vasilevskiy made 34 saves, J. T. Brown and Ryan Callahan scored 42 seconds apart in the first period, and the visiting Tampa Bay Lightning beat the Islanders, 4-0.Jaroslav Halak had 27 saves for the Islanders, who were shut out for the first time this season and fell to 1-3-3 in their last seven. Tampa Bay completed a sweep of the three-game season series with the Islanders — all within the last 14 days — by a combined 14-2 score.Get the big sports news, highlights and analysis from Times journalists, with distinctive takes on games and some behind-the-scenes surprises, delivered to your inbox every week.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.The Islanders used seven defensemen and 11 forwards.Napheesa Collier had 28 points and a big block down the stretch to help No. 3 Connecticut open its season with a 78-76 win at No. 12 Florida State.Saniya Chong scored 16 points and Katie Lou Samuelson added 14 as the Huskies extended their winning streak to 76 games, which is the third-longest streak in college basketball history.Imani Wright missed a game-winning 3-pointer at the buzzer for Florida State. Wright led the Seminoles (1-1) with 25 points, and Brittany Brown added 16 points and 10 rebounds.NO. 2 BAYLOR BEATS U.C.L.A. Kalani Brown set career highs with 25 points, 19 rebounds and 6 assists as No. 2 Baylor (2-0) took over after halftime on its way to an 84-70 victory at home over ninth-ranked U.C.L.A. Jordin Canada led U.C.L.A. (1-1) with 23 points. SOUTH CAROLINA TOPS OHIO STATE Kaela Davis scored 37 points in her South Carolina debut, and the No. 4 Gamecocks opened their season with a 92-80 win at seventh-ranked Ohio State (1-1).AdvertisementREVENGE FOR STANFORD Brittany McPhee scored a career-high 28 points, Erica McCall added 17 points and 6 blocks, and No. 11 Stanford avenged a home loss against Texas from two years ago by beating the eighth-ranked Longhorns, 71-59.VILLANOVA MEN WIN AT PURDUE Josh Hart scored 24 points and Darryl Reynolds added 12 to lead No. 3 Villanova (2-0) to a 79-76 victory that ended No. 15 Purdue’s nine-game home winning streak. Isaac Haas scored 18 of his 22 points in the second half for the Boilermakers (1-1).BRAZIL IS SUSPENDED Basketball’s world governing body, FIBA, suspended Brazil’s national federation for failing to properly finance and organize the sport. FIBA said its ruling board would re-evaluate Brazil’s situation in January.Colorado Rapids goalkeeper Tim Howard will undergo season-ending surgery Thursday on a groin muscle he injured in the World Cup qualifier between the United States and Mexico last week. Howard will miss the Rapids’ appearance in the M.L.S. Western Conference championship.A version of this article appears in print on November 15, 2016, on Page B10 of the New York edition with the headline: Murray Wins First Match as No. 1 in World.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.