By KEN BELSONJUNE 15, 2016
Baltimore Ravens offensive tackle Eugene Monroe was released Wednesday, several months after he had publicly called on the N.F.L. to let players use medical marijuana to treat injuries.Though retired N.F.L. players have advocated for the use of medical marijuana, Monroe is one of the few active players who have taken that stance. Medical marijuana, he said, is safer and healthier than prescription painkillers, which can be addictive.Get the big sports news, highlights and analysis from Times journalists, with distinctive takes on games and some behind-the-scenes surprises, delivered to your inbox every week.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.Monroe, who is now a free agent, said he would continue to call on the league to loosen its stance, regardless of whether he continues to play in the N.F.L. Commissioner Roger Goodell has said only that the league’s advisers continue to evaluate the issue.In a statement, Monroe acknowledged that he had been hampered by injuries. Adam Schefter of ESPN also reported that the Ravens had tried to trade Monroe to the Giants but that the talks had fallen through.Still, Monroe questioned whether his advocacy might have also played a role in his release.“I can’t say for sure whether or not my stance on medical cannabis was the reason the Ravens released me,” Monroe said. “However, as I’ve said in the past, they have distanced themselves from me and made it clear that they do not support my advocacy.”A team spokesman said Monroe had been released but declined to say whether his stance on medical marijuana had been part of the reason.A version of this article appears in print on June 16, 2016, on Page B14 of the New York edition with the headline: Football; Ravens Release Marijuana Backer.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.