By THE ASSOCIATED PRESSAPRIL 15, 2017
The heart and kidney that the baseball Hall of Famer Rod Carew received in a transplant last year came from the former N.F.L. player Konrad Reuland — a man who, as a youth, had met Carew.The transplant that was performed on Dec. 16, four days after Reuland died of a ruptured brain aneurysm, is believed to have been the first such procedure involving professional athletes.Carew met Reuland’s family in March after mutual friends connected Reuland’s death and Carew’s operation. Reuland attended middle school in Southern California with Carew’s children and, when he was 11, met Carew.“The whole thing is just unbelievable,” Carew told American Heart Association News in an interview published Friday. “I’ve been given a second chance so I’m going to take advantage of it, and I’ve got another family.”AdvertisementReuland’s parents, Ralf and Mary, and their son Austin took turns listening to Konrad’s heart inside Carew’s chest during their meeting.AdvertisementReuland played for the Jets in 2012 and 2013 and the Baltimore Ravens in 2015. He also spent time on the practice squads of the San Francisco 49ers and the Indianapolis Colts, who released him in August.Carew, 71, had a near-fatal heart attack in 2015. Blood thinners he took as part of his treatment led to bleeding in his brain last fall, making his need for a new heart urgent.Reuland had 12 catches for 90 yards in his career. Carew was an 18-time All Star who collected 3,053 hits in his career with the Minnesota Twins and the California Angels. Carew was elected into the Hall of Fame in 1991.RAYS 10, RED SOX 5 Logan Morrison hit a grand slam and Shane Peterson homered in his first major league at-bat since 2015, two of the career-high four homers allowed by the Cy Young Award winner Rick Porcello, as Tampa Bay rolled in Boston.BREWERS 10, REDS 4 Eric Thames homered for the second straight night and drove in three runs, and Milwaukee won in a rout in Cincinnati.BRAVES 5, PADRES 2 Ender Inciarte hit the first home run in baseball’s newest stadium, SunTrust Park in suburban Atlanta, Nick Markakis drove in the first two runs, and the Braves beat San Diego.NATIONALS 3, PHILLIES 2 Daniel Murphy doubled home Bryce Harper in the 10th inning, and host Washington edged Philadelphia.AdvertisementPIRATES 4, CUBS 2 David Freese and Francisco Cervelli each drove in two runs, and visiting Pittsburgh held off Chicago to end a four-game losing streak.Sidney Crosby had a goal and two assists, Marc-Andre Fleury stopped 39 shots, and the Pittsburgh Penguins beat the visiting Columbus Blue Jackets, 4-1, to take the first two games of their best-of-seven first round series.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.Evgeni Malkin, Jake Guentzel and Patric Hornqvist also scored for the Penguins, the defending Stanley Cup champions. Fleury, making his second straight start for the injured Matt Murray, received plenty of help from his defense. The Penguins blocked 23 shots before they even got to him.BLUES 2, WILD 1 Jaden Schwartz scored with 2 minutes 27 seconds remaining during a four-on-four situation, and St. Louis defeated Minnesota in St. Paul to take a two-games-to-none lead in their first-round series.Dean Blandino, the N.F.L. officiating director who oversaw rule changes that emphasized player safety, resigned to pursue other job opportunities. Blandino, 45, had been the league’s vice president of officiating since 2013.Blandino was a strong voice on the league’s competition committee, which suggests rule changes. Those changes have included eliminating chop blocks; decreasing the number of kickoff returns — statistically football’s most dangerous play — by moving up the kickoff; and the expansion of defenseless-player parameters.Dana Vollmer, who in three months is expecting her second child, clocked a time of 27.59 seconds in the 50-meter freestyle on Thursday night at the Pro Swim Series event in Mesa, Ariz.Vollmer, who won three medals last summer at the Rio de Janeiro Olympics, was more than 2 seconds off her time from the same event last year and finished 55th. But she said that did not matter.“I’ve loved being here,” she said. “I’ve loved seeing all my teammates, all the people from Rio.”AdvertisementVollmer, 29, had her first child two years ago and returned in time to earn a spot in Rio. She said she is now eyeing the 2020 Tokyo Games.The French soccer club Lyon, which could face sanctions after its Europa League quarterfinal against the Turkish club Besiktas was delayed by unrest in the crowd, said it was the victim of visiting hooligans.The start of the match — won by Lyon, 2-1 — was delayed about 20 minutes on Thursday when fans spilled onto the field after fireworks were set off and objects were thrown from an upper section of the stadium, Parc Olympique Lyonnais.That came after fighting between French and Turkish fans outside the stadium earlier in the day.UEFA, the sport’s European governing body, said it had opened proceedings against both clubs, with the charges against Lyon including “insufficient organization” and a “field invasion.” Besiktas was charged for the use of fireworks, throwing of objects and crowd disturbance.NEW YORK CITY F.C. 2, UNION 0 David Villa scored from more than 50 yards away in the 90th minute as New York City F.C. won at Philadelphia Union, 2-0. Jack Harrison opened the scoring when he slid in a left-footed shot in the 52nd minute for his second goal of the season.RAPIDS GOALKEEPER SUSPENDED Colorado goalkeeper Tim Howard was suspended for three games and fined an undisclosed amount for profane language directed toward a fan during a 3-1 loss at Sporting Kansas City and an altercation with a fan after the match.A version of this article appears in print on April 15, 2017, on Page D4 of the New York edition with the headline: Baseball; A Hall of Famer Now Has the Heart of a Jet.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.