AdvertisementSupported byBy Scott CacciolaSAN ANTONIO — Kevin Durant stepped off the Golden State Warriors’ practice court on Friday afternoon and made some news. Durant said he was “100 percent” certain that Kawhi Leonard, hampered by an ankle injury, would play for the San Antonio Spurs on Saturday night in Game 3 of the N.B.A.’s Western Conference finals.“Yeah, he’s going to play,” Durant said. “I haven’t talked to anybody, but that’s just my gut. They’re a way better team, obviously, with him on the court. They pose a different threat.”Through the first two games of the series — both Warriors wins — the major story line has been Leonard’s sprained left ankle. The Spurs on Friday were listing Leonard as “questionable” for Game 3, which contradicted Durant’s assessment. (It should be noted that Durant does have some journalism bona fides as the deputy publisher of, and an occasional photographer for, The Players’ Tribune.)In any case, Spurs Coach Gregg Popovich said that Leonard’s availability was still up in the air.“Either he’s going to play or he’s not,” said Popovich, who added that he would take Leonard’s long-term health into consideration. “That’s always a factor.”In the third quarter of Game 1, with the Spurs in firm control against the Warriors, Leonard aggravated the injury when he stepped on the left foot of the Warriors’ Zaza Pachulia. The Spurs crumbled without Leonard, squandering a 23-point lead after he limped to the locker room. The Spurs followed that up by getting crushed in Game 2, a 36-point loss that Leonard watched from the team hotel.“I think we had the game in which we felt sorry for ourselves and we struggled mentally, and now it’s over,” the Spurs’ Manu Ginobili said. “If he plays — great, because, of course, we all know what he’d give us on the court. If he doesn’t, we’ve got to go and compete as hard as we can and do our best game. I think we do have to believe. We have no option.”Both teams have been off since Tuesday, an extended break that has given Leonard more time to receive treatment in hopes of returning for Game 3. He had done some light shooting at practice.“It’s getting better,” he said. “If I feel good, I’m going to play.”For Leonard, “good” would be defined by not having to hobble around and launch off-balance shots, he said. He had a litmus test in mind.“Just want to be able to push with both legs,” he said, adding: “It’s frustrating. You work all year to get to this point, and not being able to help the team win a game or just being able to play is all very frustrating.”On Thursday, Leonard was named first-team All-N.B.A. for the second straight season. He is possibly the best two-way player in the league, and the Spurs lean on his defense as much as they do his offense. A 6-foot-7 forward, he averaged 25.5 points, 5.8 rebounds and 3.5 assists during the regular season.He sprained his left ankle in Game 5 of the conference semifinals against the Houston Rockets. He missed Game 6, and the Spurs — with crisp ball movement and aggressive defense — were able to compensate for his absence in a 39-point win, which clinched the series.But in some ways, that game was fool’s gold. The Warriors, with their fearsome assemblage of scorers, have taken no pity on a Kawhi-less Spurs team.“This thing is far from over,” the Spurs’ Patty Mills said. “We have a lot of juice still in the tank to come out, and we owe it to each other to play the right way.”The playoffs have not been particularly kind to the Spurs, who, not so long ago, seemed primed to at least threaten the Warriors for supremacy in the West. But injuries have made the challenge even more daunting. In the conference semifinals, the Spurs lost Tony Parker, their starting point guard, for the remainder of the postseason when he ruptured a tendon in his left quadriceps. On Thursday, Parker rejoined his teammates at practice on crutches.“He’s getting around very gingerly,” Mills said.On Friday, Tim Duncan, a Spurs legend who is one year into retirement, was with the team at its training facility — and wearing a practice jersey, no less. Sadly for the injury-riddled Spurs, he was not eligible to play in the playoffs.Advertisement