By THE ASSOCIATED PRESSAPRIL 12, 2017
Borussia Dortmund lost the rescheduled first leg of its Champions League quarterfinal with Monaco, 3-2, after tribute was paid to the player who was injured when three explosions targeted Dortmund’s bus on Tuesday.Teammates of defender Marc Bartra, who had surgery for injuries to his wrist and arm, wore T-shirts emblazoned with his picture and the words “A lot of strength — we are with you.” Dortmund then fought back to keep visiting Monaco, which got two goals from Kylian Mbappe, from taking a commanding lead into the second leg.RONALDO LEADS REAL MADRID Cristiano Ronaldo scored twice as Real Madrid beat Bayern Munich, 2-1, in the first leg of their Champions League quarterfinal, ending Bayern’s tournament record of 16 straight wins at home. Ronaldo’s goals, each coming in the second half, made him the first player to score 100 goals in UEFA club competition.ATLÉTICO TOPS LEICESTER Antoine Griezmann converted a first-half penalty kick to give Atlético Madrid a 1-0 win over visiting Leicester in the first leg of their Champions League quarterfinal.AdvertisementMarc-Andre Fleury stopped 31 shots in place of Matt Murray, and the Pittsburgh Penguins opened their Stanley Cup title defense with a 3-1 victory at home over the Columbus Blue Jackets. Murray was a late scratch after incurring a lower-body injury during warm-ups.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.BRUINS PREVAIL IN OTTAWA Brad Marchand broke a tie with 2 minutes 33 seconds left, and the Boston Bruins held on to beat the Senators, 2-1, in Ottawa in Game 1 of their first-round playoff series.AdvertisementSTARS TO HIRE HITCHCOCK, REPORTS SAY The Dallas Stars plan to bring back Ken Hitchcock as their coach, according to multiple reports. Hitchcock, who was fired as coach of the St. Louis Blues on Feb. 1, coached Dallas for seven seasons (1996-2002), leading the team to its lone Stanley Cup championship in 1999.  (REUTERS)The two-time Formula One champion Fernando Alonso will race for McLaren at the Indianapolis 500 on May 28 in a surprise switch that will force him to miss the Monaco Grand Prix that day.The nation’s No. 1 recruit made his college choice official as the 6-foot-10 Michael Porter Jr. signed a letter of intent to play at Missouri for the team’s new coach, Cuonzo Martin. Porter grew up in Columbia, Mo., and starred for Father Tolton Catholic until last year, when he played for Nathan Hale High School in Seattle.A version of this article appears in print on April 13, 2017, on Page B14 of the New York edition with the headline: Soccer; A Day After Explosions, Dortmund Loses.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.