By THE ASSOCIATED PRESSAPRIL 12, 2017
Paulo Dybala outshined his more famous compatriot Lionel Messi by scoring two goals to help Juventus beat Barcelona, 3-0, in the first leg of a Champions League quarterfinal on Tuesday in Turin, Italy.Dybala, an Argentine forward, broke the deadlock in the seventh minute and added a goal in the 22nd. Giorgio Chiellini scored the third goal, 10 minutes after the break.“I’m really happy because since I was a kid I wanted to experience these moments,” Dybala, 23, said. “It’s one of my best nights, but we mustn’t ruin it next Wednesday.”The result will give Juventus plenty of confidence heading into the second leg April 19, but the team will be wary of another remarkable comeback from Barcelona, which beat Paris St.-Germain by 6-1 in its last Champions League match to become the first team to overcome a 4-0 first-leg loss in the history of the competition.Advertisement“The sensation is that we are living through another nightmare,” Barcelona Coach Luis Enrique said.AdvertisementEXPLOSIONS NEAR TEAM BUS Three explosions went off near the team bus of Borussia Dortmund, one of Germany’s top soccer clubs, as it set off from its hotel for a Champions League first-leg quarterfinal match against Monaco on Tuesday evening. One of Dortmund’s players was injured.The police said they were working on the assumption that the blasts were directed at the Dortmund team and caused by “serious explosive devices,” which may have been hidden in a hedge near a parking lot. The game was called off shortly before kickoff and rescheduled for Wednesday. [Article, Page A6.]Michael Brantley doubled home Francisco Lindor with two outs in the 10th inning as the Cleveland Indians beat the Chicago White Sox, 2-1, in their home opener after celebrating their 2016 American League championship.POMERANZ PROPELS RED SOX Drew Pomeranz struck out six in his season debut, Dustin Pedroia drove in four runs, and the Red Sox beat the Baltimore Orioles, 8-1, in Boston.TIGERS EDGE THE TWINS Matthew Boyd allowed one hit in six outstanding innings, and James McCann homered to lift the Detroit Tigers to a 2-1 victory over the visiting Minnesota Twins.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.BIG GAME FOR MARLINS’ OZUNA Marcell Ozuna homered twice and had a career-high six R.B.I. to help Miami win its home opener against the Atlanta Braves, 8-4.MURPHY PACES NATIONALS Daniel Murphy homered, doubled twice and tied career highs with five R.B.I.s and four hits, and the Washington Nationals defeated the visiting St. Louis Cardinals, 8-3.Steve Fisher will always be the “Michigan man” who was promoted to head coach on the eve of the 1989 N.C.A.A. tournament and led the Wolverines to the national title. He coached the Fab Five. And then he went off and did something few people thought was possible: He put San Diego State on the college basketball map.AdvertisementFisher, 72, announced his retirement from coaching after spending 18 seasons at San Diego State, which he turned from a laughingstock into a West Coast power. “San Diego State is my legacy,” Fisher said. “I’m proud of every step in my journey, but I’m an Aztec.”Fisher was 386-209 at San Diego State, leading the Aztecs to eight N.C.A.A. tournament berths and five in the N.I.T.The Knicks favorite Charles Oakley made his first court appearance since he was ejected from a February game at Madison Square Garden and arrested. Oakley, 53, was arraigned in Criminal Court in Manhattan on charges including misdemeanor assault before being released without bail. Prosecutors have accused Oakley of striking a security guard in the fracas at the Garden. They say two other people who intervened were pushed and received cuts.HAWKS CLINCH NO. 5 SEED Dwight Howard had 19 points and 12 rebounds as the Hawks won their fourth straight, routing the listless Charlotte Hornets, 103-76, in Atlanta to secure the No. 5 seed in the Eastern Conference.The jury in the double-murder trial of the ex-N.F.L. star Aaron Hernandez finished its third day of deliberations in Boston without reaching a verdict. Jurors have spent about 19 hours deliberating since Friday. Deliberations were scheduled to resume Wednesday morning.Lauren Carlini, a senior volleyball player at Wisconsin, was given the Sullivan Award at the New York Athletic Club as the nation’s best amateur athlete. Carlini, the only four-time all-American in the program’s history, was the only one of the seven finalists who did not participate in the 2016 Olympic Games. (NYT)A version of this article appears in print on April 12, 2017, on Page B12 of the New York edition with the headline: Soccer; Juventus Puts Barcelona in Another Big Hole.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.