By SETH BERKMANMAY 6, 2017
Mets shortstop Asdrubal Cabrera lay on the outfield grass at Citi Field, clenching his teeth and grabbing his left thumb as a teeming rain fell on him during the third inning of Saturday’s game against the Miami Marlins. The weather delayed the game, while Cabrera, who landed awkwardly after diving for a ball, joined the growing group of Mets whose seasons have been interrupted by pain.Cabrera left the game and had X-rays, which the Mets said did not reveal a fracture. The team said that he had an injury to his left thumb and that he would have a magnetic resonance imaging test on Sunday.“He was in quite a bit of pain on the field,” Manager Terry Collins said. “The M.R.I. will tell us a lot more. He’s just real sore. So we’ll just have to wait and see.”When play resumed, the Mets added on to five first-inning runs and crushed the Marlins, 11-3. Robert Gsellman won his second straight start, allowing three runs over five innings, which included the 39-minute rain delay.AdvertisementBut as their win unfolded, the Mets had to think about the possibility of filling Cabrera’s job. If he is to miss an extended period, the Mets might promote their top shortstop prospect, Amed Rosario, from Class AAA Las Vegas. Rosario, 21, was hitting .381 in 28 games entering Saturday.General Manager Sandy Alderson was visiting the SportsNet New York broadcast booth as Cabrera’s injury occurred. On the Mets’ television broadcast, Alderson said the team would consider Rosario if it needed another shortstop.AdvertisementCollins was scheduled to meet with Alderson late Saturday, possibly to discuss options.Since Rosario is currently in Albuquerque, N.M., with Las Vegas, it could be difficult for the Mets to bring him up quickly. In the meantime, Jose Reyes would most likely move to shortstop, with Wilmer Flores at third base.The Mets made those changes after Cabrera’s injury, and both players delivered. The Mets added three more runs in the fifth inning, and Reyes, who laced a run-scoring single to right field in the first, and Flores each scored runs in a three-run seventh.That provided ample support for Gsellman, who felt mechanically stronger than in his previous starts. His trademark sinker looked sharper, and he induced a number of groundouts.“I think certainly we saw some highlights today of pure, better stuff,” Collins said.The incremental improvement from Gsellman was encouraging for the Mets after they began the day with disheartening news about another starting pitcher.Noah Syndergaard, who is on the 10-day disabled list with a partly torn right latissimus muscle, spoke with the news media on Saturday, when the Mets made him and his flowing hair the focus of a promotion, handing out hats with long blond wigs attached.Get the big sports news, highlights and analysis from Times journalists, with distinctive takes on games and some behind-the-scenes surprises, delivered to your inbox every week.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.Seeing the actual version on the mound at Citi Field will not come as soon. Syndergaard said he did not expect to throw for six weeks and would probably need the equivalent of a full spring training regimen before he could pitch competitively.Advertisement“I think, realistically, it’s going to take a while,” Alderson said, adding that moving Syndergaard to the 60-day disabled list was a possibility. “We don’t know when he’s going to be back. We can speculate about that, but it’s going to be much later in the season.”Not all of the day’s injury updates were so pessimistic. Yoenis Cespedes, who is on the disabled list with a strained left hamstring, is progressing well in his recovery, according to Alderson.Cespedes will be evaluated in New York on Monday as the team tries to find the cause of his frequent hamstring injuries.Despite the absence of Cespedes, the Mets have been hitting well lately. On Saturday, they scored five or more runs for their ninth straight game. T. J. Rivera drove in one run and scored two more.“With Ces out and now with Cabby out, we’ve got to spread the wealth around,” Collins said, “and we’ve got to get everybody to chip in and get some big hits.”Perhaps the game’s biggest plate appearances came from Michael Conforto’s not making contact at all. Conforto collected two R.B.I. on bases-loaded walks and had three walks total, igniting the Mets’ offense from the leadoff spot.A version of this article appears in print on May 7, 2017, on Page SP5 of the New York edition with the headline: Mets Grimace in Unison as Cabrera Injures Thumb.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.