By THE ASSOCIATED PRESSAPRIL 11, 2017
Isaiah Thomas scored 27 points to help the Boston Celtics beat back a fourth-quarter charge and defeat the visiting Nets, 114-105, on Monday night, keeping alive their hope of securing the Eastern Conference’s top seed.Al Horford added 19 points and 8 rebounds for the Celtics, who clinched the Atlantic Division title and can finish with no worse than the No. 2 seed.The Nets trailed by 27 in the third quarter before an 18-5 run got them back into the game. The Nets got as close as 6 in the fourth, but Thomas and Horford combined for 15 points in the quarter to help secure the victory.Jeremy Lin led the Nets with 26 points and 12 rebounds. Brook Lopez finished with 25 points, and he passed Buck Williams to become the franchise’s career leading scorer with a jumper late in the fourth quarter.AdvertisementJAMES DOESN’T PLAY IN LOSS Tyler Johnson scored 24 points, including the game’s final 4 from the foul line, and the Miami Heat remained alive in the postseason chase by rallying to beat the Cleveland Cavaliers, 124-121, in Miami.AdvertisementHassan Whiteside scored 23 points and grabbed 18 rebounds for Miami, which would have been eliminated with a loss.Deron Williams had a season-high 35 points, along with 9 assists and 7 rebounds for the Cavaliers, who fell to 0-7 this season when LeBron James doesn’t play. The Cavs were also without Kyrie Irving and Tristan Thompson, and fell a game behind Boston in the race for No. 1 in the Eastern Conference.Giants catcher Buster Posey was doing well after being struck in the helmet by a 94-mile-an-hour fastball in the first inning and forced out of the game, a frightening moment in San Francisco’s 4-1 victory against the Arizona Diamondbacks in its home opener. Posey will be re-evaluated Tuesday, but “he’s doing good, he’s doing fine,” Manager Bruce Bochy said. Posey is likely to sit out Tuesday’s game.Get the big sports news, highlights and analysis from Times journalists, with distinctive takes on games and some behind-the-scenes surprises, delivered to your inbox every week.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.TIGERS WIN PITCHERS’ DUEL Justin Verlander and Chris Sale dominated in a matchup of ace pitchers before Nicholas Castellanos singled in the go-ahead run off Sale in the eighth inning, lifting the Detroit Tigers over the visiting Boston Red Sox, 2-1.MARINERS’ PAXTON DOMINATES AGAIN James Paxton shut down Houston for the second time in a week, pitching seven innings of four-hit ball and leading Seattle to a 6-0 win in its home opener.A’S SPOIL ROYALS’ HOME OPENER Khris Davis hit a two-run homer, Jharel Cotton shut down Kansas City’s anemic offense, and Oakland held on to spoil the Royals’ home opener, 2-0.The Los Angeles Kings fired Coach Darryl Sutter and General Manager Dean Lombardi, the duo that led the franchise to its only two Stanley Cup championships.AdvertisementThe Kings promoted the former defenseman Rob Blake to vice president and general manager. The longtime executive Luc Robitaille was promoted to team president in charge of all hockey and business operations.Los Angeles won the Stanley Cup in 2012 and 2014 but has not won a playoff round since. The Kings (39-35-8) missed the playoffs this season for the second time in three years with their worst record since 2009.CANUCKS FIRE COACH The Vancouver Canucks fired Coach Willie Desjardins after missing the postseason for the second consecutive season. The team announced the move a day after ending the season with its eighth straight loss. In three seasons with Vancouver, Desjardins went 109-110-27.MICHIGAN COACH BERENSON RETIRES Michigan Coach Red Berenson has retired after a 33-season run that included two national championships. Berenson, a 77-year-old former N.H.L. star, won national titles in 1996 and 1998. He had a record of 848-426-92 with 23 N.C.A.A. tournament appearances.As jurors in the double-murder trial of the ex-N.F.L. star Aaron Hernandez deliberated for a second day in Boston, one of Hernandez’s lawyers told the judge that his selection of a white woman as forewoman of the mostly minority jury has “troubling racial overtones.” The jury has deliberated about 12 hours since Friday without reaching a verdict.The ATP’s annual tournament in Memphis is moving to Long Island in 2018 after 41 years in Tennessee. The Memphis Open was one of the longest-running tournaments in the United States and was the country’s only indoor ATP event. The tournament will begin play at the renovated Nassau Coliseum on Feb. 10 through 18.A version of this article appears in print on April 11, 2017, on Page B14 of the New York edition with the headline: Pro Basketball; Celtics Beat Nets; Cavaliers Fall to the Heat.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.