
On Baseball By                     
 TYLER KEPNER
 
JULY 17, 2017
Two young men found their gloves, grabbed a ball and played catch on a sunny afternoon in a city park on Monday. They said it felt good to throw again. It had been a while. They agreed they should do it more often.Usually, this would not be newsworthy. But when the men are Noah Syndergaard and Matt Harvey, every throw is packed with possibility — for breakout or breakdown.“Certainly it’s nice to see them out there,” Mets Manager Terry Collins said after watching them at Citi Field. “But I don’t know when I’ll get them back or if I’ll get them back.”Syndergaard had last thrown on April 30 in Washington, before heading to the disabled list with a torn right lat muscle. Harvey had not thrown since June 14, having sat out since then with a stress injury to the scapula bone in his right shoulder.Advertisement“I went home one weekend and my nieces and nephews were throwing around the ball,” Harvey said. “I picked it up and obviously heard, ‘Don’t throw it!’ from my dad.”AdvertisementDon’t throw it? The Mets expected to say just the opposite this season. The injury-prone year should have been 2016, when the previous fall’s World Series run caught up with their prized young arms. The Mets salvaged a wild card last season, anyway, and this spring they seemed poised for another postseason push.But Syndergaard — already the hardest-throwing starter in the majors — fizzled in his doomed effort to challenge the limits of velocity. Harvey found his strength zapped by thoracic outlet syndrome. Others have been hurt, too, and after falling at home to Adam Wainwright and the St. Louis Cardinalson Monday, 6-3, the Mets were 41-49 and fading fast.Wainwright, of course, conjures painful memories from 2006, when he froze Carlos Beltran with a curveball to finish Game 7 of the National League Championship Series at Shea Stadium. The Cardinals won it all that October, and again five years later. The Mets are still waiting.But they did come close. For all the challenges of last season, and all the torture of this one, that should not be easily dismissed. Eleven teams have made multiple postseason appearances this decade without reaching the World Series. The Mets at least got there in 2015.In 30 starts since then, Harvey has been a shell of the dominator who charged from the dugout to try to complete a World Series shutout on that crisp November night against the Kansas City Royals. His statistics the last two seasons: 8-13 with a 5.02 earned run average, a dreary ledger that just might be his penance for piling up innings in his first full season after Tommy John surgery. He will never know.“I’m not a doctor; I have no idea,” Harvey said. “I’m not gonna say it did, I’m not gonna say it didn’t. It’s not really my place to evaluate that.”In any case, Harvey said, he would not have changed anything.“No — we played five games in the World Series,” he said. “How could you regret that? Obviously, we wish it was different. But we were very close to being where we wanted to be, and that was world champions. I wouldn’t change any of that.”Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.Harvey did acknowledge poor judgment this season in waiting too long to report his injury. He lacked stamina, pitching past the sixth inning only twice in 13 starts, and wishes he had spoken up sooner.Advertisement“It was pretty uncomfortable for a while,” Harvey said. “Me wanting to be out there as much as I possibly can, fighting through some uncomfortable times, it’s my fault for doing that. I should have said a lot more earlier, and maybe I would have missed a start or two here or there. But wanting to be out there more and not miss any more time, I kind of pushed through it and then obviously ran into a wall.”Syndergaard was less reflective. He said it was weird at first to play catch — “Felt like a Ping-Pong ball in my hands,” — but he quickly reminded everyone he was still really strong.“My body’s never felt better,” he said. “I’m just ready to get back out there.”Could that mean an August return?“There’s no timeline yet,” he said.Asked if the months off had given him time to reflect on his off-season strength training, Syndergaard said no.“I don’t think my workout program had anything to do with it,” he said. “I always pride myself on a tremendous work ethic and always being able to train as smart as I possibly can. It’s just one of those things.”Do not expect Syndergaard to add and subtract from his fastball when he returns. He sounded committed to pushing his limits, all the time.“I just want to continue to raise the bar,” he said. “Never become complacent.”His teammates have no room for complacency. They need a long winning streak to revive a flatlining season, and there is no time to waste. Collins called this a big homestand, and there was no denying the point.“We’ve created where we are,” he said, “and unfortunately, it’s a stage where these games are very, very important to us.”For most of the players, these days carry the urgency of September. But for two important pitchers starting over, it might as well be February. It is a long way from playing catch to pitching in games, and a long way to contention for the Mets.A version of this article appears in print on July 18, 2017, on Page B9 of the New York edition with the headline: A Game of Catch Where Every Throw Is Fraught.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.See More »