By BRAD SPURGEONJUNE 16, 2016
Few auto racing victories are likely to be as thrilling on so many levels as was the first triumph of an American car manufacturer 50 years ago at the world’s most famous 24-hour endurance race.The sweep of the top three places by Ford at the 24 Hours of Le Mans in 1966 was a considerable achievement by the manufacturer, teams and drivers, involving a multilayered web of drama that even a Hollywood scenarist might not be able to concoct.To start with, there was Ford’s multimillion-dollar investment in the race, with its eight GT40 Mark II cars at three Ford teams — plus five of its cars used by several private teams — meaning that 13 of the 55 cars entered in the 1966 race were Fords. Ford was hoping to beat Ferrari, the team and manufacturer that had won the race every year since 1960.Enzo Ferrari, the team’s owner and director, had embarrassed Henry Ford II in 1963 by pulling out of a deal in which the American constructor would buy out the Italian brand and the two would race together as Ford-Ferrari or Ferrari-Ford, depending on where the racing was being done.AdvertisementThere were those who speculated that Ferrari’s negotiation had actually been a tactic to put more pressure on Fiat, the Italian company that eventually bought Ferrari. But after the deal broke down, Ford executives decided there was only one way to strike back at the Italian legend: beat him on the racetrack, where he took all of his pride.AdvertisementInvesting about $10 million in its Le Mans program, Ford fared poorly in 1964 and then suffered an embarrassment in 1965 when none of the four cars it started in the 24 Hours of Le Mans finished it. From that moment, Ford began working to create reliable cars and prepare for the 1966 edition.Ferrari, meanwhile, entered only two cars in the 1966 race; it had won the previous five editions and no doubt assumed it would win again. But neither of the Ferraris finished the race, both out by Lap 227, leaving the road clear for the Fords.By the final pit stops, there were three Fords in the lead of the race. But one of them, driven by Ronnie Bucknum and Dick Hutcherson, was 12 laps behind. The two leading cars — Ken Miles and Denny Hulme in first and Bruce McLaren and Chris Amon in second — were on the same lap.That’s when Ford’s public-relations man, Leo Beebe, decided he wanted to make an even stronger point about the first-ever American dominance of the legendary race, and make Enzo Ferrari feel even worse. He wanted to show Ford’s pre-eminence, emphasizing that it was the manufacturer that won the race, not the drivers. So he asked the cars to cross the finish line side-by-side.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.Miles had helped develop the car, and he had also won the Daytona and Sebring 24-hour races. He was hoping for a Le Mans victory to complete the triple crown of endurance races. But driving the other car at that moment was McLaren, a pet driver of the Ford program, with a personality and style that jibed with the company’s image.The organizers of the race warned, however, that if the cars crossed the finish line side by side, the victory would go not to the car that was in the lead on those final laps — Miles’s car — but to McLaren’s car. The reasoning was that McLaren’s car had started eight meters behind Miles’s car at the beginning of the race, and had therefore covered more ground.But that was how the race ended. Moreover, at the order to slow down, Miles had in fact dropped down slightly behind McLaren as they crossed the finish line. So it was that McLaren and Amon, two New Zealanders, won.There had also been a conflict over tires on the winning car, as both Amon and McLaren had a contract to race with Firestone tires. But during the race the Firestones kept falling apart, and Ford decided to use Goodyears, to Firestone’s great distress.AdvertisementMcLaren had become so desperate with the situation that at one point, as he handed over the car to Amon in the pitlane, he said: “We’ve nothing to lose. Let’s drive the doors off it. Go like hell!” Those phrases would go on to define the race for history.The race marked a turning point in endurance racing in the 1960s. The first half of the decade had been dominated by Ferrari, the second half would be dominated by Ford. The American manufacturer returned to win again in 1967, 1968 and 1969.But then Ford never again entered Le Mans as an official manufacturer, until this year. And once again, Ford will be taking on Ferrari, in the GTE class.Bill Ford Jr., the company’s chairman and a nephew of Henry Ford II, is seeking to revive Ford’s racing past with a huge commitment in the GTE category, entering a car that resembles the GT40. It is based on the new Ford GT supercar, which was introduced last year and is the most advanced Ford production vehicle ever.A version of this special report appears in print on June 17, 2016, in The International New York Times.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.See More »