By THE ASSOCIATED PRESSAUG. 4, 2017
Stan Wawrinka chose long-term health over a United States Open title defense.He pulled out of the Open, which begins Aug. 28, because of an injured knee. He said he decided to undergo a “medical intervention” and sit out the rest of 2017. He did not provide any specifics about the injury or treatment.“This was the only solution to make sure I will be able to compete at the top level for many more years,” Wawrinka said Friday in a statement through his agency.He joins Novak Djokovic, the man he beat in last year’s final at Flushing Meadows, in calling it quits for this season because of an injury.The fourth-ranked Wawrinka, a three-time Grand Slam champion, reached the final of the French Open in June, losing to Rafael Nadal, but was eliminated by Daniil Medvedev in the first round at Wimbledon.AdvertisementWawrinka, 32, was clearly bothered by his left knee then, icing it during changeovers. He said after the defeat that the knee had been a problem on and off all season and that he needed to figure out what was wrong.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.He finished with just one title this season and said he was looking toward to playing in 2018.“I love this sport and I will work hard to get back to my top level and play many more years,” Wawrinka said.AdvertisementWawrinka follows his Swiss countryman Roger Federer in having to cut his season short because of a knee injury. Federer sat out the second half of 2016 but has returned strong this year, winning two majors and beating Wawrinka in the finals at Indian Wells, Calif.Djokovic announced last week he would miss the U.S. Open because of an injured right elbow, ending his streak of playing in 51 consecutive Grand Slam tournaments. He aims to return to the ATP Tour in January.Top-ranked Andy Murray struggled with a hip problem at Wimbledon and withdrew from next week’s Rogers Cup in Montreal. Murray will lose the No. 1 ranking to Nadal if Nadal reaches the semifinals in Montreal.We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.