By BILLY WITZJULY 14, 2017
BOSTON — When the Chicago Cubs went across town on Thursday and pulled off a rare trade with the White Sox, landing pitcher Jose Quintana for a haul that included two premium prospects, it clearly defined where the two Windy City clubs stood.The White Sox are in full reboot mode, while the Cubs are fully committed to defending their World Series title. For both teams there are no half measures.The Yankees, in contrast, were walking along that fuzzy line of contention as they emerged from the All-Star break to begin a four-game litmus test at Fenway Park on Friday.Are they in it to win it?Well, um, sorta.“We will be careful buyers,” General Manager Brian Cashman said Friday, a little more than two weeks before the Aug. 1 nonwaiver trade deadline. “We have, certainly, interest in improving the club, but it depends on the price tag. If we feel it’s something that’s not going to benefit both the present and the future, then I don’t think it’s something we would be recommending too easily.”AdvertisementCashman engaged with White Sox General Manager Rick Hahn about Quintana in the past week, all the while knowing something that nobody else did: that one of his pitchers, Michael Pineda, had been told he had a partial tear in a right elbow ligament and would most likely need Tommy John surgery.AdvertisementThough Pineda has vacillated between brilliant and brutal performances since returning from major shoulder surgery in 2014, he could at least be counted on to take the ball every fifth day.“You miss that,” Manager Joe Girardi said.A deal for Quintana would do more than patch up what has been a leaky rotation in the last month. It would have significantly brightened the club’s outlook for the future.Pineda and C. C. Sabathia are set to become free agents, and Masahiro Tanaka is unlikely to opt out of the remaining three years and $67 million on his contract because he is pitching so poorly. So the Yankees could very much use Quintana, a 28-year-old veteran still in his prime and still under contract who could anchor a staff that could also include Luis Severino and Jordan Montgomery next year.The cost for Quintana was not inconsiderable. The Cubs sent their top prospect, outfielder Eloy Jimenez, and their top pitching prospect, Dylan Cease, along with two other minor leaguers, though none of the four were above Class A.Cashman said the White Sox had asked for a similar package.Blake Rutherford and Chance Adams?Clint Frazier and Domingo Acevedo?“You can make your own conclusions out of it,” Cashman said.Because the Yankees’ farm system — among the best in baseball, according to many rankings — is richer and deeper than that of the Cubs, one conclusion from the club’s modest intentions would be that Cashman does not quite believe what he saw the first five weeks of the season, when the Yankees stormed to the best record in baseball (21-9) — and looked the part.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.They have been backsliding ever since, looking less and less like a true contender as injuries have piled up, and they skidded into the All-Star break having lost 17 of their last 24 games. At the moment, the Yankees seem to be a collection of foundation pieces: right fielder Aaron Judge, catcher Gary Sanchez, shortstop Didi Gregorius, Severino and Montgomery, along with relievers Dellin Betances and Aroldis Chapman.First baseman Greg Bird might well be included in that group — but when he will be back on the field remains uncertain. Cashman, speaking to reporters on a conference call on Friday, explained that there might be a resolution soon on Bird’s painful right foot. Doctors now believe the injury is to his os trigonum — a small, relatively uncommon accessory bone, Cashman said.AdvertisementBird, who has taken batting practice this week with the Staten Island Yankees, was to receive a second cortisone shot; an earlier one provided little relief. If the shot does not relieve the discomfort, Bird will have surgery to remove the bone, which would keep him out six to eight weeks.As a stopgap on Thursday, the Yankees acquired Garrett Cooper, a minor league first baseman, from the Milwaukee Brewers, in exchange for reliever Tyler Webb. Cooper, a right-handed batter who was pounding pitchers in the hitter-friendly Pacific Coast League, was in the lineup Friday night against the Red Sox left-hander Drew Pomeranz — and probably will be twice more over the weekend.As for what Cooper might add that the released Chris Carter (and Bird and the fill-ins Austin Romine, Matt Holliday and Ji-Man Choi, et al.) had not?“The bar has been set very low at that position,” Cashman said.Cooper, 26, was giddy arriving at Fenway Park. With Eric Thames and Jesus Aguilar, two key forces for the first-place Brewers, blocking his path at first base in Milwaukee, Cooper knew there was not much chance of his getting a promotion there.There is no such problem for the Yankees, for whom Cooper will be the 11th player to play first base this season and the eighth to start.“You see that and you see it on ESPN and the media and everything,” Cooper said of the Yankees’ problems at first base. “It’s just an opportunity for me to come in and play right away. Hopefully I can maximize all the opportunities that I get.”The Yankees, as they strive to remain playoff contenders without taking a bold step forward, are trying to do the same.A version of this article appears in print on July 15, 2017, on Page D2 of the New York edition with the headline: With Pineda’s Year Most Likely Over, Yanks Ponder Missed Chances.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.