AUG. 3, 2017
The slumping Minnesota Twins desperately needed a big game from Ervin Santana, who was more than happy to oblige. Santana threw a four-hitter for his major league-best fifth complete game and hit a two-run single to lead the Twins to a 5-2 victory against the host San Diego Padres on Wednesday.The Twins won for just the second time in nine games. They went 2-6 on a trip through Los Angeles, Oakland and San Diego.“He was the starter, the middle man, the setup man, the closer and a clutch hitter,” Manager Paul Molitor said. “It was a pretty good day for him and us.”Santana (12-7) retired his first 10 batters. He struck out nine and walked one in his 21st career complete game.AdvertisementComplete games are old school these days.“That’s why every time I get a chance, I want it, because they’re not coming often,” Santana, 34, said. “Every time you’re close to it, you take advantage and you get it. It means a lot to me.”AdvertisementThe Twins traded the All-Star closer Brandon Kintzler to Washington on Monday, so Santana’s nine innings were big.HAPP PITCHES JAYS PAST WHITE SOX J. A. Happ had a season-high 10 strikeouts in seven innings, matching his longest start of the season, as the Toronto Blue Jays beat the White Sox, 5-1, in Chicago.Happ (4-8) gave up a run and six hits while walking one to get his first win since July 4. He last got through seven innings in his first start of the season on April 5.Justin Smoak extended his hitting streak to nine games and reached base three times for the Blue Jays, who won two of three in a matchup of last-place teams. Steve Pearce and Josh Donaldson added solo home runs.The Giants may be without starting wide receiver Sterling Shepard for a little while. Shepard, the team’s second-leading receiver last season, rolled his left ankle running a short route in training camp practice.After the workout, Coach Ben McAdoo said the injury appeared to be a sprain, but he added that further evaluations were planned.The second-year receiver got up after being hurt and hopped to the sideline, where he immediately fell to the grass in pain. He was taken off the field on a golf cart and did not return.AdvertisementA second-round draft pick from Oklahoma, Shepard had 65 catches for 683 yards and eight touchdowns last season playing mostly in the slot.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.DOLPHINS AJAYI HAS A CONCUSSION Miami Dolphins running back Jay Ajayi has a concussion and will miss several practices. Ajayi, who ran for 1,272 yards last season, sat out Wednesday’s workout after being hurt Monday.Maria Sharapova withdrew from the Stanford Classic in California before her second-round match because of soreness in her left arm.Sharapova, who was competing as a wild card in her fourth tournament after returning from a 15-month doping ban, said she had started to feel pain in her forearm late during her first-round win over the American Jennifer Brady on Monday. (REUTERS)KNEE INJURY SIDELINES WAWRINKA Fourth-ranked Stan Wawrinka has withdrawn from this month’s Rogers Cup in Montreal and the Western & Southern Open in Cincinnati because of a knee injury. Wawrinka, 32, battled with the injury throughout the grass-court season and was knocked out in the first round of the Aegon Championships and Wimbledon.Wawrinka, the United States Open champion, could return to defend his title when the tournament, the final Grand Slam of the season, begins Aug. 28. (REUTERS)Four-time European champion Ajax was ousted in the third qualifying round of the Champions League after a 2-2 draw at home with Nice, and the Scottish champion, Celtic, squeezed past Rosenborg.Ajax was left to rue some sloppy defending as Nice scored twice in Amsterdam after a 1-1 draw in France and advanced on away goals. James Forrest finally found the net in the 69th minute, firing home from a tight angle to move Celtic ahead with a 1-0 victory. (REUTERS)Martin Kaymer has withdrawn from the P.G.A. Championship next week because of an injury to his left shoulder. Kaymer, who won the event in 2010 at Whistling Straits near Sheboygan, Wis., for his first major title, also withdrew from the Bridgestone Invitational this week in Akron, Ohio. His brother, Phillip Kaymer, said that Kaymer had inflammation in the tendon of his upper biceps and that doctors had advised him to step away from golf for 10 days.AdvertisementThe Olympic medalist Andre De Grasse has withdrawn from the track and field world championships after failing to overcome a hamstring injury.Athletics Canada released a statement saying De Grasse, a 22-year-old sprinter, had hurt his hamstring in training Monday and had made the decision to pull out of the championships after a second medical examination.De Grasse was a leading contender in the 100- and 200-meter events at the worlds, which start Friday in London. He won bronze in the 100 and silver in the 200 at the 2016 Olympics in Rio de Janeiro.A version of this article appears in print on August 3, 2017, on Page B12 of the New York edition with the headline: Baseball; Santana Lifts Twins With His Arm and Bat.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.