By PAT BORZIJULY 18, 2017
MINNEAPOLIS — A bedraggled Yankees club arrived at its hotel here on Monday about 4 a.m. Central time, worn out from Sunday’s day-night doubleheader that concluded four stressful games over three days in Boston.“There are probably some guys who are a little fatigued,” Yankees Manager Joe Girardi said Monday afternoon at Target Field before the Yankees faced the Minnesota Twins. “But it’s something we’re used to at this part of the schedule.”One player fitting that description may have been the All-Star and Home Run Derby champion Aaron Judge, whose hitting struggles continued Monday night in the 4-2 Yankees loss. Judge went 0-for-3 with an intentional walk, leaving him 1-for-21 since the All-Star Break — the hit an infield single. His best moment came on defense, throwing out Brian Dozier at the plate in the third.But Judge was not the only one. A few hours after the Yankees learned that first baseman Greg Bird needed surgery and might be done for the season, they squandered multiple chances on a muggy-turned-rainy night in a city where they have traditionally played well.AdvertisementStarter Bryan Mitchell’s dropped throw at first base in the third with two out let in an unearned run. In the eighth, with two out and the go-ahead run at third, Didi Gregorius saw third baseman Miguel Sano playing back and tried to bunt for a hit. The ball plopped inches in front of the plate, and catcher Jason Castro threw him out. The Yankees went 2-for-11 with runners in scoring position.Advertisement“I felt if I put a perfect bunt down, we would have got the lead,” Gregorius said. “It should have been a better bunt.”Girardi declined to second-guess Gregorius. “If you do it, you’ve got to get a base hit.” he said. “He was trying to get a base hit. He’s trying to get a run in. So I don’t have a problem with it.”Trying to preserve his weary bullpen, Girardi let reliever Caleb Smith pitch three innings in his major league debut, and the last inning proved costly. Smith retired six consecutive batters in the sixth and seventh with three strikeouts and three groundouts, then gave up four hits and two runs in the eighth. Pinch-hitter Eduardo Escobar singled and Eddie Rosario doubled to deliver the runs.“I thought it was two pitches I didn’t execute, and they cost me,” Smith said.The loss capped a day of bad news for the Yankees. Girardi said Bird would undergo right ankle surgery on Tuesday, which is expected to sideline him at least six weeks. Bird fouled a ball off the ankle the last week of spring training and has not been right since, playing in only 19 games. Even if Bird starts working out about Sept. 1, Girardi isn’t sure he can return this season.“Is there a chance?” Girardi said. “Yeah, maybe.”That followed the news that Michael Pineda, as expected, would undergo season-ending Tommy John-type right elbow surgery. The Cincinnati Reds’ team physician, Timothy Kremchek, examined Pineda on Monday in Cincinnati and concurred with the Yankees’ team physician, Christopher Ahmad, that Pineda needed surgery. Kremchek will perform it on Tuesday.Garrett Cooper, filling in for Bird, went 3-for-4 on Monday with two doubles, scoring the first Yankee run in the fifth and doubling home the tying run in the seventh. But if Bird’s season is truly over, following last year’s shoulder surgery that cost him the entire 2016 season, the Yankees will most likely be looking for a long-term answer at first base, not just a temporary one.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.“It’s really tough to get untracked when you’ve missed, really, two whole years,” Girardi said of Bird. “Hopefully he can get back before the end of the season and get some at-bats and be helpful and productive, but that’s something we’re just going to have to wait and see.”C. C. Sabathia was scheduled to start Monday night until Saturday’s 16-inning marathon prompted Girardi to move Sabathia up to Sunday and push back Mitchell to Monday. Mitchell, recalled Sunday from Class AAA Scranton/Wilkes-Barre, was making his first Yankees start this season after nine starts in the minors. Mitchell’s only other career start against Minnesota — Aug. 17, 2015 at Yankee Stadium — ended abruptly when a second-inning line drive off the bat of the former Yankee Eduardo Nunez struck him in the face, fracturing his nose.AdvertisementMitchell pitched decently for five innings, allowing two runs, one unearned in the third when he dropped the throw.“I was there. I was on the bag. It was just off the end of my glove,” he said. “I don’t know if I looked away at the last second. It’s just a ball I need to catch.”The Yankees managed a run in the fifth on back-to-back doubles by Cooper and Austin Romine. Twins starter Adalberto Mejia left in the sixth with one out and Clint Frazier, moved up to the No. 2 spot in the lineup, at second after the first of his two doubles. Reliever Tyler Duffey retired the side, fanning Starlin Castro to end it, and Castro twice lost his helmet swinging at sharp breaking pitches.In the middle stop of this three-city, 11-game road trip, the Yankees met up with an improved Twins club they had dominated in the past. Besides winning four consecutive American League division series between 2003 and 2010, the Yankees entered Monday night 19-6 at Target Field since it opened in 2010, the .760 winning percentage the highest by any team at any park since 1913 (minimum 15 games).But the much-improved Twins, like the Yankees, are vying for a potential A.L. wild-card berth. With tighter defense and a young lineup anchored by slugging third baseman Miguel Sano, a first time All-Star and runner-up to Judge in the Home Run Derby, the Twins began the night 46-45, with 13 more victories than they had last year at this time.“The team is different compared to last year,” said Minnesota pitcher Ervin Santana (11-6), one of the club’s three All-Stars. “You can tell the way our defense, our offense, our pitching, everything has changed. Everything is better than last year. The other young guys have more experience. We just have to keep continuing doing this.”INSIDE PITCHThe Twins offered a pregame video tribute and moment of silence for BOB WOLFF, the New York broadcaster who died Saturday. Wolff was part of the Twins’ original broadcast crew in 1961, following the franchise from Washington, D.C.A version of this article appears in print on July 18, 2017, on Page B9 of the New York edition with the headline: Weary Yankees Fall to Twins After Long Weekend.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.