AdvertisementSupported byBy Allan KredaThe Yankees may find some relief from their injury issues over the next week, but at least for their final series before the All-Star break, they will remain without designated hitter Matt Holliday and second baseman Starlin Castro against the Milwaukee Brewers.Holliday has been hampered by a mysterious viral illness that has caused him fatigue, and he hasn’t played since June 24. But Manager Joe Girardi said he expected that the 37-year-old Holliday would return after the four-day break next week. Girardi said a two-day minor league rehab assignment would be next for Holliday, who is hitting .262 with 15 home runs and 47 R.B.I. in his first season with the Yankees.“The expectation is he will D.H. the next two days in Scranton or Trenton,” Girardi said before the Yankees faced the Brewers at Yankee Stadium on Friday. He referred to the Yankees’ AAA and AA affiliates.Holliday said though he still had not been told exactly what his ailment has been, he was mostly feeling back to normal.“Gradually I’m starting to feel more like myself the last couple of days,” he said. “As the days have gone on, I have felt more normal. The hardest part is not knowing, having somebody say you’ll be better in this many days.”Girardi said he hoped Holliday would return when the Yankees visit the Boston Red Sox beginning next Friday.Castro, who has been out with a hamstring injury sustained June 26, has a similar time frame for a return, according to Girardi.Castro is batting .313 with 12 home runs and 45 R.B.I. this season. His first-half production earned him a spot on the American League All-Star team, but he will not play in Tuesday’s game in Miami because of his injury.“We don’t feel he’s ready to play this weekend, so he won’t play in the All-Star Game; then we’ll have him, hopefully, the following weekend,” Girardi said. “He’s doing fine.”On a third injury front, first baseman Greg Bird — hampered most of the season by an ankle injury — said he would visit another doctor Monday in a further attempt to determine the source his pain.Bird has been on the disabled list since May 2 with what was originally called a right ankle bruise. He and the team have been vexed in the past two months by an inability to fully diagnose his ailment.The Yankees have been forced to use several players at first base in Bird’s absence. Bird was hitting just .100 in 19 games this season.Bird said he would see Dr. Martin O’Malley, a foot and ankle surgeon at the Hospital for Special Surgery, on Monday. Bird added that he hasn’t felt any improvement after receiving a cortisone shot more than two weeks ago.“I was hoping it would, but it didn’t feel any better,” he said. “There’s pressure to be back and I’m doing everything I can.”Girardi, who has had to answer injury questions daily during a stretch in which his team had dropped 16 of 22 games, said that the disappointment about Bird’s situation has reached multiple levels.“There is frustration on a lot of our parts — his part, our part, the organization’s part —because he hasn’t been able to get to what he considers his ankle right,” Girardi said. “We’re trying to figure it out and get some answers.”Girardi also expressed confidence that Bird — who hit 11 home runs in 46 games during his 2015 rookie season — was doing everything to return to action.“He’s done everything that we’ve asked him to do as far as getting him on the field, productive and getting him back on track,” Girardi said. “It just hasn’t happened yet.”Bird, who missed the entire 2016 season after surgery to repair a torn labrum in his right shoulder, remained optimistic. He had a strong spring training, hitting eight home runs, so his lost season thus far is all the more exasperating.“I just have to take care of what I have to take care of,” he said. “I want to play. I love baseball, and I’m doing everything I can to get back.”Advertisement