AdvertisementSupported byBy Tariq PanjaMOSCOW — On the biggest sports day in Russia before it hosts the World Cup next summer, the country’s deputy prime minister, Vitaly Mutko, again vehemently denied any state-sponsored doping of Russian athletes and accused the Western news media of trying to influence a coming decision on a possible ban of the country from the 2018 Winter Olympics.“I’m happy to go to any court, to any disciplinary committee, to anyone and I’ll be happy to talk about how there has never been and will never be any state programs related to doping in this country,” Mutko said Friday, only hours before the draw for the World Cup at the Kremlin. “We do not need that.”Mutko, the president of Russia’s soccer federation, leads local organizing committee of the World Cup, which begins in June. Yet at a news conference Friday with FIFA President Gianni Infantino to discuss the draw, an event considered the highlight of the countdown to the world’s most-watched sports event, Mutko instead spent more than an hour fending off questions about the doping scandal connected with the Sochi Olympics in 2014.Mutko was Russia’s Minister of Sport from 2008 to 2016, the period when Russian athletes and coaches took part in a wide-ranging doping program, according to an independent investigation commissioned by the World Anti-Doping Agency.Friday’s World Cup draw, which determined the eight-team groups and order of play for the tournament, occurred days before a crucial decision that will determine the fate of Russian athletes hoping to compete at the Winter Olympics in Pyeongchang, South Korea, in February.Should the International Olympic Committee’s executive board agree that there was institutionalized doping in Russia, the country could be hit with an overall ban. Mutko, accused by a whistleblower of orchestrating the doping program in his role as sports minister, also could face censure.“We are not feeling embarrassed,” Mutko said, before embarking on a lengthy and at times rambling defense in which he assailed the Western news media, and specifically The New York Times, for what he asserted was an effort to influence the I.O.C’s decision by publishing articles about the elaborate doping program.Mutko complained about double standards when it comes to the global focus on Russia, and in particular over the coverage of the doping affair. He brought up examples in other countries, and even falsely claimed The New York Times declined his offer of an interview after the publication earlier this week of details from the diaries of Gregory Rodchenkov, the former director of the country’s antidoping who blew the whistle on the doping scheme.The New York Times “did not decline to interview the deputy prime minister of Russia,’’ the newspaper said in a statement. “In fact, the Russian government has not responded to multiple requests for comment by New York Times reporters made through aides and Russia’s sports ministry during the past 16 months.”The I.O.C.’s decision on Russia’s Olympic participation will be guided in part by a report from a commission led by a former president of Switzerland, Samuel Schmid.“Maybe you know what the decision will be next week,” Mutko said Friday. “We don’t know what the I.O.C. is going to say. We hope that common sense will prevail.”FIFA says it is taking no chances with its drug testing program for the World Cup. Russia’s antidoping laboratory remains subject to a ban from the global agency responsible for accrediting it, so samples collected next summer will be sent to a laboratory in Lausanne — one of about 30 facilities accredited by the global regulator of drugs in sports — for testing. FIFA is also insisting that its own doctors, and not local ones, take blood and urine samples during the tournament.As Mutko spoke, FIFA’s president, Infantino, sat alongside him on a raised dais. Infantino was asked about a federal case in New York, where three former high ranking soccer officials are defendants in a racketeering and money laundering trial that is part of the Department of Justice’s sprawling investigation into decades-long corruption in the sport.That inquiry followed the 2010 selection of Russia and Qatar to host the next two World Cups. Ever since, FIFA has endured a stream of negative publicity that continues to batter its image and hurt its bottom line. More than 20 slots for sponsors for the 2018 World Cup remain unfilled six months before the tournament.Still, Infantino, elevated to the presidency in 2016 following the fall of longtime leader Sepp Blatter, said Russia’s $11 billion tournament will eclipse any other since the event was established in 1930.“Our ambition is of course to stage the best World Cup ever, and from what I’ve seen so far, Russia 2018 will be the best World Cup ever,” he said.For organizers the stakes are high. Russia’s $51 billion gamble on staging the 2014 Winter Olympics backfired spectacularly on the international stage, not only unmasking the doping program, but also a scandal over the amount of money spent and allegations of corruption linked to the project. President Vladimir V. Putin, who is standing for re-election in March, is paying close attention to the World Cup, the head of the organizing committee, Alexey Sorokin, said in an interview.“Mutko keeps him aware of what’s going on,” Sorokin said. “There is regular reporting, so the government in general is very supportive and very involved in the preparation for the World Cup. We couldn’t do without them.”Putin took part in the draw in the Kremlin Palace, making opening remarks alongside Infantino. Visitors to the draw passed some of the country’s most recognizable symbols, including the colored domes of Saint Basil’s Cathedral and Lenin’s tomb.Like previous hosts of sports major events, Russia is facing scrutiny on many fronts. A group advising FIFA on discrimination issues has warned gay fans about holding hands or other public displays of affection during the tournament.Sorokin insisted his country is as tolerant as any other in Europe. Being gay is not illegal in Russia, but the country has a law banning teaching about homosexuality in schools.“It’s not a crime for sure, they cannot be apprehended,” Sorokin said of gays. “Different societies’ people have the right to have attitudes.”Advertisement