
On Olympics By                     
 CHRISTOPHER CLAREY
 
NOV. 27, 2017
PRAGUE — Already versatile to a historic degree on snow, Ester Ledecka had just come from the sand on the day we met in September.“Beach volleyball!” said Ledecka, who definitely does not lack for enthusiasm.Boredom is not an option. Nor is burnout, considering all the varied activities, including windsurfing, that she embraces. But the two sports that should make Ledecka, 22, one of the most intriguing athletes at the Winter Olympics in February are snowboarding and Alpine skiing.Last winter, she became the first person to compete in world championships in both, winning a gold medal in the parallel giant slalom and a silver medal in the parallel slalom in snowboarding at Sierra Nevada, Spain, and also placing in the top 30 in the downhill, combined and super-G in skiing in St. Moritz, Switzerland.Now Ledecka plans to plunge into a much bigger fishbowl by becoming the first athlete to compete in both sports at the Olympics.Advertisement“If she played golf and tennis at the level she skis and snowboards, she would be a household name in the United States and be on ‘SportsCenter’ every night,” said Ledecka’s snowboard coach, Justin Reiter, a retired American snowboarder and 2014 Olympian. “The winter sports give it a different twist, but it doesn’t take away from the essential. I firmly believe she’s one of the greatest living athletes.”AdvertisementFor now, Ledecka is not even the most prominent figure in her own family. Her maternal grandfather, Jan Klapac, was a hockey star: an Olympic medalist in 1964 and 1968 and a member of the Czechoslovakian team that defeated the Soviet Union at the world championships in Stockholm in 1969. That victory, which came the year after the Soviet occupation of Czechoslovakia, led to mass demonstrations in Prague, some of which turned violent.Ledecka’s father, Janek Ledecky, is a Czech pop music star who has composed successful musicals, including a version of Shakespeare’s “Hamlet.” It was a hit not only in his home nation, but also in South Korea, the host of the coming Olympics, where Ledecka will presumably be the family’s main attraction.“Things are starting to change a little bit,” said Tomas Bank, Ledecka’s head ski coach. “Two years ago, everyone was saying Ester was the daughter of Janek, but now you are hearing more and more people saying Janek is the father of Ester.”Her father’s name remains very much in lights in Prague. On the way to interview Ledecka, I passed in front of the imposing Hibernia Theater, where his latest Shakespeare-inspired musical, “Iago,” is being staged.According to Ledecka, her father also recently wrote a script for a potential film about Vic Wild, the former American snowboarder who, because of meager funding for his discipline in the United States, chose to represent Russia after marrying the Russian snowboarder Alena Zavarzina and won two gold medals at the 2014 Sochi Olympics.“My dad does many things, but I think he’s the most famous here for his Christmas songs,” Ledecka said. “So for sure when you come into some Czech store in the Christmastime, then for sure one of the songs will be his.”The family, no relation to the American swimming star Katie Ledecky, is resolutely supportive of her dual career.Advertisement“If my parents, for instance, would not have had the money to support me from the start in both sports, then I would have to choose one, and I didn’t need to do that,” Ledecka said. “I could choose to go these two ways and try to accommodate it as much as I can and make my dreams come true.”Competing in skiing and snowboarding at the highest level is a physical and logistical challenge.Though she works with the same physiotherapist and equipment technician for both sports, she has separate coaching staffs. Reiter, who retired from racing in September, is part of the SG Pro Team, and Ledecka trains alongside male snowboarders, including the Americans Michael Trapp and Robby Burns.Bank is getting help this season from his brother Ondrej Bank, a four-time Olympian who was long the Czech Republic’s top male Alpine skier before retiring in 2016.“There are a lot of people around me,” Ledecka said, laughing. “I am never alone.”Tomas Bank and Reiter said one of the challenges was reining her in during training.“She’s mentally fresh because she’s changing sports, but the biggest problem for Ester is that she’s often really tired, and that can be dangerous if it leads to mistakes on the skis,” Bank said.Funding for Ledecka’s elaborate operation comes largely from sponsors, she said, with the rest coming from the Czech snow sport federations.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.Her default mode is to plan separate training blocks of up to three weeks for each sport and then pick her spots to compete in each on the World Cup circuit.When she trained in Chile in the off-season, Bank said, she did not bring a snowboard and focused exclusively on skiing. This month, she spent two weeks with Reiter training exclusively on snowboard in Copper Mountain, Colo. Last week, she left for Nakiska Ski Area in Canada to work with Bank in preparation for the opening World Cup speed events in Alpine skiing in Lake Louise, Alberta, in early December.She then plans to return to Europe for more ski races in St. Moritz before making a quick transition back to snowboard for the opening World Cup race in parallel giant slalom in Carezza, Italy, on Dec. 14.Advertisement“It is complicated, and I think every year is more and more complicated,” Ledecka said. “It’s always like in the start of the season we have Plan A and in the middle we have Plan Z, and then we go around the alphabet like three times.”She might have been a hockey player like her grandfather if her parents had not purchased a vacation chalet in the Czech resort Spindleruv Mlyn in the Krkonose mountains when she was very young.She said she was on skis at age 2 and began snowboarding at age 5 to keep up with her older brother, Jonas. Though she had started playing hockey in Prague, she said, she soon stopped to focus on her co-favorite snow sports.“We were in the mountains half the year, and I was in Prague, too, so I was going to two schools,” she said. “From the start, there were a lot of people who would say, ‘You cannot do both; you need to specialize, otherwise you will never reach a higher level.’ Since I was 14, I already had these discussions with my coaches about ‘you need to choose and blah blah.’ And I said, ‘No, I want to go in both, and if it matters to you that I do both, then I need to choose another coach because this is the way I will do it.’”She has had much greater success in snowboarding, where the depth, in her view, is not as great as in skiing. She won the parallel World Cup title the last two seasons and the last two world championships in parallel giant slalom, which will be her only chance for an Olympic medal now that parallel slalom has been removed from the program for Pyeongchang.As an 18-year-old, she finished in the top 10 in both events at the 2014 Olympics; she narrowly missed qualifying for the Czech Alpine ski team for those Games. But that was before she began competing on the World Cup ski circuit. Her first race was a downhill in Garmisch-Partenkirchen, Germany, in February 2016. She finished a remarkable 24th.Ledecka is all but certain to compete in both sports in Pyeongchang, if she remains healthy. But the Olympic program is not ideal. Bank considers the downhill her strongest skiing event, but it conflicts with the snowboarding schedule in Pyeongchang. So she plans to skip the downhill, focusing on the giant slalom and super-G before changing herself back into, in her own words, “snowboard girl” to race for a medal in the parallel giant slalom.The sports have significant commonalities and some crossover benefits.Bank said being accustomed to skiing’s greater speeds could make snowboard races feel like “slow motion” for her.Advertisement“It’s like driving in Germany on the autobahn and then switching to a normal road,” he said.Ledecka reads courses better than many other snowboarders, Reiter said, because she is used to more complex ski courses.“What she brings from snowboarding to skiing is probably a more creative way of understanding how a mountain works, of how a carve works,” Reiter said. “No offense to skiers, but skiing’s pretty easy in terms of carving because you have a bailout. You have two skis, two poles: different ways to save yourself and disperse the force you are creating. In snowboard, you have one edge, and if you blow that edge, you are going down.“But the one thing that makes Ester truly different is Ester. It has nothing to do with her being a world champion in snowboarding or a top-20 skier. It’s just her heart and her head. Basketball didn’t make Michael Jordan special. His ability to bring who Michael Jordan was to basketball made something special.”The Olympics is Ledecka’s dream but also taboo.“We have a rule in the team; whoever says ‘Olympics’ gets a 10-euro fine,” Bank said. “The Czech mentality is always a little bit difficult, and Olympic Games in my experience is getting people crazy, so we go race to race. It’s the best way.”If she pulls off her double in Pyeongchang, Ledecka may inspire more than a few imitators. Even if she does not, she has already inspired at least one.“My daughter is a skier,” Bank said last week of his 9-year-old daughter, Ema. “And about three days ago, she told me she would like to do snowboard also. Because of Ester.”A version of this article appears in print on November 27, 2017, on Page D1 of the New York edition with the headline: No Two Ways About It?  They Beg to Differ.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.See More »