 THE ASSOCIATED PRESSJAN. 13, 2017
Three female Chinese weight lifters have been stripped of Olympic titles for doping at the 2008 Beijing Games.China is likely to get a one-year ban from international weight lifting because of the three disqualifications, which resulted from retesting by the International Olympic Committee. The committee announced the verdicts Thursday.The I.O.C. also took a Beijing bronze medal in women’s shot-put from Nadzeya Ostapchuk of Belarus. Ostapchuk previously lost her gold medal and her Olympic title from the 2012 London Games in a separate doping case.The four medalists were among eight new disqualifications announced in the latest round of an extensive program using new tests to reanalyze samples stored since the Beijing and London Olympics.AdvertisementThe I.O.C. said the Chinese weight lifters — Cao Lei, Chen Xiexia and Liu Chunhong — tested positive for GHRP-2, which stimulates production of growth hormone.AdvertisementJustin Thomas became the seventh and youngest player to break 60 on the PGA Tour by shooting 11 under par in the opening round of the Sony Open in Honolulu.Just four days after clinching his third PGA Tour title by winning the Tournament of Champions on Maui, Thomas, 23, rolled in a 15-foot eagle putt on his final hole, the par-5 ninth, to card a 59.Thomas, who set the tone for his memorable day on Thursday by eagling his opening hole with a chip-in from 34 yards, also carded eight birdies and a bogey. Hudson Swafford was in second place after a 62. (REUTERS)SCRAMBLING MCILROY IS ONE BACK Several spectacular recovery shots near the end of his round helped the world No. 2 Rory McIlroy fire a first-round 67 in the South African Open in Johannesburg. He trailed the leaders, Trevor Fisher Jr. and Keith Horne, by one shot.Experimenting with clubs from three manufacturers after Nike, his previous supplier, withdrew from the market, McIlroy struggled off the tee near the end of his round.Get the big sports news, highlights and analysis from Times journalists, with distinctive takes on games and some behind-the-scenes surprises, delivered to your inbox every week.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.Wayward drives found the rough on the final three holes, but McIlroy demonstrated his ability with superb recovery shots, scrambling to two pars and a birdie.(AGENCE FRANCE-PRESSE)Leon Draisaitl’s goal 1 minute 50 seconds into overtime lifted the Oilers to a 3-2 victory over the Devils in Edmonton. The Devils led much of the way, but Patrick Maroon’s goal at the 12:36 mark in the third period tied the score, 2-2. Cory Schneider recorded 31 saves for the Devils. The Oilers’ Cam Talbot, who had an easier night, made 16. Travis Zajac and Steven Santini scored for the Devils.  (NYT)AdvertisementTyreke Evans scored a season-high 29 points, and the New Orleans Pelicans, playing without the All-Star Anthony Davis, defeated the Nets, 104-95, at Barclays Center. Brook Lopez led the Nets with 20 points, and Sean Kilpatrick had 18, but the Nets dropped their eighth straight.Shaka Smart’s tough second season at Texas has taken another rough turn. With his team already struggling at 7-9 after starting the season in the top 25, Smart indefinitely suspended the Longhorns’ leading scorer, Tevin Mack, for an unspecified team rule violation.It is the second suspension this season for Mack, who sat out the first game for an unspecified rule violation during the off-season. A sophomore, Mack is averaging 14.8 points per game and has been Texas’ most versatile and consistent player on the court.GONZAGA 93, LOYOLA MARYMOUNT 55 Przemek Karnowski scored 17 points as No. 5 Gonzaga beat visiting Loyola Marymount to remain the nation’s only undefeated Division I basketball team at 16-0.NOTRE DAME 67, MIAMI 62 V. J. Beachem sank the go-ahead basket and made the clinching steal as No. 20 Notre Dame rallied from a four-point deficit in the final two and a half minutes to beat host Miami.SOUTH CAROLINA 66, GEORGIA 63 In a women’s game, Bianca Cuevas-Moore had a career-high 25 points, and No. 5 South Carolina held off visiting Georgia. Alaina Coates had her 52nd career double-double with 12 points and 11 rebounds for the Gamecocks.FLORIDA STATE 72, LOUISVILLE 65 Shakayla Thomas scored four of her 24 points during a key fourth-period run, and No. 7 Florida State beat No. 9 Louisville in Tallahassee.With a remarkable injury-time goal, Real Madrid salvaged a 3-3 draw against Sevilla in the Copa del Rey and set a Spanish record of 40 consecutive unbeaten games.Madrid had all but secured a spot in the Copa quarterfinals in the final minutes in Seville when Karim Benzema made a run past several defenders and fired a low left-foot shot that allowed Madrid to surpass the unbeaten mark that it shared with Barcelona. Madrid advanced, 6-3, on aggregate after winning the first leg, 3-0, at home last week.AdvertisementA.C. MILAN RALLIES A.C. Milan came back from a goal down to beat Torino, 2-1, and set up a meeting with Juventus in the Italian Cup quarterfinals. After Andrea Belotti put Torino ahead, Juraj Kucka and Giacomo Bonaventura responded for Milan in a three-minute span of the second half.A version of this article appears in print on January 13, 2017, on Page B12 of the New York edition with the headline: 3 Weight Lifters Stripped of Olympic Titles.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.