
DEC. 28, 2017

In 2017, we continued to hear about the long-term cognitive impact that many scientists and athletes believe is a result of brain trauma sustained in football and other sports.
A neuropathologist examined the brains of 111 N.F.L. player — and 110 were found to have C.T.E., the degenerative disease linked to repeated blows to the head. John Branch, a reporter at The New York Times, had been in contact via text messaging and email with Walter Peat since writing about his son Stephen, a former N.H.L. player who experienced debilitating headaches and violent mood swings. Walter Peat gave The Times permission to publish the messages, which illustrate a father’s desperate attempt to save his son.The story of a famous, 27-year-old brain, cut from its celebrity and placed on an examination table. Once there, the healthy-looking brain was cut into sheaths, exposing the telltale signs of a potent disease. After nearly 20 years of serving as a color analyst for college football games on ESPN and ABC, Ed Cunningham walked away because he no longer felt comfortable profiting from a sport he knows is killing its participants. When a college receiver sustained a concussion while wearing a high-tech mouthguard with motion sensors, it gave researchers a detailed window into what happens to the brain in the milliseconds after a big hit. This video illustrates the new findings about how the brain is affected by such blows. Don Horton coached hundreds of college linemen after his playing days were over. At the end of his life, as he realized what the sport had done to him and some of his players, he asked: What was his responsibility to those he coached?Part confessional, part help line, part bonding session, an invitation-only discussion group for the wives and partners of current and retired N.F.L. athletes has become the go-to place to air the complexities, anxieties and consequences of living with a professional football player.The C.F.L. barred players from deliberately slamming into one another during regular-season practices, and they no longer wear shoulder pads and other protective gear in practices, aside from helmets. The rules seemed, early on, to make the players safer, but there are big doubts about whether a similar approach could ever work in the N.F.L. Advertisement