
On Baseball By                     
 TYLER KEPNER
 
NOV. 19, 2016
The most significant change in baseball in the last two decades is labor peace between the owners and the players. That is saying something, given how much has changed in the way the game is run and played. But without cooperation, changes never happen. Without labor peace, there is no sport.The last work stoppage was the strike that wiped out the 1994 World Series and bled into the next season. Baseball is thriving now, with annual revenue of more than $9 billion and teams from all market sizes taking turns in the World Series. The current collective bargaining agreement expires on Dec. 1, but no one in the industry seems worried about a shutdown.Still, the last C.B.A., completed after the 2011 season, made significant changes to free agency, the draft and the international amateur market, while adding a second wild-card team in each league, blood testing for human growth hormone, a 26th roster spot for doubleheaders and other modifications.When that deal was struck, Bud Selig was commissioner and Michael Weiner ran the players’ association. Selig retired before the 2015 season, yielding to his top lieutenant, Rob Manfred. Weiner died of brain cancer in 2013, and Tony Clark, the longtime first baseman, became the union’s executive director.AdvertisementPeople familiar with the latest talks, who were not authorized to speak publicly about ongoing negotiations, believe that a new C.B.A. will mostly include tweaks to the current system. Manfred hinted at that during a news conference in October.Advertisement“Over the last three negotiations, we have found a framework that has served the sport very well in terms of promoting competitive balance, promoting financial stability, allowing our players to continue to earn higher and higher salaries,” he said. “And within that framework, there’s a lot of ways to turn the dials to produce adjustments and change that need to be made. And I think that framework will prove to be durable over time.”On-field issues — such as replay, sliding rules and so on — are adjusted periodically, not just during C.B.A. talks. But some differences should show up soon. The 162-game schedule will not change, although instead of taking 183 days to finish, the season may now fit it into a 187-day window. Active rosters are likely to increase to 26 players, from 25, as first reported by Fox’s Ken Rosenthal, and September rosters will most likely be capped at 28 or 29.The battleground issues now, such as they are, include compensation for teams that lose free agents, the luxury-tax threshold and the possibility of an international draft.Over the life of the current C.B.A., just five free agents have accepted a qualifying offer — a one-year, guaranteed deal for the average salary of the 125 highest-paid players, which amounted to $17.2 million this year. Players who rejected the offer, such as Ian Desmond and Dexter Fowler last winter, have often found a depressed market for their services, because teams outside the top 10 in the draft have had to surrender their first-round picks to sign them.The union naturally wants as few restrictions as possible on free agency so players can have as many suitors as possible. One answer would be to allow teams losing top free agents to still be compensated, but to impose lesser penalties — or no penalties at all — on teams that sign them.The current luxury-tax system on payrolls seems to have worked, to some extent, in keeping most teams from spending wildly more than the others. The tax threshold is likely to rise from its current $189 million, so the gap between low payrolls and high payrolls may widen. But the hopelessness that once pervaded small-market franchises is gone: 21 of the 30 teams in Major League Baseball have reached the playoffs over the five years of this C.B.A., with Kansas City and Cleveland sharing the last three American League pennants.Get the big sports news, highlights and analysis from Times journalists, with distinctive takes on games and some behind-the-scenes surprises, delivered to your inbox every week.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.The current C.B.A. also revamped the way teams spend on amateur talent, allotting different bonus pools for each team in the draft, based on the previous year’s standings. Two of the worst teams at the start of the last C.B.A. were the Chicago Cubs and the Houston Astros. Now both teams are strong, with the Cubs the reigning champions.AdvertisementThe Cubs and the Astros both hired new executives to run their baseball operations just as the last agreement took effect. Those executives — Jeff Luhnow of the Astros and Theo Epstein of the Cubs — understood the advantages in the system for rebuilding teams, and aggressively tore down their rosters. The system that emboldened that strategy bothered some other executives.“The whole design now is set up to reward losing,” said one team’s top decision maker, who requested anonymity to candidly discuss the C.B.A. “All benefits come from being horrible. The worse you are, the better you get. You’re penalized for success and massively rewarded for failure, so fail away. You’re getting draft picks, you’re getting money on the international side, you’re getting everything you need.”The Astros drafted first over all in 2013, 2014 and 2015. Essentially, they were bad at just the right time, and they were willing to be patient to get better. Jim Crane, the Astros’ owner, said in late September that it would not have made a difference if he had spent lavishly on free agents when he bought the team in 2011.“We had so many holes, I’d have just been wasting the money,” Crane said. “The timing had to be right. I don’t think anybody does that on purpose. I think it’s where they are in the sequence and what they have to spend. We had to change everything — the back office, the baseball operations is totally revamped. We had no technology. The Cubs were in the same situation.”As the Astros and the Cubs rebuilt, the Royals surged, winning a pennant in 2014 and a championship the next season. But the current C.B.A. did not necessarily help them, said the Royals’ general manager, Dayton Moore, because they had constructed their homegrown foundation before there were spending restrictions in the draft.“The one thing I would say is this,” Moore said late in the season. “How we built this team under the previous C.B.A.? Those same latitudes and opportunities don’t exist. We were able to spend as much money as we wanted — or as much money as our owner would budget — in the draft. For example, our first draft in 2007, our signing budget in the domestic draft was $6.5 million. Last year, in 2015, our pool money was $6.3 million. Players aren’t getting cheaper.”The current C.B.A. also established spending limits on the international market, again based on the previous year’s standings. But the penalties in the system did not stop most teams from exceeding their pools — at least at some point — and the league has had to continue policing how teams manipulate the system.For the next C.B.A., owners strongly favor the idea of an international draft, which Manfred called inevitable after taking office in January 2015. In theory, this would streamline the entry method for international amateurs, but the union is deeply skeptical of the idea.AdvertisementTop baseball operations officials, in general, seem to favor fewer restrictions on their pursuit of talent. Bonus pools weighted heavily toward losing teams — and a rigid international structure — run counter to their competitive instincts.“Personally, I like the idea of the best scouts, the best coaches, the best baseball ideas — let people have their individual strategies and competitive advantages,” Jon Daniels, the general manager of the Texas Rangers, said in late September. “We understand financial resources are going to play a role in that, but sometimes, with the intent to level the playing field financially, there are unintended consequences.”Every new agreement is fraught with such possibilities, and it takes time to see how teams and players will interpret and apply the new rules. For all of the details that must be finalized, the sides seem to agree that the basic structure holding up the industry is strong.Modifying it is important. But blowing it up — once the default position for the sport’s warring factions — is no longer an option.A version of this article appears in print on November 20, 2016, on Page SP4 of the New York edition with the headline: Prosperity With Peace, and Only Quiet Complaints.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.See More »