JAN. 12, 2017
Jim Furyk was appointed Wednesday as the United States captain for the 2018 Ryder Cup in France, where the American team will try to win in Europe for the first time in 25 years.Furyk was a unanimous choice by the Ryder Cup committee. A former United States Open champion, he played on nine consecutive Ryder Cup teams, starting in 1997, and he was an assistant captain to Davis Love III last year at Hazeltine in Chaska, Minn., as the United States won the competition for the first time since 2008.A runner-up two years ago, Vance Joseph is John Elway’s pick this time around.“It’s official,” Elway, who runs the Broncos’ football operations, wrote on Twitter. “Excited to announce Vance Joseph as head coach of the Denver Broncos!”Joseph, 44, built a reputation as one of the N.F.L.’s best secondary coaches as he worked his way through the ranks with San Francisco, Houston and Cincinnati before serving as the Dolphins’ defensive coordinator this season.AdvertisementJoseph impressed Elway in 2015, when Gary Kubiak got Denver’s job, and the Broncos then tried to hire him as their defensive coordinator, a move the Bengals blocked.AdvertisementBILLS NAME RYAN’S REPLACEMENT The Buffalo Bills, who fired Rex Ryan last month, reached an agreement to hire Sean McDermott as their coach. McDermott, 42, has been the Carolina Panthers’ defensive coordinator for six seasons.Jason Demers scored the tiebreaking goal early in the second period, Roberto Luongo stopped 29 shots, and the Florida Panthers held on for a 2-1 victory over the Islanders at Barclays Center. Nick Leddy had the Islanders’ goal, and Thomas Greiss finished with 22 saves.CAPITALS 5, PENGUINS 2 Alex Ovechkin scored twice to exceed the 1,000-point plateau, leading Washington to a home victory over Pittsburgh. Becoming the 84th N.H.L. player to hit the milestone, Ovechkin put the team on his back as Washington won its seventh consecutive game.Russell Westbrook posted his 18th triple-double of the season, and the Thunder defeated the Memphis Grizzlies, 103-95, in Oklahoma City.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.Westbrook finished with 24 points, 13 rebounds and 12 assists for the 55th triple-double of his career. He already has matched his triple-double total from last season.Enes Kanter scored 19 points and Victor Oladipo added 16 for the Thunder, who won their third straight. Mike Conley scored 22 points for the Grizzlies.A 13-year-old girl killed by a stray bullet while riding home from basketball practice has been made an honorary member of the Connecticut women’s basketball team.UConn Coach Geno Auriemma said he had decided to make the gesture after hearing the story of Shamoya McKenzie, an eighth grader in Mount Vernon, N.Y., who died on Dec. 31.AdvertisementMcKenzie’s mother has said her daughter had a poster of the current UConn team in her bedroom and dreamed of playing for the Huskies.Auriemma said he had sent McKenzie’s family a team jersey with her number, 30, along with a letter that read, “Once a Husky, Always a Husky.”BAYLOR 77, T.C.U. 54 The freshman Lauren Cox made her first seven shots as second-ranked Baylor won its 51st consecutive home game by defeating Texas Christian.CREIGHTON 75, BUTLER 64 In a men’s game, Maurice Watson Jr. scored 21 points and No. 8 Creighton matched its best start in program history at 16-1 with a victory at home over No. 12 Butler.A version of this article appears in print on January 12, 2017, on Page B14 of the New York edition with the headline: Furyk Will Lead Next U.S. Ryder Cup Team.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.