By THE ASSOCIATED PRESSJAN. 9, 2017
Cristiano Ronaldo won FIFA’s Player of the Year Award for the fourth time Monday, beating his old rival Lionel Messi, who was pulled out of the ceremony in Zurich only a few hours earlier by Barcelona, his club, in preparation for a game.“It was a year that was magnificent at a personal level and at a sporting level,” Ronaldo, 31, said in his acceptance speech, which he began with “Wow, wow, wow!”Ronaldo was rewarded for his performance in 2016, when he won the Champions League with Real Madrid and then Euro 2016 with Portugal. Messi, who has won the award five times, was second. Antoine Griezmann of Atlético Madrid and the French national team was third.“I don’t have much more to say; I think the awards speak for themselves,” Ronaldo said. “I’m very happy, and I can say that 2016 was the best year of my career.”AdvertisementCarli Lloyd won the women’s Player of the Year Award for the second year in a row.Claudio Ranieri won the Coach of the Year Award for leading Leicester City to the Premier League title.AdvertisementSilvia Neid of Germany was named the top female coach for the second time.The Colombian team Atlético Nacional was given the Fair Play Award for conceding the Copa Sudamericana title to Chapecoense, the team decimated in a plane crash.“We did nothing more than what we had to do,” said Juan Carlos de la Cuesta, the club’s president.(REUTERS)The Jacksonville Jaguars hired Doug Marrone as head coach and Tom Coughlin, the former Giants coach, as executive vice president for football operations.The Jaguars (3-13) also gave General Manager Dave Caldwell a two-year contract extension. So Marrone, Coughlin and Caldwell are signed through 2019, giving them three years to, at the very least, make Jacksonville relevant in the A.F.C. South. Marrone had been serving as interim coach after Gus Bradley was fired in late November.Coughlin, 70, was Jacksonville’s first coach and was 68-60 in eight seasons. He won two Super Bowls in 12 seasons with the Giants. He will have final say on draft choices and on free-agent signings.STEELERS ASSISTANT COACH PLACED ON LEAVE The Pittsburgh Steelers assistant coach Joey Porter was charged early Monday with assaulting a doorman and a police officer at a bar hours after the team’s 30-12 win over the Miami Dolphins in a wild-card game. Pittsburgh placed Porter on leave during the investigation. The Steelers are set to visit Kansas City in the divisional round of the playoffs this weekend.Steelers quarterback Ben Roethlisberger said he would be ready for the Chiefs game. He said the foot injury he sustained in the win over Miami was “nothing severe.”AdvertisementLEAGUE REVIEWS HANDLING OF DOLPHINS QUARTERBACK The N.F.L. began a review of the concussion protocol conducted on Miami Dolphins quarterback Matt Moore, who left his team’s playoff game at Pittsburgh after being shaken up.Get the big sports news, highlights and analysis from Times journalists, with distinctive takes on games and some behind-the-scenes surprises, delivered to your inbox every week.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.Moore was hit in the chin as he threw a pass, and the play drew a roughing-the-passer penalty against the Steelers’ Bud Dupree. Members of the Dolphins’ medical staff and an independent neurological consultant evaluated Moore and cleared him to return to the game, the Dolphins said Sunday.Moore missed only one play. The Dolphins declined to comment on the review.AVAILABILITY OF PACKERS RECEIVER UNCLEAR Packers wide receiver Jordy Nelson was hospitalized overnight after sustaining a rib injury in Green Bay’s 38-13 wild-card game victory over the Giants on Sunday, the team said.After spending the night in the hospital, Nelson was released, but his availability for Sunday’s game against the Dallas Cowboys in Texas was unclear.The Nationals’ Max Scherzer, the National League Cy Young Award winner, injured a finger on his pitching hand and will miss the World Baseball Classic.Washington announced on Twitter that Scherzer had a stress fracture in the knuckle of his right ring finger. On Twitter, Scherzer said that he began to experience discomfort in the finger in late August.The team said the continuing rehabilitation would keep Scherzer off the United States team at the Classic, which is in March, but he was still “expected to be a full participant” at spring training, which starts next month.Scherzer went 20-7 with a 2.96 E.R.A. and 284 strikeouts last season.Russell Westbrook had 21 points, 14 assists and 9 rebounds, helping the Oklahoma City Thunder pull away from the host Chicago Bulls for an easy 109-94 victory.AdvertisementSteven Adams scored 22 points, and Enes Kanter had 20 points and 11 rebounds, leading a dominant performance inside for Oklahoma City. Victor Oladipo added 13 points.Dwyane Wade led Chicago with 22 points.TIMBERWOLVES END LOSING STREAK Karl-Anthony Towns had 34 points and 11 rebounds, Ricky Rubio added 13 points and a season-high 15 assists, and the host Minnesota Timberwolves ended a four-game losing streak with a 101-92 victory over the Dallas Mavericks.Baylor is No. 1 in The Associated Press men’s basketball poll for the first time.The Bears (15-0) have made a meteoric rise in the poll, going from a team that did not receive a vote in the preseason poll to one that received 55 first-place votes from the 65-member national media panel.Baylor is the 59th program to be ranked No. 1 since the poll started in the 1948-49 season.Villanova, which received one first-place vote, had been No. 1 for the past five weeks, but the Wildcats (15-1) dropped to third after losing at Butler last week.Alex Ovechkin tied the Canadiens great Maurice Richard, known as Rocket, with his 544th career goal, leading the visiting Washington Capitals to a 4-1 victory over Montreal for their sixth straight win.Ovechkin, who has won the Maurice Richard Trophy as the league’s goal-scoring leader six times, tied Richard for 29th place on the N.H.L. career list. He also had two assists.Evgeny Kuznetsov, Brett Connolly and Nicklas Backstrom also scored for Washington.PANTHERS SHUT OUT THE DEVILS Roberto Luongo made 28 saves for his 73rd career shutout, leading the visiting Florida Panthers to a 3-0 win over the Devils, who lost their third straight.A version of this article appears in print on January 10, 2017, on Page B10 of the New York edition with the headline: Ronaldo Wins Fourth Player of Year Award.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.