By THE ASSOCIATED PRESSJAN. 8, 2017
Caleb Swanigan had 18 points and 13 rebounds on Sunday to help No. 20 Purdue win at home over No. 13 Wisconsin, 66-55, and end the Badgers’ nine-game winning streak.The Boilermakers (14-3, 3-1 Big Ten) have won nine of 10 over all and three straight against the Badgers.Ethan Happ had 17 points and Nigel Hayes had 10 for the Badgers (13-3, 2-1).Wisconsin trailed, 40-36, with 14 minutes 35 seconds to go when D’Mitrik Trice missed an open layup. The Boilermakers responded with a 12-0 run and led by at least 11 the rest of the way.MISSISSIPPI STATE BEATS LADY VOLS Blair Schaefer made a go-ahead 3-pointer with 2:39 left as No. 4 Mississippi State capitalized on its superior depth to win, 74-64, at Tennessee (10-5, 2-1 Southeastern Conference) and stay undefeated. Mississippi State (17-0, 3-0) is one of only three remaining unbeaten Division I women’s teams, along with No. 1 Connecticut and No. 18 Virginia Tech.AdvertisementGrigor Dimitrov of Bulgaria ended a long wait between ATP titles, beating third-seeded Kei Nishikori, 6-2, 2-6, 6-3, to win the final of the Brisbane International in Australia and claim his first tournament victory since 2014. Dimitrov lost the Brisbane International final to Andy Murray in 2013. He won three titles in 2014 and reached the Wimbledon semifinals as he rose to a career-high ranking of No. 8.Get the big sports news, highlights and analysis from Times journalists, with distinctive takes on games and some behind-the-scenes surprises, delivered to your inbox every week.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.Not even a broken gate rolling down the course could stop the Olympic slalom champion Mikaela Shiffrin from winning a women’s World Cup race in Maribor, Slovenia. In light snowfall, she was leading the field by 0.19 of a second when a gate that she had just passed correctly broke and flew down the hill. Shiffrin skied over it but managed to stay on the course. She fell 0.09 of a second off the lead but accelerated in the bottom section to take the win, 0.19 of a second ahead of Wendy Holdener of Switzerland.AdvertisementJoel Embiid scored 20 points, and the Philadelphia 76ers earned their 10th victory, matching their total from last season and beating the host Nets, 105-95. The 76ers broke it open with a 17-2 surge in the fourth quarter to win the matchup between the N.B.A.’s two worst teams. Brook Lopez scored 26 points for the Nets, who have lost six in a row.Chelsea cruised into the fourth round of the F.A. Cup with a 4-1 victory at home over Peterborough United, even though the team’s captain, John Terry, received a red card. Terry, who was handed a rare start, was given the red card for a foul on Lee Angol, but Chelsea progressed thanks to two goals by Pedro and goals from Michy Batshuayi and Willian.Tottenham Hotspur joined Chelsea in the fourth round by winning at home over Aston Villa, 2-0, but Liverpool faces a replay at fourth-tier Plymouth Argyle after a lineup of second-stringers was held to a 0-0 draw at Anfield.AGENCE FRANCE-PRESSEMESSI RESCUES BARCELONA Lionel Messi saved Barcelona from its second straight defeat by scoring on a 90th-minute free kick in a 1-1 draw at Villarreal in the Spanish league. Three days after losing to Athletic Bilbao, 2-1, in a first-leg match in the Copa del Rey, Barcelona had failed to score until Messi produced a superb strike from the edge of the penalty area.In a surprise move, California fired Coach Sonny Dykes after four seasons that produced just one bowl appearance. Dykes finished his tenure with a 19-30 record, including 10-26 in the Pacific-12. The offensive coordinator Jake Spavital will serve as interim coach.Justin Thomas of the United States bounced back at just the right time to hold off Hideki Matsuyama of Japan and win the SBS Tournament of Champions in Kapalua, Hawaii. Thomas closed with a four-under-par 69 and ended Matsuyama’s bid for a fourth straight victory.A version of this article appears in print on January 9, 2017, on Page D4 of the New York edition with the headline: Purdue Stops Wisconsin’s Nine-Game Streak.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.