AdvertisementSupported byBy Mike VorkunovWhile the Knicks finished up practice on Friday afternoon, going through their final drills ahead of a Saturday night meeting with LeBron James and the Cleveland Cavaliers at Madison Square Garden, Derrick Rose had an adjacent court all to himself. With no basketball in sight, he and a team trainer finished a set of full-court sprints.Rose has not played in the Knicks’ last three games as he deals with a sprained left ankle. He is also likely to miss the game against the Cavaliers.His absence will be painful, not only for the 22-29 Knicks, but also for Rose himself. When a marquee opponent takes the floor to play the Knicks, Rose sees it as an opportunity to demonstrate that he is essentially the same person he was years ago — when he was the league’s most valuable player as a member of the Chicago Bulls.After that came a series of knee injuries that slowed his career, and then a trade to the Knicks, where he is now in the final year of his contract.“Yes, yes, yes, yes, this is my year,” he said on Friday after practice ended. “This is when you prove yourself, in games like this. I’ve missed a few of these games, but I can’t let it get to me mentally. It’s part of playing, and I just want to listen to my body.”While Rose has not sustained any serious physical problems in his first, and perhaps only, season in New York, the ankle injury comes after he missed four games in December because of back spasms. He also missed one game when he temporarily went AWOL from the team.Rose has not played in more than 66 games in a season since 2010-11, and as he heads into free agency this summer, it is understandable that he views each remaining game this season with heightened urgency.But it is also possible that Rose could finish this season with another team. As the Knicks continue to pursue possible trades that would send Carmelo Anthony elsewhere, Rose’s status has been called into question.It would, for instance, seem illogical for the Knicks to trade Anthony, commit to rebuilding and then keep Rose around for the remainder of the season.“The rebuild could be me going, too,” Rose said. “I don’t know. My job is just to focus whenever I’m on the court. Just try to win games. Try to be positive. Try to be better every game, every practice, every day. Like I said from the beginning, I’m chasing something. I’m trying to get back to myself, and I’m just trying to play consistent games.”Though he has not reached the standard he set before his knee injuries, Rose is having a reasonably successful season with the Knicks. He is averaging more points per game (17.9) than any season since 2011-12, when he was last an All-Star.Rose said he had not discussed the possibility of a trade with either his agent or the Knicks’ front office. He acknowledged that when he was the subject of trade rumors while with the Bulls, it had affected him. Now, at 28, he is trying to focus on the business at hand, which, for now at least, means winning enough games to sneak into the postseason.Advertisement