JAN. 5, 2017
Kethan Savage scored 5 of his 13 points during a decisive 7-point run to give No. 18 Butler a 66-58 victory over No. 1 Villanova on Wednesday night, ending the Wildcats’ 20-game winning streak.Butler (13-2, 2-1 Big East) improved to 4-0 against ranked opponents this season and extended its home winning streak to 12 games. Jalen Brunson had 23 points on a rough shooting night for the Wildcats (14-1, 2-1).BAYLOR 65, IOWA STATE 63 Manu Lecomte made a short, high-arcing jumper over a defender with eight seconds left, and No. 2 Baylor (14-0, 2-0) remained undefeated with a victory over Iowa State (9-4, 1-1) in the Bears’ Big 12 home opener.DUKE 110, GEORGIA TECH 57 Grayson Allen had 15 points and 7 assists in his return from a suspension for tripping an opponent, and No. 8 Duke (13-2, 1-1 Atlantic Coast Conference) routed visiting Georgia Tech (9-5, 1-1) in Coach Mike Krzyzewski’s final game before he was to leave the team indefinitely to have back surgery.AdvertisementAllen had been given an indefinite suspension for tripping an Elon player on Dec. 21 but sat out only one game.AdvertisementUCONN 90, EAST CAROLINA 45 In a women’s game in Hartford, Napheesa Collier scored 21 points, and top-ranked Connecticut (14-0, 2-0 American Athletic Conference) beat East Carolina (9-6, 0-2) for the program’s 89th straight win, leaving the Huskies a game from their own N.C.A.A. record.Jimmy Butler scored 10 straight points during a critical stretch in the fourth quarter, leading the Chicago Bulls to a 106-94 win over the host Cleveland Cavaliers, who had a less-than-100 percent LeBron James and were without Kyrie Irving and Kevin Love.Butler scored 14 of his 20 points in the fourth quarter as Chicago held off Cleveland. James, who has been battling a cold, finished with 31 points, 8 rebounds and 7 assists.Kevin Hayes and Michael Grabner each scored two goals, Henrik Lundqvist stopped 30 shots, and the Rangers beat the Flyers, 5-2, in Philadelphia.Chris Kreider also scored to lead the Rangers to their fourth win in five games and match Columbus for the most victories in the N.H.L. (27). Jake Voracek scored twice for the Flyers, who have lost seven of eight since a 10-game winning streak.The Oakland Raiders will start the rookie Connor Cook at quarterback in their wild-card playoff game on the road against the Houston Texans, Coach Jack Del Rio said.With the Pro Bowler Derek Carr out with a broken leg and the backup Matt McGloin nursing a shoulder injury that could make it difficult for him to practice enough before Saturday’s game, the Raiders have turned to Cook, who will be the first N.F.L. quarterback to make his first career start in the postseason.AdvertisementCook was a fourth-round draft pick after a four-year career at Michigan State, where he threw for 9,194 yards with 71 touchdowns and 22 interceptions.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.TANNEHILL PROBABLY OUT FOR SUNDAY Quarterback Ryan Tannehill sat out the Miami Dolphins’ practice, making it unlikely that he will return from a left knee injury for the team’s playoff game Sunday at Pittsburgh.Tannehill has missed the past three games. The 10-year veteran Matt Moore, who is 2-1 as Tannehill’s replacement, is expected to make his first career postseason start.BENGALS’ JONES RESENTS ARREST Cincinnati Bengals cornerback Adam Jones said he regretted a hotel scuffle that landed him in jail, the latest legal problem in his often-tumultuous pro football career, but he insisted he did not deserve to be arrested.“I’m sorry that this happened,” Jones said as he left the Hamilton County Justice Center in Cincinnati, more than 32 hours after he was booked on four charges. He said that it would have been different if he had beaten people up but that all he had done was touch someone.Ashton Eaton, a two-time Olympic gold medalist in the decathlon, and the heptathlete Brianne Theisen-Eaton announced their retirements in essays on their website.Eaton, 28, an American and the world-record holder in his event, hinted after defending his title at the Rio de Janeiro Olympics in August that he might soon be moving on to other things. Theisen-Eaton, 28, who represents Canada, won the bronze medal in Rio.Novak Djokovic, the defending champion, and top-seeded Andy Murray posted straight-sets wins to reach the Qatar Open quarterfinals in Doha, but only Djokovic was asked to join his opponent in a selfie. Djokovic honored that request, from Horacio Zeballos, after his 6-3, 6-4 win.“I just have to mention making a selfie after the match was over — that was the first time that I ever had this kind of experience in my career,” Djokovic said on the court.AdvertisementMurray had a challenging outing against Gerald Melzer, recording a 7-6 (6), 7-5 win. Melzer “was dominating large parts of the match,” Murray said.NO. 2 SEED BOUNCED IN BRISBANE Alizé Cornet stunned second-seeded Dominika Cibulkova, 6-3, 7-5, in the Brisbane International in Australia on Thursday. Cornet blunted everything Cibulkova threw at her to reach the season-opening tournament’s semifinals.  (AGENCE FRANCE-PRESSE)Tiger Woods will start competitive play this year at Torrey Pines in San Diego, where he has won eight times as a professional. The Farmers Insurance Open, to be held there Jan. 26-29, announced Wednesday that Woods had committed to playing. It will be his first official PGA Tour event since August 2015.Lindsey Vonn could make her World Cup return in Austria next week, two months after having surgery on a broken arm. The Alpine director of the United States ski team, Patrick Riml, said that Vonn, a four-time overall champion, had resumed ski training in Colorado this week and that she planned to travel to Europe over the weekend.A version of this article appears in print on January 5, 2017, on Page B10 of the New York edition with the headline: Villanova’s Run Ends at 20 With Loss to Butler.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.