AdvertisementSupported bySports BriefingBy The Associated PressChris Berman, the longtime ESPN broadcaster and six-time national sportscaster of the year, will give up many of his on-air responsibilities, the network said Thursday.In his new role, Berman, who joined ESPN one month after it went on the air in 1979, will make occasional broadcast appearances and will serve as a spokesman for the network at some events.Although Berman, 61, will be a less visible presence after the Super Bowl, he will continue to offer opinions and perspective on N.F.L. events and appear weekly on “Monday Night Countdown.” He will also handle play-by-play duties for ESPN Radio during the baseball divisional playoffs, and participate in the annual ESPY Awards.“It is all good, I get to stay here and be involved with football and baseball and the ESPYs and some things still to be defined,” Berman said. “This has kind of been in the works in my head and in this place’s head, and we finally figured it out.”Best known for his work on ESPN’s anchor show “SportsCenter,” Berman has been the face of ESPN for more than three decades, and has made some of its most memorable calls. He said one stood out: Cal Ripken setting baseball’s consecutive games played record in 1995.“That stood as more than even a baseball accomplishment,” Berman said. “It was like America: go to work every day for 14½ years and not call in sick. That’s a night I still get tears speaking about.”James Harden scored 26 points and Nene made two free throws with 0.7 seconds remaining to lift the Houston Rockets to their sixth straight win, 118-116, over the visiting Oklahoma City Thunder.Houston overcame Russell Westbrook’s 49 points, though he struggled down the stretch as Oklahoma City dropped its third straight game.The Rockets had a 14-point lead early in the fourth quarter before their offense stalled, and the Thunder went on a 20-7 run to cut the lead to 107-104 with under 6 minutes left. The Thunder took a lead but Harden tied the score 116-116 with two free throws with under 2 minutes to go.The teams combined to miss seven shots after that, with Westbrook missing three in that span, before Nene’s free throws.PACERS TOP NETS Jeff Teague had 21 points, 15 assists and 7 rebounds, and Myles Turner finished with 25 points and 15 rebounds as the Indiana Pacers beat the visiting Nets, 121-109. The Nets have lost four straight and nine of 11 over all.Dolphins quarterback Ryan Tannehill was ruled out of Sunday’s playoff game at Pittsburgh and the backup Matt Moore will start in his place for the fourth straight game.The Dolphins announced that Tannehill would sit out after determining that he was still not ready to practice because of a sprained left knee.Moore, a 10-year veteran, will be making his first career postseason start. If the Dolphins beat the Steelers, Tannehill could be ready for a divisional playoff game at New England on Jan. 14.Edgardo Alfonzo, the former star infielder for the Mets, will manage the Brooklyn Cyclones, the Mets’ Class A short-season affiliate, for the 2017 season.Alfonzo, 43, spent eight of his 12 seasons in the major leagues with the Mets. From 1995 to 2002, he hit .292, with 120 home runs and 538 R.B.I., and became a fan favorite for his clutch hits. In 2000, he hit .324 with 25 home runs and 94 R.B.I. and helped propel the Mets to the World Series.Alfonzo began coaching with the Cyclones in 2014 and served as the bench coach last season. He will replace Tom Gamboa, who retired. JAMES WAGNERTop-seeded Andy Murray struggled to beat Nicolas Almagro, 7-6 (4), 7-5, in the Qatar Open quarterfinals while the defending champion Novak Djokovic dispatched the qualifier Radek Stepanek, 6-3, 6-3, in Doha.Murray, a two-time champion at the tournament, trailed 3-1 in the first set and squandered a 2-1 lead with a service break in the second set.In the semifinals, Murray will play third-seeded Tomas Berdych. Djokovic will face Fernando Verdasco.Jimmy Walker, last year’s winner at the P.G.A. Championship, shot an 8-under-par 65 to take the first-round lead in the SBS Tournament of Champions in Kapalua, Hawaii.Jim Herman, Justin Thomas and Ryan Moore were two strokes back.Advertisement