By THE ASSOCIATED PRESSNOV. 20, 2016
ARLINGTON, Tex. — Sunday brought a new backup, but the same result, for the rookie quarterback Dak Prescott and the Dallas Cowboys.Prescott threw three touchdown passes, two to Dez Bryant, in the first game with Tony Romo as his backup, and the Cowboys set a franchise regular-season record with their ninth straight win, beating the visiting Baltimore Ravens, 27-17.The Cowboys (9-1) punted on their first four possessions — a first this season — against the N.F.L.’s No. 1 defense. But Prescott, 23, led drives of 92 and 88 yards, both ending with touchdown passes to Bryant, at the start of the second half, breaking a 10-10 tie. Prescott completed 14 of 15 passes in the half.“Like I said before, the guy’s amazing,” said Bryant, who had six catches for 80 yards in his first two-score game since his All-Pro season in 2014.Advertisement“We’re going to follow that guy,” he added. “We’re going to continue to keep following that guy. The way that he adjusts and the way he handles his business, it says a lot about him.”AdvertisementRomo, who broke a bone in his back during a preseason game, was active for the first time since last Thanksgiving and was the Cowboys’ backup for the first time in 10 years.Get the big sports news, highlights and analysis from Times journalists, with distinctive takes on games and some behind-the-scenes surprises, delivered to your inbox every week.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.Romo, 36, never took off his baseball cap, although he watched with interest in the second quarter as medical personnel surrounded Prescott after he went down hard on a late hit by C. J. Mosley following his first touchdown pass, which went to Cole Beasley.Prescott bounced off the bench moments later and finished 27 of 36 for 301 yards for another 300-yard game a week after his first.The Ravens (5-5), who lost to Dallas for the first time in franchise history, spanning five games, controlled the tempo for most of the first half. Baltimore stayed close with quarterback Joe Flacco’s 5-yard scoring pass in the fourth quarter to Steve Smith, who became the 14th player with 1,000 career catches.But the Cowboys’ third possession of the second half took up more than six minutes, culminating in Dan Bailey’s 21-yard field goal for a 10-point lead with 1 minute 50 seconds remaining.“They scored every time they had the ball,” Flacco, who was 23 of 35 for 269 yards, said of the second half. “In that kind of game, we’ve got to do the same thing.”Ezekiel Elliott, who had 97 yards, reaching 1,102 this season, broke the Dallas club rookie rushing record of 1,007 yards set by Tony Dorsett in 1977.That is the same year the Cowboys set the previous franchise mark with an 8-0 start. Dallas won the Super Bowl that season, but the ever-optimistic owner Jerry Jones is resisting such talk.Advertisement“I can hang my hat on this little thing called nine wins in a row,” Jones said.A version of this article appears in print on November 21, 2016, on Page D7 of the New York edition with the headline: With Romo Ready, Prescott Keeps Cowboys’ Streak Alive.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.