By DAVID WALDSTEINMAY 14, 2016
DENVER — Coors Field is hardly the kind of controlled laboratory in which to make conclusions about a baseball player’s performance. Hitters thrive in the high altitude, and pitchers suffer correspondingly.Matt Harvey has always had great success against the Colorado Rockies, but none of those games were at Coors Field. He made his debut here Friday, and it did not go well.Harvey allowed five runs and a staggering 11 hits in five and two-thirds innings as the Rockies beat the Mets, 5-2, in another disappointing start by Harvey.Jon Gray, the Rockies’ rookie starter and a former first-round draft pick, earned his first career win and also collected his first hit, a single off Harvey in the fifth, as the Rockies ended an 11-game losing streak at the hands of the Mets.Advertisement“It’s frustrating,” Harvey said. “From one start to the next, it doesn’t feel the same at all. It wasn’t the ballpark or anything like that. It was me.”AdvertisementThe 11 hits were the most Harvey has surrendered since he allowed 13 on Aug. 24, 2013, against the Detroit Tigers. That was his last outing before having Tommy John surgery.Harvey, who threw 216 innings last year including the postseason, said he had no physical problems.“My body feels fine,” he said. “It’s just frustrating being out there right now.”His record is now 3-5 with a 4.93 E.R.A., a surprising number for a pitcher who has never even finished a season with an E.R.A. over 3.00.He did not allow any home runs, but the Rockies produced four extra-base hits against Harvey, who threw many of his fastballs at 92 and 93 miles per hour, a touch slower than his previous outing in San Diego, where it seemed as if he were solving some of the puzzling problems that have led to his confounding season.But Manager Terry Collins said the reduced zip on Harvey’s fastball pitches was not a concern.“Not really,” Collins said. “I saw him in ’13 when he was lights out. There was some nights when he was 97 and other nights he pitched at 94, 95.”Get the big sports news, highlights and analysis from Times journalists, with distinctive takes on games and some behind-the-scenes surprises, delivered to your inbox every week.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.What is a concern, he said, “is just the consistency of making quality pitches.”Before Friday’s game, Harvey was 2-0 in three starts against the Rockies, allowing only one earned run over 23 innings for a microscopic 0.39 E.R.A.But he gave up twice that number in the fourth inning alone, thanks in large part to a misplay by left fielder Michael Conforto during a sequence in which the Rockies smacked three straight hits.AdvertisementWith the Mets ahead, 2-0, Nolan Arenado rapped a single to left. Then Gerardo Parra banged a sinking line drive to left.Conforto ran in hard and to his left, but the ball bounced in front of him and under his glove and rolled all the way to the wall, where center fielder Yoenis Cespedes had to retrieve it.Arenado scored easily and Parra huffed into third base on what was ruled a triple. Two pitches later Harvey left a slider right over the plate that Mark Reynolds lashed into center field, scoring Parra to draw the Rockies even.The Rockies added another run in the fifth, but Harvey did well to limit the damage. The rally began with Gray, who collected his first major league hit on a bouncer up the middle.He went to second base on an infield hit by Charlie Blackmon and scored on a double by the rookie Trevor Story, giving the Rockies a 3-2 lead. At that point, with runners at second and third, no outs and the meat of the Rockies’ order due up, the Mets instructed Hansel Robles to warm up in the bullpen.But Harvey got the next three batters out to strand the runners. Carlos Gonzalez popped up, Arenado hit a soft liner to Neil Walker at second, and Parra hit a weak grounder to the shortstop.Still, as the hits mounted, so did Harvey’s pitch count. He gave up another run in the sixth — the inning that has bedeviled him this season — on a double by D. J. LeMahieu and a single by Tony Wolters.It was the ninth run Harvey has given up in the equivalent of five and two-thirds innings of pitching during the sixth inning this year. He wound up being charged with another. After he struck out Gray, Collins took the ball from Harvey and handed it to Jerry Blevins.Blackmon, a left-handed hitter, was Blevins’s first assignment, and he rocketed a ball high off the wall in right field to score Wolters and drive Harvey’s E.R.A. even higher.Advertisement“I’m just not feeling comfortable throwing the baseball right now,” he said.A version of this article appears in print on May 14, 2016, on Page D2 of the New York edition with the headline: Harvey Falls in First Visit to a Pitching Wasteland.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.