By DAVID WALDSTEINMAY 13, 2016
DENVER — Major League Baseball on Friday handed down its long-anticipated punishment of Jose Reyes, suspending the veteran shortstop through the end of May for violating the sport’s policy on domestic violence.Reyes, who had been on paid suspension since the beginning of spring training in February, accepted the penalty. It is retroactive to Feb. 23, so he will end up forfeiting two months’ pay, or roughly $7.25 million of his $22 million salary for 2016.Reyes, 32, who a decade ago was a dynamic player for the Mets, piling up triples and stolen bases in league-leading fashion, is the second player suspended under baseball’s new policy. The first player was Yankees reliever Aroldis Chapman, who returned this week after a 30-game suspension.The announcement was made as the Mets were about to begin a weekend series in Denver against the Rockies, leaving both his former team and his current team to react to the news.Advertisement“Anytime there is some sort of mutually agreed upon domestic violence policy, you have to honor that policy,” Rockies General Manager Jeff Bridich told reporters. “It’s an important issue socially and an important issue for the game.”Reyes was arrested at the end of October while he and his wife, Katherine Ramirez, were on vacation at a resort in Maui and apparently became involved in a domestic dispute.According to a recording of a 911 call that was released by the police, a hotel security guard reported that Ramirez had injuries to her leg and scratches on her neck.Reyes was arrested and released on $1,000 bail and was scheduled to go on trial in early April, but prosecutors ended up dismissing the charges because Ramirez declined to cooperate.However, under its policy, M.L.B. still had the right to take action and decided to do so, with Commissioner Rob Manfred meeting with Reyes before the suspension was announced.AdvertisementReyes had the right to appeal the suspension but chose not to, and he issued a statement of contrition though the players’ union.“I want to apologize for everything that has happened,” Reyes said in the statement. “I am sorry to the Rockies organization, my teammates, all the fans and most of all my family.“I am happy to put this all in the past and get back to doing what I love the most, playing baseball,” the statement added. “My wife, Katherine, has remained by my side throughout everything and for that I will be forever grateful.”Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.All of this played out on Friday, with the Mets in the visitors’ dugout. Reyes had signed with them in 1999 when he was a teenager in the Dominican Republic, and by the middle of the past decade, he had become a beloved star in Queens, with “Jose, Jose, Jose’’ being happily sung by Mets fans to the tune of “Olé, Olé, Olé.’’But after the 2011 season, with the Mets struggling financially and no longer a winning team on the field, Reyes departed, signing a six-year, $106 million free-agent deal with the Miami Marlins.A year later, however, he was traded to the Toronto Blue Jays, who subsequently traded him to Colorado last summer in a deal that got them Troy Tulowitzki. Now Reyes is a Rockie and no longer the dynamic player that he once was.Indeed, in his absence this season, the rookie Trevor Story has emerged as an impact hitter at shortstop, with 11 home runs and 27 R.B.I. What Reyes’s role will be with the Rockies once he returns from his suspension is not clear, and he might prefer to be traded again to a team that can guarantee him regular playing time.His domestic violence case and the suspension might make that more difficult, as will the money still owed him. Reyes is set to make another $22 million in 2017, with a $4 million team buyout for the 2018 season.In his comments before Friday’s Rockies-Mets game, Bridich was straightforward in praising Story, Reyes’s replacement, perhaps raising more doubts about Reyes’s future in Denver.Advertisement“Trevor has done a great job,” he said. “He has earned the role that he plays on this club. As it relates to this situation specifically with Reyes, he has earned all the playing time that he has gotten.”While under suspension, Reyes is allowed to go to extended spring training at the Rockies’ facility in Arizona. It is likely that he will begin working out early next week.Bridich said the Rockies had not been part of baseball’s investigation of Reyes and had only just started the process of deciding when and where Reyes would resume playing.Beginning June 1, Reyes is eligible to begin a 20-day minor league rehabilitation before he must be recalled to the major leagues. If the Rockies have not traded Reyes by that point, it will be up to Walt Weiss, the Rockies’ manager, to reintegrate him into the team.But Weiss said he had not developed a plan for that yet.“It’s part of my job to manage the club, and not just on the field but in the clubhouse and in a variety of ways,” he said. “I’ll deal with that when the time comes.”A version of this article appears in print on May 14, 2016, on Page D2 of the New York edition with the headline: Rockies’ Reyes Suspended Over Domestic Violence.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.