AdvertisementSupported byOn Pro BasketballBy Harvey AratonAs Tim Duncan’s erstwhile mentor, and a devoted friend and fan, Dave Odom had no idea if the stunning conclusion of the San Antonio Spurs’ season Thursday night also meant the termination of Duncan’s quietly magnificent 19-year career.“I never hear him comment on that,” said Odom, who first saw Duncan play on an outdoor court overlooking the Caribbean in St. Croix, then recruited him and coached him for four years at Wake Forest. “He’s saying, ‘Don’t ask me that. It’s none of your business. I’ll let you know.’”In a telephone interview from his home in North Carolina, Odom paused and drew the most obvious N.B.A. contrast: “Kobe Bryant’s farewell was fine, but that would never be Tim’s way.”The 60-points-on-50-shots, self-glorification way, he meant. Duncan went down with the Spurs, a 67-win regular-season team that, under adrenaline-heightened playoff circumstances in Oklahoma City, wasn’t athletic enough, particularly in the legs.That the Spurs were comparatively plodding was obvious in Game 6 of the Western Conference semifinals as Gregg Popovich, the only pro coach Duncan has known, operated frantically to slow the Thunder’s second-quarter surge. With only one superior athlete, Kawhi Leonard, Popovich had too many players who couldn’t keep up with, who could barely breathe on (much less contain) Russell Westbrook and Kevin Durant.Duncan was made out to be a shell of his all-timer self for the first five games, but he was on the floor in Game 6, scoring 19 points, setting those familiar sturdy high screens, clogging the lane on defense, for the Spurs’ only competitive periods in the first and final quarters.He graciously congratulated the Thunder for moving on to face the Golden State Warriors in the conference finals and walked off with an index finger raised — for Duncan, as demonstrative as it gets.About what comes next, at age 40, he said, “I’ll get to that after I get out of here and figure life out.”He could return, taking up a mere $5.6 million in salary-cap space and not necessarily hamstringing the Spurs in trying to retool and literally catch up with the greyhounds out West.Duncan could also concede that his extraordinary partnership with Popovich and the others has run its course. Manu Ginobili would appear headed for the exit. Tony Parker, still effective but slowing, turns 34 next week.In the dying moments of Game 5 in San Antonio, LaMarcus Aldridge, this season’s free-agent catch, was unable to meet the moment of pivotal truth in his first appearance on the Spurs’ pressurized playoff stage.Perhaps he will next time, next season, though we are reminded again that earning the maximum salary doesn’t bestow those mysterious intangibles separating the very good from the historically great.Without them, without Duncan, the San Antonio Spurs as we have known them do not exist.“Here, in my opinion, is the essence of Tim,” Odom said Thursday afternoon, a few minutes after texting Duncan his best wishes for Game 6. “He was never afraid to win, nor was he ever afraid to lose.”Not the sexiest pitch in the history of N.B.A. marketing. But if Duncan does retire, he will surely be appreciated and feted for the purity of his game, the commitment to his team — adult qualities more important to the sport than most people may think, though not easily quantified by television ratings and jersey sales.On the ESPN broadcast Thursday night, Duncan was called the greatest power forward in N.B.A. history; he was always the Spurs’ hub, the center of high- and low-post activity, the core of their interior defense.His skills and approach were reminiscent of a young Bill Walton, bank shot included, only far less flamboyant. In a telephone interview, Walton said: “I don’t get into positions. Tim Duncan has been like Oscar Robertson, like every other great player. He’s done everything for his team.”For the sake of injecting some much-needed fervor into a possible farewell, the verbally unrestrained Walton was our man.“He personifies what’s good about the N.B.A. and has been the epitome of everything I believe in basketball and life — and I don’t separate the two,” he said.Through the years, the standard line on Duncan is that he was a product of a low-key culture antithetical to the sneaker-company-sponsored deifying of teenagers.That could be too much of a stereotype. Maybe Duncan was just Duncan, a rare hidden gem until one of Odom’s Wake Forest players, Chris King, accompanied a group of N.B.A. draftees on a Caribbean island-hopping tour to promote the game.Asked by Odom if he had seen anyone who might be of value, King mentioned one “tall kid who was pretty good.”What was his name? King didn’t know. On which island? He didn’t recall. It took some sleuthing by a member of Odom’s staff to produce a name and a telephone number.And that was how Odom found himself sitting on a grassy knoll overlooking the sea one sun-splashed Sunday afternoon, watching the 17-year-old Duncan play pickup ball with a mixed-age group that had just finished a day’s work at a nearby Hess Oil plant.Almost five years later, Odom was on a conference call with the Spurs’ entire staff, raving about Duncan’s character to the point where he sensed “a growing restlessness” on the other end of the line.“You could feel they were thinking that this is just Tim Duncan’s coach trying to push them into drafting him with the No. 1 pick and overdoing it,” Odom said.The next year, Odom attended a Spurs playoff game in San Antonio. Duncan told him that Popovich wanted to see him.“Remember that phone call?” Popovich said. “I have to say there was some doubt in the room about whether you were being honest.”Yes, Odom said, he knew that by the tone of their voices.“In retrospect, you weren’t being honest,” Popovich said.“What do you mean?” Odom said.“He’s even better than what you said,” Popovich said.Odom laughed at the punch line of a story he has no doubt told a few times. If Duncan has reached the end of his five-championship road, just weeks after Bryant went out with an overstatement of seismic grandiosity, let that be the demure big man’s career epitaph: even better than what people said.Advertisement