By VICTOR MATHERMAY 13, 2016
While Ronda Rousey was dominating the Ultimate Fighting Championship and being heralded as one of the world’s best athletes, a handful of naysayers maintained that someone else was actually the best fighter in women’s mixed martial arts.On Saturday, that woman, Cristiane Justino, known as Cyborg, will finally make her U.F.C. debut.Justino, a 30-year-old Brazilian, has dominated opponent after opponent, winning titles in the Strikeforce and Invicta promotions. Like Rousey, she has won many of her fights in a matter of seconds. Unlike Rousey, whose specialty is the armbar, Justino tends to send opponents to the canvas with a devastating knockout punch.But she has never fought in the U.F.C., largely because of weight class issues. Justino fights at 145 pounds, while the U.F.C.’s heaviest weight class for women, in which Rousey fights, is 135 pounds. Justino, who is 5 feet 8 inches, has been reluctant to cut weight to get to that level.Fighting in different promotions did not stop Rousey and Justino from engaging in a long-running war of words. Justino called Rousey and U.F.C. officials bullies, while Rousey ripped Justino for testing positive for steroids after a fight in 2011.AdvertisementCyborg’s arrival in the U.F.C. comes as the women’s division is in some disarray. First, the unbeatable Rousey lost to Holly Holm in  November. Then Holm turned around and lost in March to Miesha Tate, who has lost to Rousey twice.AdvertisementNone of the big names are set to fight each other soon. In July, Tate will defend her title against Amanda Nunes, and Holm will fight Valentina Shevchenko.Regardless of who the champion is, Rousey remains the biggest name in women’s mixed martial arts. Her return has been delayed by the filming of a movie, “Road House,” but there is talk she will return in November at the first U.F.C. card in New York, where the sport has been legalized.Justino’s debut on Saturday, in Curitiba, Brazil, will be contested at a special weight, 140 pounds. She will be a huge favorite over Leslie Smith, who is only 2-2 in the U.F.C. and 8-6-1 over all.“I know that Cyborg has overwhelmed most of her opponents, Smith said in a U.F.C. video. “I know that she has a lot of power and I know that she gets wild.“I think that I have the intelligence and the skills to work outside of her plan.”Get the big sports news, highlights and analysis from Times journalists, with distinctive takes on games and some behind-the-scenes surprises, delivered to your inbox every week.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.Assuming Justino routs Smith, what is next for her? Will the U.F.C. start a new, heavier division for her to fight in? Or will she have no choice but to cut weight to fight Rousey or the other big names at 135? “The long-term plans for Cyborg have not been determined yet,” Lenee Breckenridge, a U.F.C. spokeswoman, said.For her part, Justino seems ready to take the U.F.C. by storm. “I’m really happy, it’s a great opportunity,” she said. “I can fight any girl: Holly Holm, Miesha, Ronda, anyone.”Should she eventually get into the Octagon against Rousey, it would very likely be the most anticipated women’s fight in history.The huge interest in Cyborg’s debut is bringing almost as much attention as the main event on Saturday, a men’s heavyweight title fight. The champion Fabrício Werdum, a submission specialist, will face the hard-hitting Stipe Miocic, who comes off an impressive first-minute knockout of Andrei Arlovski.A version of this article appears in print on May 14, 2016, on Page D7 of the New York edition with the headline: Barriers to a Hyped Fight Are Falling Faster Than Cyborg’s Opponents.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.