By CHRISTINE HAUSERSEPT. 27, 2016
Hours after Miami Marlins pitcher Jose Fernandez and two friends were killed in a boating accident, a beachgoer approached a lifeguard in Miami Beach with a mysterious object that had washed ashore on Sunday.It was a bag containing four baseballs that apparently had been autographed by Fernandez, a law enforcement official told the local television station WSVN.The beachgoer handed the bag over to the lifeguard, who turned it in to the authorities, the official, Vincent Canosa, the chief of the Ocean Rescue division of the Miami Beach Fire Department, said in a report on WSVN’s website Monday. The bag also contained Fernandez’s checkbook, he said.“A bag was turned in to the lifeguard at 24th Street,” Chief Canosa told WSVN. “It appeared to be the bag of one of the deceased that had four signed baseballs.”WSVN reported that the baseballs had numbers on them — presumably dates. The bag was found about a mile from the crash site about 1 p.m., Chief Canosa told the station. He did not immediately return a telephone call to his office seeking comment on Tuesday.
            New- official comment on bag of signed Jose Fernandez baseballs found near accident scene on beach @wsvn pic.twitter.com/vfJtc5dTdE AdvertisementA spokeswoman for the city, Melissa Berthier, said in a phone call on Tuesday that the bag was eventually given to the Florida Fish and Wildlife Conservation Commission, which is leading the investigation into the crash.What you need to know to start your day, delivered to your inbox Monday through Friday.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.A 32-foot motorboat carrying Fernandez, 24, who was born in Cuba and defected when he was 15, struck a jetty that delineates the northern section of Miami’s deepwater channel and capsized, officials said. Fernandez and the two other men aboard almost certainly died on impact, the authorities said.AdvertisementThe boat was discovered by a Coast Guard crew about 3:50 a.m. Sunday. Emilio Jesus Macias, 27, and Eduardo Rivero, 25, were also killed, The Miami Herald reported.Fernandez’s death touched a nerve among fans, fellow players and members of the Cuban community in Florida, with tributes taking place on the playing field and at makeshift shrines. On Monday, at their first game without him, his Marlins teammates wore jerseys with the number 16 to honor Fernandez.Rob Klepper, a spokesman for the Florida Fish and Wildlife Conservation Commission, declined to comment when reached by telephone on Tuesday, except to say that the bag recovered would be considered “active investigative material.”A version of this article appears in print on September 28, 2016, on Page B9 of the New York edition with the headline: Bag Connected to Fernandez Is Found After Fatal Crash.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.