AdvertisementSupported byN.B.A. RoundupBy Jay SchreiberThe Knicks did not play Monday, which was just as well, since they have lost 14 of 17 games. But they continue to tweet.First, Phil Jackson, the team president, weighed in with his second thought in two days on Stephen Curry’s 46-point extravaganza on Saturday night, a game in which he hit 12 3-pointers, including the overtime winner from more than 32 feet out.That prompted this Twitter message from Jackson on Sunday morning:Never seen anything like SCurry? Remind you of Chris Jackson/ Mahmoud Abdul-Rauf, who had a short but brilliant run in NBA?The post drew a fair share of criticism from people who thought Jackson was demeaning Curry, the N.B.A.’s best player, by comparing him to a 6-foot 1-inch point guard whose N.B.A. career had its moments, but not that many of them.So Jackson tried again Monday.That settled that, for now.At the same time, Carmelo Anthony took to Twitter, apparently to answer his former teammate Amar’e Stoudemire, who seemed to throw some barbs at Anthony on Sunday without mentioning him by name.Stoudemire, who was not on Twitter but was talking to reporters, said, “You have to become a complete player in order to bring your team out of a rut.”On Monday, Anthony responded, posting several quotations from Robert Greene’s book “The 48 Laws of Power.” One read, in part, “When you show yourself to the world and display your talents, you naturally stir all kinds of resentment, envy, and other manifestations of insecurity.”And so it went. On Instagram, Stoudemire posted lyrics from a Tupac Shakur song that spoke of the media’s “dirty tricks.” Maybe Stoudemire regretted what he had said Sunday.The Knicks do play on Tuesday night, against Portland. They are 25-36 and losing direction in a season that still has 21 games — and probably many Twitter messages — to go.CAVALIERS 100, PACERS 96 LeBron James scored 33 points, and Tristan Thompson made two huge plays in the final minute, leading host Cleveland to a win over Indiana.Matthew Dellavedova hit a tying 3-pointer for the Cavs with 1 minute 13 seconds left before Thompson made it 96-94 with a layup. Thompson then blocked a shot by Indiana’s George Hill with 18 seconds left.Kyrie Irving made four free throws in the last eight seconds to put away the Pacers. (AP)CELTICS 100, JAZZ 95 Jae Crowder had 22 points, and Boston extended its home win streak to 11 with a victory over Utah. (AP)BUCKS 128, ROCKETS 121 Giannis Antetokounmpo recorded his second career triple-double, and host Milwaukee outlasted Houston. (AP)WARRIOR APOLOGIZES FOR TIRADE Draymond Green’s passion is what makes him so valuable on the court for the Golden State Warriors, yet he acknowledged taking things too far this time.Green, a power forward leading the N.B.A. this season with 11 triple-doubles, apologized for an emotional outburst during halftime of the Warriors’ 121-118 overtime victory at Oklahoma City on Saturday.“I apologized to my teammates and my coaching staff, this organization,” Green said after practice Monday. He said such a tirade would not happen again, adding, “That’s not who I am.”The league’s reigning most valuable player, guard Stephen Curry, who is questionable for Tuesday’s game against Atlanta with a tender left ankle, said it was Green’s emotional personality that made him so valuable.“That’s what we love about him, what he brings to the court,” Curry said. “It spilled over to the locker room, but I’ve been in this league a long time — that wasn’t the first time it’s happened.”Curry also was named Western Conference Player of the Week on Monday for his fourth such honor this season — the first in franchise history to win four in one season. He averaged 43.8 points, 7.3 assists, 5.8 rebounds and 1.50 steals as the Warriors (53-5) went 4-0.Golden State will have 17 of its final 24 games at Oracle Arena, where they are 24-0 and are riding a 42-game regular-season winning streak as they chase the Chicago Bulls’ record of 72 wins from 1995-96. (AP)CAVALIERS’ WILLIAMS OUT Cleveland point guard Mo Williams will be sidelined for at least the next two weeks with an injured left knee.Williams, who has been bothered by soreness in the knee for much of the season, He has not played more than 20 minutes in a game since Dec. 11. (AP) HEAT WAIVE UDRIH Guard Beno Udrih, who had surgery to repair a foot injury last week and is expected to need three months to recover, was waived by Miami. (AP) GRIZZLIES LOSE BIG MAN Memphis forward-center Brandan Wright is out indefinitely after an exam found a sprained ligament in his right knee. (AP)Advertisement