By SETH BERKMANMARCH 1, 2016
As the Knicks failed to score over the first three and a half minutes of the fourth quarter Tuesday night against the Portland Trail Blazers, each missed shot was met with jeers and with chants for Jimmer Fredette, who was signed to a 10-day contract last week.When Carmelo Anthony left the game, the boos followed him. In an uncharacteristic moment, he snapped back at one fan who continued to heckle him while he sat on the bench.As Anthony tried to gather himself, he said later, he turned around, pointed to the team owner James L. Dolan and told the heckler: “Look, the owner’s right there. Ask for your money back.”Many of the fans at Madison Square Garden might have wished they could take his advice. The Knicks’ 104-85 loss left them seven games out of the final playoff spot in the Eastern Conference and dropped them to 3-15 since Jan. 20. The Trail Blazers, meanwhile, have gone 14-2 in the same stretch.AdvertisementBefore the game, Portland set up four lights in the middle of its locker room, illuminating the walls in every direction. Players said the purpose was to instill energy and get them ready for tip-off.AdvertisementBy comparison, without any special lighting, the Knicks’ locker room might have looked gloomy, a word that lately could probably describe the atmosphere around the team more generally. Once considered a contender to make the postseason, the Knicks now seem more like back-page fodder.Sunday featured a new salvo as Miami Heat forward Amar’e Stoudemire, a former Knick, appeared to subtly criticize Anthony, his onetime teammate, in a wide-ranging screed on the Knicks’ failures.In what might have been a response, Anthony posted a series of messages on Instagram on Monday addressing jealousy. (Stoudemire also took to Instagram to blame the New York news media for fabricating a controversy and on Tuesday told reporters that he had not intended to criticize Anthony, referring to him as “family.”)Speaking after Tuesday’s game, Anthony did not want to waste any more time discussing the subject.“What’s understood don’t need to be spoken upon, man,” he said. “Me and Amar’e got an understanding. We spoke, and that’s that.”It was a night of emotional swings for Anthony, who opened the game with intensity, jawing at Blazers center Mason Plumlee during a stoppage of play and moments later arguing with a referee after a late foul call went against the Knicks.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.A few possessions later, perhaps looking to release some frustration, Anthony tried to aggressively dunk the ball during a stoppage of play, only to get stuffed by the rim, lose his balance and land on his back.Damian Lillard, Portland’s star point guard, had more success, pouring in 24 points in the first half and finishing with a game-high 30. With just under five minutes remaining in the second quarter and the Blazers trailing by 41-40, Lillard helped fuel a run, scoring 14 of Portland’s next 18 points to carry the team to a 58-50 halftime lead.C. J. McCollum, the other half of the Blazers’ dynamic backcourt, scored only 4 points in the first half but broke out for 13 in the third quarter and finished with 25.AdvertisementThe Knicks had no such scoring balance; after Anthony, who posted 23 points to go with 10 rebounds, their next leading scorer was Arron Afflalo, who had 13.Before the game, Blazers Coach Terry Stotts said his team’s renewed commitment to improving its pick-and-roll defense and its individual defensive scouting reports had ignited its recent streak. The Knicks, meanwhile, could not identify the cause for their implosion.“It is not one thing that went wrong,” Kristaps Porzingis said. “You cannot really pinpoint one thing. Maybe it’s little things adding up to each other, and we aren’t playing the way we should be playing, and things aren’t going our way.”The disgruntled masses watching another second-half collapse were momentarily pleased late in the game. With the Knicks trailing by 97-79 with 3 minutes 13 seconds remaining, Coach Kurt Rambis finally called for Fredette to enter the game. The crowd roared.Fredette did not have a field-goal attempt, but he made 4 of 5 free throws. For Knicks fans, it was the lone bright spot of the night.A version of this article appears in print on March 2, 2016, on Page B13 of the New York edition with the headline: Blazers Leave Knicks in a Dark Place.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.