By THE ASSOCIATED PRESSMARCH 1, 2016
Carolina’s Joakim Nordstrom scored on a rebound with 1 minute 29 seconds left, and the Hurricanes defeated the Devils, 3-1, in Newark on Tuesday night in a game between teams fading from playoff contention.Derek Ryan, playing his first N.H.L. game at age 29, also scored as the Hurricanes ended a three-game losing streak with their third win in eight games. Eddie Lack was outstanding in making 29 saves, and Nathan Gerbe scored into an empty net with 21.2 seconds to go.Adam Henrique scored for the Devils, who lost their third straight and their sixth in seven games. Cory Schneider had 17 saves.With the score tied at 1 late in the third period, Elias Lindholm juggled the puck on his stick at center ice and skated in on Schneider, who stopped his shot. But Nordstrom was in the right spot when the puck came to him to the left of the net, and he put it in the net.AdvertisementBefore the game, Carolina said right wing Andrej Nestrasil would miss the rest of the season after breaking a vertebra Feb. 25 in a loss at Toronto.AdvertisementCAPITALS 3, PENGUINS 2 Matt Niskanen scored the winner on a third-period power play, and host Washington subdued Pittsburgh in a back-and-forth showdown.BRUINS 2, FLAMES 1 Patrice Bergeron scored a tiebreaking goal with 3 minutes 24 seconds left in the third period at Boston.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.PANTHERS 3, JETS 2 Reilly Smith had goals in the first and third periods to lead Florida to a road win over Winnipeg. Smith and Jaromir Jagr each scored their 21st goals of the season in the third.OILERS 2, SABRES 1 The rookie Connor McDavid scored his second goal in overtime to lead Edmonton to victory at Buffalo.PREDATORS 5, STARS 3 Shea Weber had a goal and two assists in his return from a three-game absence after a lower-body injury, and host Nashville downed Dallas.WILD 6, AVALANCHE 3 Charlie Coyle and Nino Niederreiter each scored twice as host Minnesota cruised past Colorado and gained a foothold on the final playoff spot in the Western Conference.BLUES 4, SENATORS 3 Patrik Berglund scored the shootout winner in the 11th round, and St. Louis topped visiting Ottawa.A version of this article appears in print on March 2, 2016, on Page B14 of the New York edition with the headline: Devils Fall for Sixth Time in Seven Games .  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.