AdvertisementSupported byBy Rob HughesLondon — The element of the unexpected that has left fans spellbound this season in England’s Premier League continues to surprise and uplift everyone.Leicester City, the team that came from last to first place, remains the leader, but only just. Tottenham Hotspur, which was last the champion 55 years ago, is a team filled with youth and closing hard on Leicester.But Manchester United, written off as a disaster, has rediscovered something. Inside of a week, United has knocked Shrewsbury out of the FA Cup, come from behind to crush the Danish club Midtjylland in the Europa League, and on Sunday overpowered Arsenal 3-2 in a thriller at its Old Trafford stadium.The thread to Manchester’s three wins across three tournaments has been to dare to trust graduates. Louis van Gaal, United’s Dutch manager, is far from being a spring chicken, but out of adversity he found a panacea that has injected adventure back into a club.With 13 senior players injured, and with some people questioning his training methods, van Gaal had to trust junior players, and one apprentice responded with phenomenal success.Marcus Rashford, Manchester born and United schooled, is a strapping, still-growing youth. At 18, he became the third-youngest scorer in the club’s history when he struck twice against Midtjylland on Thursday.Sharp goals they were, too. Rapid, unrushed strikes from a young man in the right place at the right time. Experts smiled, and predicted that Arsenal would be something else, something several levels above anything he has known.So it is. But don’t tell Rashford, don’t waken him. And don’t waken van Gaal, either. The coach, 64, watched as disbelievingly as the rest of us as Rashford again scored once, twice and created the third goal as Manchester beat Arsenal.His first goal was a predatory reaction after Arsenal’s Brazilian defender, Gabriel Paulista, fell over the ball eight yards out. Rashford’s second goal, three minutes later, was from a similar distance, once more capitalizing on confused defending.All of Rashford’s goals so far have been from this kind of distance and from staying alert and calm while others panic or are simply unaware of the spaces he finds. He has that rare combination of quick movement with a calm head.Arsenal hit back before halftime with a glancing header from Danny Welbeck, who once upon a time was also a United junior, until van Gaal sold him. Welbeck has just come back after a long injury that kept him out since March 2015, and he didn’t know whether to laugh or cry at scoring against his former team.By now, things were getting stretched for Manchester and Arsenal, with such worldly talents as Mesut Ozil and Alexis Sanchez. So it took another moment of invention from young Rashford, this time a run into the Arsenal box and a pass back to Ander Herrera, to create the third United goal.The pass invited a shot from Herrera, which took a wicked deviation off the defender Laurent Koscielny to enter the net.And something almost similar gave Arsenal a chance when Welbeck’s shot was blocked by the goalkeeper David de Gea, but from the rebound Ozil directed a shot into the ground. It bounced high off the turf and looped into an unguarded corner of the goal.By then, with the score at 3-2 and United replacing tired young players with eager young players, and with the crowd singing as they rarely have done this season, the occasion did strange things to elderly men. Van Gaal, who normally never leaves his seat in the coaching area, came down to remonstrate with the referees’ assistants, and faked a theatrical fall to make a point.He later apologized, saying it was not nice for the referees. He excused himself on the grounds of emotion. One cannot remember “King Louis” showing such emotion since his days at Ajax, the Amsterdam club he coached to the 1995 Champions League final victory, with a then little-known teenager, Patrick Kluivert, scoring the only goal against the mighty AC Milan.Van Gaal, and Manchester, have gone back to the future and, trusting in youngsters, turned around a season that was seemingly going nowhere.Meanwhile, in London, the Spurs came from a goal down to beat Swansea City, 2-1. The Swans’ goal came from Alberto Paloschi, who followed his Italian coach, Francesco Guidolin, in the last week of the January transfer window. A poacher’s goal, it put Swansea on top for almost an hour until the Spurs’ pressure paid off with goals from Nacer Chadli and Danny Rose on 70 and 77 minutes.Tottenham looks fresher than Arsenal. Manchester United looks reborn. And no one should take anything for granted in the Premier League.Advertisement