By BEN SHPIGELMARCH 1, 2016
The Jets officially designated the star defensive lineman Muhammad Wilkerson as their franchise player Tuesday, all but ensuring that he will remain with the team for one more season.Wilkerson received the nonexclusive tag, which allows him to negotiate with other teams — and the Jets to match any offer. If Wilkerson, who would have become an unrestricted free agent on March 9, were to sign elsewhere, that team must pay the Jets the onerous cost of two first-round draft picks.Unless he and the Jets agree on a new deal by July 15, Wilkerson will make $15.7 million next season and then become an unrestricted free agent. It is possible, even likely, that the Jets, already loaded on the line with Sheldon Richardson and Leonard Williams, will explore trading Wilkerson to free up salary-cap space.But it will be difficult for General Manager Mike Maccagnan to find a suitor willing both to pay Wilkerson and compensate the Jets to their satisfaction.AdvertisementFOUR PERCENT INCREASE The Jets are raising season-ticket prices by an average of about 4 percent next season, the first increase by the team for most sections at MetLife Stadium since 2011.AdvertisementGeneral-admission tickets will cost an average of about $5 more, while premium seats will rise by an average of about $15.The Jets’ president, Neil Glat, said that in evaluating ticket prices, the team considered demand, attendance and price comparisons with other events in the N.F.L. and the New York area.“We take a look at it every year, and we try to look for the prices that make the most sense,” Glat said. (AP)Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.MORE FRANCHISE TAGS The Denver Broncos placed their exclusive franchise tag on linebacker Von Miller, Super Bowl 50’s most valuable player.That guarantees Miller a salary of $14.129 million for 2016.Other teams that named nonexclusive franchise players on Tuesday included the Carolina Panthers, who put the tag on cornerback Josh Norman; the Washington Redskins, quarterback Kirk Cousins; the Chicago Bears, wide receiver Alshon Jeffery; the Kansas City Chiefs, cornerback Eric Berry; the Los Angeles Rams, cornerback Trumaine Johnson; the Buffalo Bills, offensive tackle Cordy Glenn; and the Baltimore Ravens, kicker Justin Tucker. (AP)TWO-YEAR DEAL FOR BRADFORD Quarterback Sam Bradford agreed to a two-year contract with the Philadelphia Eagles.Bradford, 28, joined the Eagles last season and compiled some career bests, but the team finished 7-9 and Chip Kelly was fired as coach. The new coach, Doug Pederson, and the team’s front office decided to keep Bradford, an injury-prone free agent.Bradford was acquired by the Eagles a year ago in a trade with the Rams that sent Philadelphia’s incumbent quarterback, Nick Foles, to St. Louis. Bradford started 14 games and threw for a career-high 3,725 yards, the fourth-highest yardage total in Eagles history. (AP)BILLS RELEASE WILLIAMS Buffalo parted ways with the high-priced defensive end Mario Williams.Williams’s release frees the Bills of nearly $13 million in payroll next season.AdvertisementWilliams had two years left on his six-year, $100 million contract and was scheduled to make an $11.5 million base salary during the 2016 season. (AP)A version of this article appears in print on March 2, 2016, on Page B15 of the New York edition with the headline: Jets Assign Tag to Wilkerson; Season-Ticket Prices Increase .  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.