By NAILA-JEAN MEYERSMARCH 1, 2016
Every Tuesday, The New York Times will look at the week ahead in the N.H.L., highlighting hot — or not so hot — teams and players. (All times Eastern.)Oilers at Sabres, Tuesday, 7:30 p.m.Connor McDavid and Jack Eichel, the No. 1 and No. 2 picks in last June’s draft, will finally meet for the first time in the N.H.L. McDavid missed the teams’ game in December because of a broken collarbone. That injury, which kept him out for 37 games, makes any comparison of their seasons unfair. But Eichel is third in rookie scoring with 17 goals and 24 assists in 63 games, while McDavid is ninth with 10 goals and 19 assists in 27 games. McDavid, a Canadian, and Eichel, an American, are opponents on Tuesday, but on Wednesday they are expected to be chosen for Team North America in the World Cup of Hockey. (More on that later.)Avalanche at Wild, Tuesday, 8 p.m.With six weeks left in the season, there are not that many playoff spots still up for grabs. This game is important to Minnesota’s chance of staying in the Western Conference race. Minnesota is 2 points behind the Avalanche for the second wild-card spot. After winning their first four games under their new coach, John Torchetti, the Wild lost their next three. Colorado was busy in advance of the trade deadline, acquiring forwards Mikkel Boedker and Shawn Matthias and defenseman Eric Gelinas.Rangers vs. Penguins, Capitals and IslandersNow with two Staals instead of one, the Rangers embark on a tour of their Metropolitan Division rivals, playing in Pittsburgh on Thursday and then heading to Washington on Friday before hosting the Islanders for the first time this season on Sunday. The Capitals continue to run away with the East, but the Rangers have opened up a 7-point lead over the third-place Islanders in the division. Pittsburgh is a point behind the Islanders and holds the eighth playoff spot in the East. The Rangers are 1-0 against the Penguins this season, 1-2-1 versus the Capitals and 0-1-1 against the Isles.AdvertisementLightning at Senators, Thursday, 7:30 p.m.Tampa Bay is streaking again, carrying a seven-game winning streak to Ottawa. The Lightning, who also compiled a seven-game streak in January, are tied for first place with the Panthers in the Atlantic Division entering Tuesday’s games. The Senators’ playoff chances are on life support — and so are Canada’s. The Senators are the Canadian team closest to a playoff spot, 6 points out in the East. The last time no Canadian team made the playoffs was 1970, when only Montreal and Toronto were in the league.Ducks at Kings, Saturday, 4 p.m.Behind a Corey Perry hat trick, Anaheim beat Los Angeles on Sunday, 4-2. Entering Tuesday’s games, the Ducks — who, if you recall, were in last place in the West at the Christmas break — were 2 points behind the Kings in the Pacific Division. The Ducks have won eight in a row and 15 of 17, and one of those losses was in a shootout.AdvertisementSince last Tuesday, there have been seven hat tricks in the N.H.L., including two on Monday night by Patric Hornqvist of the Penguins and Brayden Schenn of the Flyers, who each recorded his first career three-goal game. Hornqvist had only two goals this season before Monday.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.The Predators’ Filip Forsberg had two hat tricks in the past week, becoming the first player with two in three or fewer games since the 1986-87 season, when Petri Skriko of the Vancouver Canucks had hat tricks in consecutive games. Forsberg had all three of Nashville’s goals last Tuesday against Toronto, then scored three goals in the second period alone on Saturday against the Blues.Forsberg, a 21-year-old Swede, scored 12 goals in 11 games in February, tying for the league lead, and leads the Predators with 26 goals over all. A first-round draft pick by the Capitals in 2012, Forsberg (no relation to Peter) is in his second full N.H.L. season but has been collecting hat tricks since last spring. He also had a hat trick in the playoffs last season against the Chicago Blackhawks and at the world championships in May.The World Cup of Hockey is six months away, but on Wednesday the preliminary rosters for the eight teams will be announced in a series of news conferences around the world.Players have been scouted all season for the two-week tournament, which begins Sept. 17 in Toronto. Wednesday’s announcements will reveal the first 16 players on each roster. Most intriguing will probably be Team Europe and Team North America.The Czech Republic, Finland, Russia and Sweden have their own teams, so Team Europe will be composed of the best players from countries not otherwise represented. They are expected to include Mats Zuccarello of Norway, Anze Kopitar of Slovenia and Zdeno Chara of Slovakia. The president of the team is Franz Reindl, the head of the German ice hockey federation, and the general manager is Miroslav Satan, a Slovak whose 15-year N.H.L. career ended in 2010. The team will be coached by Ralph Krueger, the former coach of the Oilers and the Swiss national team, who happens to also be the chairman of the Southampton Football Club in England.Team North America will consist of the best Canadian and American players under age 23, meaning top rookies like McDavid, Eichel, Max Domi and Dylan Larkin, who played in the world junior championships last year, can be on the same roster. The squad is being chosen by a group that includes Oilers General Manager Peter Chiarelli, Blackhawks General Manager Stan Bowman and Oilers Coach Todd McLellan.We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.