By THE ASSOCIATED PRESSFEB. 28, 2016
For all the star power filling the rosters of the Washington Capitals and the Chicago Blackhawks, it was a pretty connection between two fourth-line forwards that proved to be the difference.Chicago forward Richard Panik kicked the puck from behind the net to the rookie forward Dennis Rasmussen at 12 minutes 47 seconds of the third period, and the Blackhawks topped the N.H.L.-leading Capitals at home on Sunday, 3-2.“I thought it was a beautiful pass,” Chicago Coach Joel Quenneville said with a grin. “One of the best passes I’ve seen all year.”Jonathan Toews and Patrick Kane also scored as the Blackhawks (39-20-5) won for only the third time in eight games. Corey Crawford made 28 saves, helping Chicago leapfrog idle Dallas for the top spot in the Western Conference with 83 points.AdvertisementThe Blackhawks, who are the defending Stanley Cup champions, were coming off disappointing losses to the Minnesota Wild and the Nashville Predators, but they got help from two players acquired in a flurry of moves last week. Andrew Ladd, who was reacquired by Chicago in a trade with Winnipeg on Thursday, got an assist, and Tomas Fleischmann, who came over in a trade with Montreal on Friday, had a solid debut.AdvertisementMarcus Johansson and Evgeny Kuznetsov scored for Washington (45-12-4), which had won five of its previous six games.Also on Sunday, Washington activated center Jay Beagle from long-term injured reserve and placed defenseman John Carlson on long-term injured reserve.WILD 3, PANTHERS 1 Erik Haula scored midway through the third period to lead Minnesota to a victory at home over Florida.Charlie Coyle and Jason Pominville also scored for Minnesota, which ended a nine-game winless streak (0-6-3) at Xcel Energy Center. The Wild technically won a “home” game against Chicago last Sunday in a Stadium Series contest at the University of Minnesota.Devan Dubnyk stopped 17 shots as Minnesota climbed to 2 points behind Colorado for the second Western Conference wild-card playoff spot.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.Aaron Ekblad scored for Florida, which lost in regulation for the first time in six games.LIGHTNING 4, BRUINS 1 Ryan Callahan scored twice and Steven Stamkos converted a penalty shot to help Tampa Bay beat host Boston for its sixth straight win.Ben Bishop stopped 32 shots for the Lightning and Alex Killorn also scored. Stamkos also had an assist and has scored in all six games of the winning streak.Kevan Miller scored the Bruins’ only goal.SHARKS 4, CANUCKS 1 Joe Pavelski and Tomas Hertl scored 2:28 apart in the third period, helping San Jose win on the road.AdvertisementPatrick Marleau and Justin Braun had the other goals for the Sharks, while Martin Jones made 23 saves.Vancouver was looking to win three in a row for the first time this season.BLUES 5, HURRICANES 2 David Backes and Kyle Brodziak scored in the second period to lead St. Louis to a victory at Carolina.Ty Rattie, Robby Fabbri and Alex Pietrangelo also scored for St. Louis, and Jake Allen stopped 32 shots.FLYERS REACH DEAL WITH RAFFL The Philadelphia Flyers have signed forward Michael Raffl to a multiyear contract extension.Had the deal not been reached, Raffl would have been a candidate to be dealt ahead of the N.H.L.’s trade deadline Monday.A version of this article appears in print on February 29, 2016, on Page D5 of the New York edition with the headline: Late Heroics From Bench Help Blackhawks Cool the Capitals’ Hot Streak.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.