By BRAD SPURGEONMAY 13, 2016
BARCELONA, Spain — Daniil Kvyat, a driver for the Red Bull Formula One team, was sitting at home in Moscow watching “Game of Thrones” a little over a week ago when a phone call came from one of his bosses. He was stunned to learn that he had been demoted to Red Bull’s training team, where he had started two years ago.It was one of the most humiliating moves made by a team in years. This was the same Kvyat, however, who had crashed into the star Ferrari driver Sebastian Vettel three times in the last two Formula One races, sending Vettel out of the Russian Grand Prix in Sochi two weeks ago.Kvyat faced a barrage of questions from the news media in Barcelona on Thursday before Sunday’s Spanish Grand Prix.“The decision, in a way, was a bit of a shock also for myself,” Kvyat said. “There was no real explanation, to be honest.”AdvertisementIn front of the news media at the track outside Barcelona, he was seated next to the rising 18-year-old Max Verstappen, who is replacing him. Verstappen, in his second season in the Formula One series, was promoted from the Toro Rosso training team to which Kvyat, 22, is returning.Advertisement“I’m very happy with the chance they have given me,” Verstappen said.For the last decade, both Toro Rosso and Red Bull have belonged to the Red Bull energy drink company, which used the weaker Toro Rosso team as a training ground for its young drivers who aimed to rise to the Red Bull team. Red Bull won the championship four seasons in a row, from 2010 to 2013, with Vettel as its lead driver. Vettel had graduated from Toro Rosso to Red Bull in 2009.Never before had a driver been ejected from the Red Bull team during the season to be replaced by a driver from Toro Rosso.“We are in the unique position to have all four drivers across Red Bull Racing and Toro Rosso under long-term contracts with Red Bull, so we have the flexibility to move them between the two teams,” Christian Horner, the Red Bull team director, said in a statement. “Dany will be able to continue his development at Toro Rosso.”Yet Kvyat finished seventh in the drivers’ standings last season with 95 points, while his teammate Daniel Ricciardo was eighth with 92 points. Kvyat also finished third at the Chinese Grand Prix last month and has 21 points in the championship this year, good for eighth in the standings. Verstappen has 13 points.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.Verstappen joined the series last year as the youngest driver ever in Formula One. He has proved to be an excellent racer, scoring 49 points last season compared with 18 for his teammate Carlos Sainz Jr.But Verstappen, the son of the former Formula One driver Jos Verstappen, has shown signs of immaturity. At the Australian Grand Prix in March, he publicly berated his team over the car radio, swearing at it for not ordering Sainz to let him pass. He took his mechanics by surprise by taking an early pit stop, and finally, in a rage to pass, he collided with Sainz, although neither driver lost position because of it.Lewis Hamilton of Mercedes, the reigning champion, who is second this year in the standings with 57 points, said that teams should give drivers more time to develop.“Red Bull has done well in bringing young talent forward, but I think they need to be aware that young drivers need time to progress,” Hamilton said. “Mistakes do happen; there’s so much pressure on drivers, particularly at a young age.”AdvertisementThere may have been a bigger motive for the Red Bull move. Verstappen had been attracting the interest of other teams, and the immediate offer to race at the better team allowed Red Bull to lock him into a longer contract.“He has demonstrated that he has got a great amount of natural talent, a great amount of natural ability,’’ Horner said.Still, Verstappen will have to prove himself against his new teammate, Ricciardo, who has several years’ more experience and won three races for Red Bull in 2014. If he cracks on that task, it could have a lasting effect on the rest of his career.“With the risk,” Verstappen said of that danger, “I think it was a bigger risk to be so young in Formula One — but I’ve handled it pretty well.”A version of this article appears in print on May 15, 2016, on Page SP3, in The International New York Times.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.