By DAVID WALDSTEINMAY 12, 2016
LOS ANGELES — As Noah Syndergaard squared around to bunt, a sardonic murmur seemed to circulate among the fans. It was almost perceptible, as if the same conversation was being repeated from one section of the stands to the next, moving like the wave around Dodger Stadium.Syndergaard, the strapping Mets starter known for his long blond hair and his 100-mile-per-hour fastball, had homered in his previous at-bat against Kenta Maeda.Sure, there were two runners on base, but fans seemed to wonder aloud, Why bunt? The guy had just homered. Why not let him swing away?The point soon became moot when Maeda got two strikes against Syndergaard. The bunt sign was called off, so the pitcher-turned-slugger brought his bat back up over his head and stared out at Maeda like a real batting threat.AdvertisementMaeda threw a 2-2 slider right over the plate, and Syndergaard hit a towering driver to deep center that cleared the fence over an airline advertisement, appropriately enough, for his second home run in two at-bats, this one a three-run blast.AdvertisementJust four days after another Mets starter, Bartolo Colon, hit the first home run of his 19-year career, Syndergaard became the first Mets pitcher in almost 33 years to hit two home runs in a game.“You’d like to see him get the bunt down,” Manager Terry Collins said. “But if you don’t get the bunt down, you might as well hit a homer.”Nicknamed Thor for his Norse heritage and his mighty fastball, Syndergaard is often said to bring the hammer down on opposing batters. But on Wednesday, his hammer was the bat in his hands.“It felt like it was like a dream,” Syndergaard said. “It’s not real. I don’t think I ever hit two home runs when I played Little League. To hit two home runs in a major league ball game, especially against a pitcher like Maeda, it’s an awesome experience.”The only other Mets pitcher to hit two homers in a game was Walt Terrell, who clouted both off Ferguson Jenkins of the Chicago Cubs at Wrigley Field on Aug. 6, 1983.As Terrell was in that game, Syndergaard was the winning pitcher on Wednesday, throwing eighth strong innings and accounting for all of his team’s offense as the Mets beat the Dodgers, 4-3.Get the big sports news, highlights and analysis from Times journalists, with distinctive takes on games and some behind-the-scenes surprises, delivered to your inbox every week.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.Syndergaard (3-2) also allowed two home runs, solo shots by Corey Seager in the third inning and Yasmani Grandal in the fourth. He scattered four other hits, struck out six and recorded 14 groundouts.AdvertisementSyndergaard said after the game that he had his elbow examined recently “for precautionary reasons.”He became the first major league pitcher to hit two home runs in a game since Aug. 18, 2007, when Micah Owings hit two for the Arizona Diamondbacks against the Braves in Atlanta.In Syndergaard’s first at-bat in the third inning, he put a picturesque swing on the first pitch he saw from Maeda into the bleachers in right field. It was his first home run of the season and the second of his career.The four R.B.I. tied a Mets record for a pitcher in a single game. That figure has been achieved eight times, most recently by Steven Matz last season.Syndergaard had a chance for more when he went to the plate in the sixth inning against relief pitcher Chris Hatcher.But the reaction from the fans as he strode to the plate on that occasion was less curious murmur and more anticipatory buzz.The bases were loaded. There was nowhere to put Syndergaard.Hatcher is a hard-throwing right-hander, and his first offering was a 97-mile-per-hour fastball. Syndergaard was waiting for it, and he ripped a foul ball into the seats in right field, far enough and hard enough to excite the fans.He ripped another fastball hard to the right again, and the fans let out an ooooh. But finally, Hatcher struck Syndergaard out swinging with a 96-m.p.h. heater, and the Dodgers’ fans rose and applauded as if Hatcher had just struck out Albert Pujols with the bases loaded in extra innings.AdvertisementJoe Blanton struck out Syndergaard in his final at-bat, so he ended up 2 for 4.The homers were Syndergaard’s first hits of the season. Last year, he had nine hits in 43 at-bats, including a double and his only other home run. That was on May 27 against Sean O’Sullivan, then of the Phillies, at Citi Field. It occurred in only his fourth career major league start.Wednesday night was his 31st start, but three of those were in American League parks where he did not bat, meaning he is averaging a home run once every 9.3 games.No wonder his nickname is Thor.INSIDE PITCHWILMER FLORES injured his left hamstring on Monday and was sent back to New York to be examined.An earlier version of a picture caption with this article referred incorrectly to Noah Syndergaard’s two-homer game. As the article correctly noted, he is the first Mets pitcher — not the first Met — to hit two home runs in a game in almost 33 years.We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.