By THE ASSOCIATED PRESSMAY 12, 2016
TORONTO — The Raptors’ DeMar DeRozan matched a playoff high with 34 points, Kyle Lowry had 25, and Toronto beat the Miami Heat, 99-91, on Wednesday night to take a three-games-to-two lead in their Eastern Conference semifinal series.Bismack Biyombo had 10 points for the Raptors, who can clinch their first conference finals berth with a win in Game 6 in Miami on Friday.It was the 13th time DeRozan had scored 20 or more points in a playoff game, a franchise record, and his sixth this postseason.Dwyane Wade scored 20 for Miami, Goran Dragic and Josh Richardson each had 13, and Joe Johnson had 11.AdvertisementToronto led by 20 in the first half and by 13 to start the fourth quarter before its lead shrank to 88-87 when Wade made two free throws with 1 minute 54 seconds left. DeRozan made two free throws of his own, and after a Miami turnover, Lowry made a long 3-pointer to put Toronto up by 93-87 with 52 seconds left.Get the big sports news, highlights and analysis from Times journalists, with distinctive takes on games and some behind-the-scenes surprises, delivered to your inbox every week.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.DeRozan sealed the win by going 4 for 4 on his free throws in the final 21 seconds.DeRozan jammed his sore right thumb while fouling Miami’s Tyler Johnson with 8:19 remaining in the fourth. He headed to the locker room for treatment but returned four minutes later.AdvertisementLowry and DeRozan, who combined for 19 total points in Toronto’s overtime loss in Game 4, scored 19 together in the first quarter alone as the Raptors raced out to a 28-18 lead. Wade was the only Miami starter to make a field goal in the first as the Heat had more fouls (eight) than baskets (six).Biyombo had 8 points in the second, electrifying the crowd by sandwiching two dunks around a huge block on Wade. Toronto led by 55-35 with 3:39 left, but Dragic scored 8 points during a 10-0 run by the Heat, cutting the deficit to 55-45 at halftime.Miami’s Luol Deng left midway through the third period with a sore left wrist and did not return. The Heat said X-rays were inconclusive. Deng scored 4 points and missed all eight of his field-goal attempts.Shortly after, Toronto’s DeMarre Carroll injured his left wrist, ending his night, after being called for a charge. Carroll went down in pain after the play and then got up and walked to the locker room, cradling his wrist. The Raptors said X-rays were negative.Wade scored 7 points in the third, but DeRozan had 11, and the Raptors took a 75-62 lead into the fourth.A version of this article appears in print on May 12, 2016, on Page B14 of the New York edition with the headline: DeRozan Has 34-Point Game; Heat Face Elimination.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.