AdvertisementSupported byThunder 113, Spurs 99 | Oklahoma City wins series, 4-2By Andrew KehOKLAHOMA CITY — Standing alone, 26 feet from the basket, Kevin Durant flicked his wrist and held his hand aloft as the ball curved from his fingertips and splashed through the net. An earsplitting, celebratory roar swelled up from the stands at Chesapeake Energy Arena.This was an unexpected scene.It was only the second quarter in Game 6 of the Western Conference semifinal matchup on Thursday between the Oklahoma City Thunder and the San Antonio Spurs. The Thunder had built a three-games-to-two lead through the first five contests. The Spurs, facing elimination, had vowed to come out angry. They promised more energy, better execution.That explained the feeling of delight and delirium in the crowd after Durant’s basket, which came with two seconds left in the first half and capped a stunning 45-15 run. It gave Oklahoma City a 24-point halftime lead. The Spurs, despite a frantic effort in the fourth quarter, never recovered, and they lost, 113-99.It was odd to see and almost hard to believe: The league’s second-winningest team this season failing to escape the second round. The Spurs won 67 games during the regular season, second only to the Golden State Warriors’ 73. They had the league’s best defense, a crisp and multipronged offense.Thus the Thunder, the winners of 55 games and the No. 3 seed in the conference, were seen as the underdogs. They seemed talented but flawed — exciting, but ultimately inferior to the classy Spurs.“We were confident coming here,” Durant said. “We’re happy to be moving forward and having an opportunity to play again.”He added, “We wasn’t in this position for nothing.”Now the Thunder will meet the Warriors in Game 1 of the Western Conference finals on Monday night in Oakland, Calif.“Golden State’s a great team,” Thunder Coach Billy Donovan said. “It will be a great challenge. We’ve got a little bit of time to get prepared before we play.”On Thursday night, Durant was spectacular, scoring 37 points. Russell Westbrook added 28 points and 12 assists.For the Spurs, the defeat may mark the end of an era. Never before had Tim Duncan, Tony Parker and Manu Ginobili — the core of four N.B.A. championship teams — looked so collectively ineffectual.“Everybody’s disappointed — the only team that’s not disappointed is the last team standing,” Spurs Coach Gregg Popovich said when asked about the season coming to an end. “Everybody loses but one.”The evergreen San Antonio offense seemed pared to two options: midrange jumpers and isolated post-ups for LaMarcus Aldridge. They struggled to find open shots.Kawhi Leonard scored a team-high 22. Duncan, in what might have been his last game, scored 19 points and grabbed 5 rebounds. Aldridge had 18 points and 14 rebounds.Popovich, meanwhile, flailed in hope of finding something, anything, to invigorate his group.He played Kevin Martin, who had appeared for 44 seconds in the previous four games combined, in the first quarter. In the second, he put in the 7-foot-3 rookie center Boban Marjonovic, who had played 44 seconds in the last three games. He used the 40-year-old point guard Andre Miller, who had not played since Game 1, extensively in the second half.Nothing worked. The Thunder were too forceful, too dynamic. They kept firing throughout the third, and they led by 91-65 heading into the final period. The Spurs chipped away in the fourth, getting as close as 11 points with about three minutes left. But Serge Ibaka blocked Duncan at the rim, and the Thunder broke away to secure a transition dunk for Durant.“That block was game-sealing,” Durant said. “That was like a clutch basket.”Popovich had a serene look on his face as he watched the proceedings. Facing elimination before the game, he was his normal sardonic self. He smirked when asked during the team’s morning shootaround how the team could create more scoring opportunities for Leonard.“We’re working on inventing a new play that nobody’s ever seen before, and we’re going to unleash it tonight,” he said. “The Thunder won’t know what the hell is going on. Am I done yet?”Hours later, at a pregame news conference, Popovich shot down a question about whether he was feeling reflective — about his aging players, about the run they had through the years — during these playoffs.“I don’t think about that at all,” he said. “There’s a game tonight.”As he walked toward the conference room door, he muttered under his breath, “I’m going to go reflect.”There will be plenty of time to reflect now.For a short time before they crumbled, the Spurs looked purposeful. Aldridge pumped his left fist after making a hook shot for the first points of the game. Duncan contributed early, too. He sank his first three shot attempts — a hook shot, a tip-in and a bank shot from 4 feet — before going to the bench.But the Thunder crept back after a slow start. Fans at Oklahoma City games remain standing until the team scores a point, and the fans were on their feet until 2 minutes 30 seconds had ticked off the clock — seeing four misses — before Westbrook swooped to the rim for a layup. The Thunder ended the quarter on a 12-0 run and with consecutive rim-shaking dunks, from Steven Adams and Durant, to build a 25-19 lead after one quarter.From there, the baskets kept coming. It was uncanny. But the fans seemed not to mind. They exploded when Durant sank his shot just before halftime. And they kept yelling and dancing until the final buzzer, when blue and orange ribbons floated down from the ceiling.Advertisement