By DAVE CALDWELLNOV. 19, 2016
PHILADELPHIA — Patrik Laine encountered a grand total of one boo when he stepped onto the ice Thursday for the first shift of his first game against the Philadelphia Flyers. The city’s rugged fans know hockey well enough to spot a powerful adversary worthy of their badgering. But Laine, the Winnipeg Jets’ 18-year-old right wing, got a reprieve.That sort of oversight probably will not last. Entering the weekend, Laine had a league-leading 12 goals in his first 18 games, five of them on the power play, and had quickly established himself as a force.Laine, the second pick in this year’s N.H.L. draft, had twice as many goals through Thursday’s games as the player taken first, Auston Matthews of the Toronto Maple Leafs. Matthews scored four goals in his first game but entering the weekend had gone 11 games without a goal. Not that Laine was paying much attention.“It’s not my job to think about those things,” Laine, a Finn whose last name is pronounced Line-ay, said Thursday. “He’s going to focus on what he’s doing, and I’m focused on my job.”AdvertisementAnd his job is not just to score. The 6-foot-5, 206-pound Laine plays with an edge, much like Alex Ovechkin, the Washington Capitals forward who has long been his favorite player.AdvertisementAfter Ovechkin flattened Laine with a check during a semifinal between Russia and Finland at the world championship in May, Laine said he would never wash his sweater. But Finland won the game, and Laine was named the tournament’s most valuable player despite his team’s loss in the final to Canada.His prolific professional start, he said, has more behind it than luck.“I got the linemates,” Laine said of center Mark Scheifele and forward Nikolaj Ehlers. “It’s easy to play with them. I think I have great confidence now, but it’s only if you work hard. You will get rewarded at some point. I think I’ve worked pretty hard to have earned these goals.”Get the big sports news, highlights and analysis from Times journalists, with distinctive takes on games and some behind-the-scenes surprises, delivered to your inbox every week.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.Laine reported to the Jets after playing for Finland at the World Cup of Hockey in September, and it quickly became apparent to Coach Paul Maurice that the lineup had become more potent. Winnipeg, which ranked 21st in the league in goals last season, was sixth as of Thursday.When the Jets go on the power play, Laine plays the left point — the same spot Ovechkin mans for the Capitals — where he has helped lift Winnipeg to 18th in the league with a man advantage, up from 30th last year.“The biggest surprise was the way he shot the puck even in practice — the number of times he scored even in shooting drills,” Maurice said. “He’s a very, very competitive guy. But, as competitive as he is on the ice, he’s that easygoing off the ice. Relaxed, humble, very quiet kind of guy.”Laine’s wrist shot is a formidable weapon, but there is more to his game than fearsome shooting.“He’s got an incredible stick defensively,” said forward Blake Wheeler, the Jets’ captain. “I think that’s a very Finnish way of playing the game. He knocks down pucks. He has great defensive awareness going back to the puck on the backcheck. He plays a very physical game. I didn’t expect that from him.”The Jets are one of the youngest teams in the N.H.L., with an average age of 25.3, about two years younger than the league average, and Maurice said this season’s team was more relaxed. That might be because it has a premier scorer. The Jets have not had a player score more than 30 goals in any of the five seasons since the franchise moved from Atlanta.Advertisement“They’ve got a lot of inside jokes, and that’s always a great sign,” Maurice said. “They’re saying stuff to each other that they think is really funny, but we’re not really sure what they meant by it, and that’s a sign of a good room.”Laine has fit in. His English is good, and his cheeks and chin are covered with a blond scruff that seems to be an attempt to look more like a veteran.Maurice said it would probably be unwise to draw conclusions on Laine after what he called “one lap of the N.H.L.” Laine has already played at Philadelphia and at Madison Square Garden, both 5-2 losses, and challenging road games in Boston, Chicago and Pittsburgh still await him.So there is much work still to do.“I don’t have a specific thing I’m working on,” Laine said. “I have to get better as a player, work on everything, building chemistry with my linemates and as a team. Just working on that.”A version of this article appears in print on November 20, 2016, on Page SP4 of the New York edition with the headline: Off to Flying Start, a Rookie Lifts Spirits in Winnipeg.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.