By ALLAN KREDAMAY 12, 2016
Garth Snow has experienced plenty during his decade as the Islanders’ general manager, a particularly long era for an executive who had not won a playoff series until last month.Now the page turns for him and for the team, which will see an ownership shift on July 1, when Jonathan Ledecky and Scott Malkin take over majority control from Charles Wang. But the constant aim is to improve the roster around center John Tavares, the Islanders’ captain and best player.“I have the same mentality I have had the 10 years that I’ve been here,” Snow said on a conference call four days after the Islanders were eliminated by the Tampa Bay Lightning in the second round of the playoffs. “We look to take the next step and get to the next level.”Snow, 46, who played the last four seasons of his career as a backup goalie for the Islanders, took the reins in the summer of 2006 when Neil Smith was fired after six weeks on the job.AdvertisementSnow rarely speaks to the news media during the season, preferring to leave public comments about the team to Coach Jack Capuano, who, like Snow, played hockey at the University of Maine. Capuano became coach of the Islanders in November 2010 and now has the second-most victories in franchise history behind the Hall of Famer Al Arbour, who led the Islanders to four straight Stanley Cups from 1980 to 1983.AdvertisementSnow said he had been working closely with Ledecky and Malkin in advance of their assuming control of the Islanders a week after the entry draft next month in Buffalo.Snow said the challenge of trying to keep Kyle Okposo, Frans Nielsen and Matt Martin, longtime Islanders who are all unrestricted free agents, would not be affected by the pending change in the owners’ suite.“The new ownership starting on July 1 won’t have any impact on what we’re doing,” Snow said. “I’m really looking forward to the transition. I know they want to continue the culture that has been established by Charles Wang during his ownership.”Snow did not divulge specifics on how he would improve a squad that defeated the Florida Panthers in the opening round for the Islanders’ first playoff series win in 23 years. Or how he would finally find bona fide linemates for Tavares, who perennially leads the team in scoring with a revolving cast on his wings.“Obviously, John is the face of the franchise, an elite player and one of the top players in this game,” said Snow, who has a first-round pick in next month’s draft but none in the second or third rounds because of trades. “Whether it is a winger for John, the addition of a goalie or upgrading our defense, we will leave no stone unturned to improve our hockey club. Opportunities will unfold leading up to the draft.”The Islanders have drafted well in the past decade. Okposo, a right wing, was their top selection in 2006 weeks before Snow took over as general manager. Okposo was followed by forward Josh Bailey in 2008 and Tavares, who was first over all in 2009. Other recent first-round picks include forwards Brock Nelson (2010) and Ryan Strome (2011) and defenseman Ryan Pulock (2013).Get the big sports news, highlights and analysis from Times journalists, with distinctive takes on games and some behind-the-scenes surprises, delivered to your inbox every week.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.Although Strome and Nelson struggled in the playoffs, Snow remained resolute on the importance of giving young players time.AdvertisementThe Islanders have high hopes for left wing Michael Dal Colle, taken fifth over all in 2014, and center Mathew Barzal, who was selected with the 16th pick last June.“We have the depth to let players develop,” Snow said. “We’re looking to get better like every other team in the league.”Snow added that he was relieved that defenseman Travis Hamonic’s family situation had improved and that he had rescinded a trade request made last fall.“Travis is very close to me on a personal level,” said Snow, who drafted Hamonic in the second round in 2008. “You draft a player when he’s 17 or 18 and you try to develop him to where we want him to be, to where he wants to be. To see players have success — the joy it brings to them — that’s very rewarding for me.”As for forwards Okposo, Nielsen and Martin, Snow well knows the difficulty of keeping the core of a team together as salary costs rise.“We would like to bring them all back,” he said. “We will have to see how it all unfolds with an eye toward the salary cap.”Snow was blunt as he considered the loss to the speedy Lightning, who won four straight games after the Islanders took the series opener in Tampa Bay.“We just weren’t good enough,” he said. “We lost to the better team. That’s why it is important for us to learn from it and get better.”AdvertisementThe same theory may hold for his position, which is perhaps complicated by the presence of George McPhee.McPhee was hired as a special adviser to Snow last season after being the longtime general manager of the Washington Capitals, for whom Ledecky was once was a minority owner.“I have been doing this 10 years now, and I have learned a lot,” Snow said. “You never stop learning and trying to make yourself better.”A version of this article appears in print on May 13, 2016, on Page B13 of the New York edition with the headline: Islanders’ G.M. Ponders Era of Change.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.