By ZACH SCHONBRUNMAY 12, 2016
Carlos Beltran kept drifting back, back, back, until his feet traversed from the outfield grass into the dirt of the warning track, and he raised his glove high. Then he jumped.The air was warm at Yankee Stadium on Thursday night, giving the baseballs extra life, a little foreshadowing of the impending summer. This one, off the bat of Kansas City catcher Salvador Perez in the fifth inning, did not surprise Royals Manager Ned Yost. He said he had seen Perez hit nine home runs to right field in batting practice.“When he hit it,” Yost said, “I thought it had a chance.”Instead, Beltran robbed what might have been a go-ahead three-run homer — or at least an extra-base hit off the top of the wall — from obliterating starter Nathan Eovaldi’s night. When the ball nestled in Beltran’s glove, so, too, died the Royals’ best chance of a come-from-behind victory.The Yankees’ calculus for winning games relies on bullpen arms, and fans are beginning to see the full force of their effect. In Thursday’s 7-3 win, the new closer, Aroldis Chapman, did not appear, but he warmed up in case the score got tight, and his presence allowed Manager Joe Girardi to use Dellin Betances in the seventh inning and Andrew Miller in the eighth, shutting down the Royals after Eovaldi’s early exit.AdvertisementEovaldi lasted only five innings after surrendering three runs on eight hits. But it was enough to earn him a second consecutive win. Kirby Yates pitched a scoreless sixth to form the bridge to Betances.“I thought he struggled with his split tonight,” Girardi said. “But he did what he had to to win that game.”The damage started when Alex Gordon blasted a 99-mile-per-hour fastball over the Yankees’ bullpen in right-center field in the fourth. A run-scoring single by Christian Colon cut the Yankees’ lead to 3-2 before Didi Gregorius hit a two-run homer in the bottom of the inning to give Eovaldi a bit more cushion.Get the big sports news, highlights and analysis from Times journalists, with distinctive takes on games and some behind-the-scenes surprises, delivered to your inbox every week.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.Gregorius was one of three Yankees to homer in the first four innings off starter Ian Kennedy. The second batter of the first inning, Starlin Castro, poked a home run out to right to put the Yankees on the board early.In the second, Chase Headley (2 for 3) sliced a ball the opposite way down the left-field line, and it found the stands to put the Yankees ahead by 3-0. It had been 228 days since Headley’s last extra-base hit. That is with consistent playing time. He had been the only regular starter left in baseball without anything other than singles among his hits this season.AdvertisementSo when his ball sliced five rows deep into the left-field stands, the Yankees’ dugout exploded in jubilation.“I think they’ve been as supportive and helpful of getting through a tough time as they possibly can be,” Headley said. “It’s not an easy place to play when you’re not playing well. These guys in here have been tremendous, and I’m very appreciative of that.”Headley is 7 for 20 on the homestand with four R.B.I. and five runs scored.“I don’t care how long you’ve been in the game, when you’re struggling like that, it’s tough,” Girardi said. “But he’s remained patient.”The lineup, Girardi noted, is beginning to behave the way the club had envisioned it would before the season. The Yankees have scored at least five runs in seven of the last 11 games.But before the game, General Manager Brian Cashman said his optimism for the future was based mostly on the bullpen vision he helped concoct.“Most clubs are trying to figure out the back of their bullpen,” Cashman said. “Our focus is going to be dealing with the underbelly of getting to the seventh, eighth, or ninth inning with our starters. It should be an easier focus than locking down the late part of the game.”INSIDE PITCHAlex Rodriguez jogged in the outfield for the first time Thursday and reported no soreness in his right hamstring, giving the Yankees confidence that he might be activated once his 15 days on the disabled list are completed by May 19. “I’ll have a much better answer in the next 48 hours,” Rodriguez said.A version of this article appears in print on May 13, 2016, on Page B12 of the New York edition with the headline: Yankees’ Bullpen Strength Is Critical in Another Win.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.