By CHRIS GORDONMAY 11, 2016
It has been a long, strange year for Phil Kessel, a wing who helped propel the Pittsburgh Penguins to the N.H.L.’s Eastern Conference finals Tuesday night.“Bit of a difference, right?” Kessel asked reporters after the Penguins’ 4-3 overtime victory, which eliminated the Washington Capitals. “I am happy to be here.”A year ago, Kessel was playing for the Toronto Maple Leafs and enduring complaints from much of their fan base. In four of Kessel’s six seasons with the team, he scored 30 or more goals, but the Leafs made the playoffs only once, losing in the first round. With questions about his competitiveness and dedication on top of his average salary of $8 million, there was a cloud hanging over his head.Traded to the Penguins in July, Kessel, who is signed through the 2021-22 season, found himself alongside stars like Sidney Crosby and Evgeni Malkin.AdvertisementSkeptics wondered if he would fit in. But he had the confidence of Mike Sullivan, who took over as the Penguins’ coach in December and turned Pittsburgh into one of the hottest teams in the league.Advertisement“Phil is a guy that can score,” Sullivan said. “We’ve asked him to be more responsible defensively, be stronger on the wall, to help us defend when we don’t have the puck. He’s embraced that message all year.”On Tuesday, Kessel scored the Penguins’ first two goals as Pittsburgh took a 3-0 lead midway through the second period. After the Penguins committed three consecutive delay-of-game penalties, helping the Capitals tie the score, 3-3, late in the third period, Kessel assisted on Nick Bonino’s series-winning goal 6 minutes 32 seconds into overtime.The Capitals were the N.H.L.’s top regular-season team, with 11 more points than the next-best team. They featured Alex Ovechkin, the league’s top goal scorer, and goalie Braden Holtby, who tied the N.H.L. record for wins in a season.But the team that has won the Presidents’ Trophy by securing the best regular-season record has won the Stanley Cup only twice since the 2004-5 lockout, and the Capitals added to a disappointing franchise history in the playoffs. They have not advanced past the second round since 1998 and have never won the Stanley Cup. They have lost to the Penguins in eight of nine playoff series against them.The Capitals had home-ice advantage for the hard-fought series, which lasted six games. Three of the contests went into overtime, and the Capitals never lost by more than one goal. Pittsburgh outscored Washington in the series, 16-15.Facing elimination in Game 5 on Saturday, Washington appeared to have its power play back in gear and won decisively, 3-1. But the Penguins were fast and played with confidence from the start of Game 6.“It starts with our team’s speed,” Sullivan said. “We were getting through the neutral zone with speed, and when we do that, I think we are a hard team to play against.”AdvertisementKessel was just part of the Penguins juggernaut. Sullivan preaches balanced scoring throughout his lineup, and in the team’s series against the Capitals, 11 Pittsburgh players netted goals.With two other offensive weapons, Crosby and Malkin, occupying the top two lines, Kessel played on Pittsburgh’s third line with Bonino and Carl Hagelin. All three were acquired in trades over the past 10 months.Hagelin had just 12 points in 43 games with the Anaheim Ducks before going to Pittsburgh, but he tallied three goals and four assists against Washington. (Hagelin, a former Ranger, will be playing in the conference finals for the fourth time in five years.)“I thought their forward depth really came through in this for them,” Capitals Coach Barry Trotz said, referring to Pittsburgh’s third line.Get the big sports news, highlights and analysis from Times journalists, with distinctive takes on games and some behind-the-scenes surprises, delivered to your inbox every week.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.The line may be the most feared in the playoffs, registering 18 points against the Capitals. It scored all four of Pittsburgh’s goals in Game 6 and had three assists.In the first period, Kessel got the scoring started with a signature move, using Capitals defenseman Karl Alzner as a screen before firing a wrist shot past Holtby. He added another goal on a power play when he picked up the puck at the near circle, skated in front of Washington’s net and beat Holtby. After Tuesday’s game, Kessel was tied for the lead in power-play points this postseason.The Capitals contributed their share of mistakes. Defenseman Brooks Orpik, a former Penguins player, received a double minor for high-sticking in the second period. That penalty led to two Penguins power-play goals, including Kessel’s, in 33 seconds.Alzner, a part of Washington’s top defense pairing, was nursing a groin strain; he left in the second period and did not return.AdvertisementIn the third period, the desperate Capitals came storming back to tie the score, helped by a flurry of delay-of-game penalties for hitting the puck over the glass.The Penguins — and Kessel — seemed unfazed. During a frenzied overtime, Kessel passed to Hagelin, who fired a shot at Holtby. Bonino pushed in the rebound. The next 10 minutes turned into a frenetic and jubilant haze at Consol Energy Center.Kessel insisted that he had never been jittery about his chance at redemption in Pittsburgh. He leads the Penguins with 12 points in the postseason.“I don’t remember the last time I’ve been nervous before a hockey game,” he said after the win. “You just go out there and play, and hopefully it works out.”Now, Kessel said, he is simply looking forward to the next series: the Eastern Conference finals against the Tampa Bay Lightning.A version of this article appears in print on May 12, 2016, on Page B13 of the New York edition with the headline: Once Criticized in Toronto, Now Cherished in Pittsburgh.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.