By TIM ROHANMARCH 1, 2016
PORT ST. LUCIE, Fla. —  The early part of spring training — all drills, no games — can eventually become monotonous. But not at Mets camp, where every day brings another surprise from Yoenis Cespedes, the newly re-signed slugger.Last week, Cespedes conducted a personal car show, showing up with customized luxury cars, six in all, that, combined, cost more than $1 million.Then, on Monday, came news that Cespedes had purchased a champion 270-pound hog — a new addition to his ranch — for about $7,000 after attending the St. Lucie County Fair.On Tuesday, Cespedes outdid himself. Wearing a cowboy hat and boots, he rode from one side of the Mets’ complex to the other on a horse named Candy, followed by Noah Syndergaard on another horse. Steven Matz and Kevin Plawecki then took their own turns riding around. Even Jay Horwitz, the Mets’ longtime media relations director, climbed aboard at one point.AdvertisementThe horse stunt was Syndergaard’s idea. After seeing Cespedes’s parade of cars last week, he decided he would pick a morning to make his own grand entrance at camp. He remembered scrolling through Cespedes’s Instagram account and seeing him atop a horse, which stood out to Syndergaard because his father, Brad, trains horses.AdvertisementSo he approached Cespedes, who said, Why not? Cespedes provided two of his own horses, from his ranch up the road in Vero Beach, and together they climbed into the saddle and started parading around.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.“We play a game for a living,” Syndergaard said. “It’s supposed to be fun. Try to keep it light and relaxed. Spring training and the season can be pretty grueling. It’s a grind. So it’s always fun to keep things loose.”Manager Terry Collins did not seem as amused. He indicated that he had spoken to Cespedes and Syndergaard and relayed to them: “Fun time’s over. It’s time to get ready for baseball.”While members of the news media were still buzzing about the topic, though, Collins tried to take it in stride. He pointed out that Syndergaard, a 6-foot-6 pitcher from Mansfield, Tex., had worn a helmet while riding.“That tells you that Texas stuff is not all it’s made up to be,” Collins said.A version of this article appears in print on March 2, 2016, on Page B12 of the New York edition with the headline: The Mets Form a Post Parade.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.