By BILLY WITZFEB. 28, 2016
TAMPA, Fla. —  The most riveting matchup Sunday at Steinbrenner Field did not take place on the field, but above it — and then into the stands, onto the backfields and the shrubs that surround the Yankees’ complex.It involved a stadium operations official in a cherry picker, armed with a basket, a blanket and a stick, trying to capture a raccoon from atop the 40-foot-high screen behind home plate. After several efforts were thwarted by the hissing raccoon, the employee whacked it with the stick, sending the raccoon hurtling down to the stands as witnesses shrieked.As more than a dozen stadium workers converged on the animal, it sprang to life and led them on a chase, sprinting toward the right-field line, then doubling back toward home plate before it headed up to the top row of the stadium.Cornered again, the raccoon jumped down to a plaza below and scampered off toward the back fields before finding shelter — and apparently a reprieve — in the shrubs.AdvertisementIt was the Yankees’ first blown rundown of the year.“The raccoon is alive and well,” said the Yankees spokesman Jason Zillo, adding that the team needed to clear the raccoon from the field before it let fans in to watch practice out of concern for their safety.AdvertisementIt is not the first time the Yankees have been forced to confront wild creatures. In 2007, a squirrel climbed up and down the right-field foul pole during a game against the Boston Red Sox at Yankee Stadium, an incident that led a Norse scholar to fear that it portended good fortune for the Red Sox and misfortune for the Yankees.Later that year, the Yankees were done in — not just by the Indians, but by the midges that swarmed them in a playoff game in Cleveland. Meanwhile, the Red Sox won the World Series.The raccoon’s appearance may not be an ominous sign. Last year, on their way to the World Series, the Mets discovered a baby raccoon in their clubhouse at the end of July. That night, the Mets beat the Los Angeles Dodgers in extra innings, and thus Rally Raccoon was born.The Yankees’ complex is a welcoming place for animal life, with geese and other fowl making themselves at home in several ponds around the premises. Two years ago, a raccoon — presumably a different one — was discovered sitting in one of the stadium seats catching a glimpse of a workout.Sunday morning’s chase took place while the Yankees were safely sequestered in their clubhouse for a meeting with Tony Clark, the executive director of the players’ union. But they quickly caught wind of it on social media.“They should have sent me up there,” said Brett Gardner, an avid hunter and fisherman from South Carolina, who displayed a good deal of derring-do last spring when he scaled the outfield wall to retrieve Chris Young’s glove.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.Ivan Nova said he had to chase raccoons out of his family’s home in the Dominican Republic as a boy, but they did not bother him. Snakes, though, terrify him — something that his son knows from placing a rubber snake on his bed.But Zillo, the spokesman, said the Yankees had been impressed by what they had seen of the raccoon.“Agility, speed, determination,” Zillo said. “He checked a lot of boxes that our scouts like.”AdvertisementTOPICS OF CONCERN  With baseball’s collective bargaining agreement expiring after this season, Tony Clark addressed the Yankees for nearly an hour.Among the topics that are likely to be part of the negotiations is the use of qualifying offers, which agents contend has restricted interest in free agents because teams have to forfeit a draft pick as compensation for signing them.Players like Dexter Fowler, Yovani Gallardo and Ian Desmond, who had productive seasons in 2015, found themselves without contracts until last week. Desmond signed with the Texas Rangers on Sunday.“It’s a concern anytime you have a system in place that for whatever reason suggests that players who can help teams perform well on the field and compete do not have jobs,” Clark said.Clark skirted commenting directly on the domestic violence case of Aroldis Chapman, who could face a suspension from Commissioner Rob Manfred, but he did support the new policy, even though it gives broad power to Manfred.“The truth is there really weren’t any guidelines or ramifications that were going to afford either party to function in a fashion that most would determine makes sense,” Clark said. “As a result, what we negotiated we think does that.”SUMMONED TO START Luis Severino, Ivan Nova and Bryan Mitchell will start the Yankees’ first three exhibition games. The opener is Wednesday against the Detroit Tigers. ... Alex Rodriguez and Carlos Beltran are not likely to play Wednesday, Manager Joe Girardi said. ... Nova was hit in the thigh by a line drive off the bat of Aaron Judge, but deflected the ball with his glove.A version of this article appears in print on February 29, 2016, on Page D7 of the New York edition with the headline: Pursuit of Intruder at Yankees’ Park Has That Rough Spring-Training Feel .  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.