AdvertisementSupported byBy Jonah Engel BromwichEvery week, The New York Times chooses one essential game to watch, highlighting hot teams, winning and losing streaks and statistical intrigue in the N.B.A.Saturday, 8:30 p.m. Eastern, ABCThe Oklahoma City Thunder and the Golden State Warriors will play their third and final regular-season game on Thursday. Their game on Saturday was a classic, a clash of two N.B.A. titans that exceeded the hype. Thursday’s game will be Oklahoma City’s last chance before the playoffs to accomplish something that it has come closer to than any other great team this season: defeating the Warriors at home.The Warriors and, to a lesser extent, the Thunder, the San Antonio Spurs and the Cleveland Cavaliers have dominated the season. They are the best four teams by far, and they have gobbled up the attention they deserve. They have also distracted from the parity and the unpredictability that have been the story of the season for the league’s 26 other teams. Excitement swirls around Golden State as it chases the Chicago Bulls’ record for regular-season wins set 20 years ago, but it still remains up in the air which teams will make the playoffs.At the start of the season, the Houston Rockets seemed like a guaranteed playoff team, and even a dark horse for the championship. Last season, they reached the Western Conference finals after a hard-fought series against the Los Angeles Clippers, and though they lost to the Warriors, the eventual champions, in five games, they played competitively early in the series. The Rockets exited the playoffs looking like a team that would compete at a high level for years to come.But things went sour immediately this season. Houston lost its first three games and never seemed to right the ship. Coach Kevin McHale was fired in the first month. With or without McHale, these Rockets often seem a strange, lost team, despite retaining the talent that took them so far in last year’s playoffs.Now the Rockets sit on the postseason bubble, in eighth place in the conference, only half a game ahead of the Utah Jazz entering Monday. They have lost eight of their past twelve games, and did not seriously challenge either the Warriors or the Spurs when they played this month.And yet Houston has shown that it is capable of beating good teams. The Rockets soundly defeated the Miami Heat, 115-102, on Feb. 2, one of their better outings this season. James Harden, the team’s star, had 26 points and 14 assists, helping five of his teammates score in double figures. It was an exemplary Rockets game, a flashback to last season’s success.Harden, who took some most valuable player votes away from Stephen Curry last season, holds the key to the Rockets’ chances in every game, and his statistics often include clues about why they won or lost. Against the Spurs on Saturday, for instance, he scored 27 points but had only 2 assists. Only one other starter scored in double figures, and Houston lost, 104-94, with little fanfare.The Rockets could put up a tougher fight in the first round of the playoffs than most eighth seeds, but to make the playoffs, they will have to consistently defeat other members of the N.B.A.’s middle ranks.In many ways, the Chicago Bulls, Houston’s opponent on Saturday, are the Rockets’ Eastern Conference double, even down to their red jerseys. Chicago is also clinging to an eighth seed, staying just ahead of the Detroit Pistons. Entering the season as one of the most promising teams in the East, the Bulls have underperformed under their new coach, Fred Hoiberg. An injury to Jimmy Butler, their star, this month has left them flailing.Butler is not the only Bull missing time. Nikola Mirotic has been out recently after a bout with appendicitis, and the always fragile Derrick Rose has missed several games recently with hamstring trouble. But even with their best players available, the Bulls have yet to find an identity. Hoiberg pledged to speed up the offense, but his adjustments have come at the expense of efficiency: Chicago has one of the least effective attacks in the league, despite having plenty of players who can score.Talent is not a problem in either Chicago or Houston, which must make both teams’ struggles all the more frustrating for fans. Obvious problems suggest obvious solutions, whereas low morale and lack of effort just breed confusion and frustration. The Rockets and the Bulls seemed as if they had a chance to be part of the N.B.A.’s elite. Instead, they have joined the middle of the pack, the churning majority of the league, fighting for a chance to face — and be defeated by — the best of the best.Advertisement