By THE ASSOCIATED PRESSMARCH 1, 2016
LOS ANGELES —  Jamal Crawford scored 26 points off the bench, Chris Paul had 23 points and 12 assists, and the Los Angeles Clippers beat the Nets, 105-95, on Monday night.Brook Lopez had 25 points and 10 rebounds for the Nets, who were going for their first three-game winning streak of the season. Instead, they lost their fifth straight to the Clippers at Staples Center.J.J. Redick added 19 points for the Clippers, who have won consecutive games for the first time since Feb. 5-8, when they won three straight road games.Get the big sports news, highlights and analysis from Times journalists, with distinctive takes on games and some behind-the-scenes surprises, delivered to your inbox every week.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.Crawford carried the Clippers in the fourth, which began with them clinging to a 2-point lead. His jumper opened the Clippers’ first double-digit lead of the game, at 97-86.AdvertisementTwice in a row, Paul fed DeAndre Jordan, who converted alley-oops into monster jams. They teamed up again for the same play on the Clippers’ final basket. Jordan had 10 points and 10 rebounds.The Clippers’ defense got stops, too, and the Nets twice turned the ball over on offensive fouls.The Nets outscored the Clippers by 16-4, including 7 by Bojan Bogdanovic, to lead by 6 late in the third. Los Angeles answered by scoring the final 8 points to take an 81-79 lead into the fourth after Crawford’s pull-up jumper beat the buzzer. Bogdanovic finished with 19 points.AdvertisementThe Nets led by 8 early in the game and found themselves in a back-and-forth throughout the first half. Neither team led by more than 8, and there were 12 ties and nine lead changes. Led by 7 points from Paul, the Clippers closed on a 15-6 run to lead by 52-46 at the half.We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.