By DAVE SEMINARAFEB. 29, 2016
For years, two tennis players with little in common other than their love for the sport held records that seemed unlikely to be broken.Kenny Banzer is a 30-year-old wealth planner from Liechtenstein, one of the world’s richest countries. Gadonfin Yaka, 75, is a maintenance man at a post office in Germantown, Md., who grew up in a thatched-roof dwelling in a remote village in Togo with no electricity or running water.In 2000, Banzer was a seventh grader, five days past his 14th birthday, when he became the youngest player to compete in the Davis Cup.A year later, Yaka played in the Davis Cup for Togo at 60, setting the record for the oldest Davis Cup participant.AdvertisementThe annual Davis Cup competition begins this week, with 135 nations participating across 12 divisions. In recent years, several of the world’s top players have indicated that the Davis Cup is low on their list of priorities. But the tournament’s most compelling story lines often play out in its lower levels, where players from Albania to Zimbabwe play for pride, and, sometimes, records that the International Tennis Federation has a hard time keeping straight.AdvertisementBanzer assumed that his record would not be broken because for more than 20 years, the I.T.F has had a rule barring players under 14 from competing in the Davis Cup and other pro tournaments. And Yaka could not imagine that any country would resort to fielding a player older than 60, so he, too, believed his place in tennis history was safe.But they recently discovered that their records were broken by players from San Marino: Marco De Rossi, who played as a 13-year-old in 2011, and Vittorio Pellandra, who made his Davis Cup debut in 2007 at 66.The I.T.F. updates these records automatically from a database on a periodic basis and cannot say for sure when it recognized De Rossi and Pellandra as the record holders.The records are not without controversy. Why was De Rossi allowed to play 46 days before his 14th birthday? And should Pellandra’s record count, given the fact that he appeared on court for less than 10 minutes before retiring with a leg injury?“I wasn’t just an old man who was trying to break a record when I played,” said Yaka, who immigrated to the United States in 2005 and is now a citizen. “The record is very special to me, but I wonder if the I.T.F. takes these things seriously.”Banzer had a 3-4 record playing Davis Cup from 2000 to 2002 for Liechtenstein, the world’s sixth-smallest country, nestled in the Alps between Austria and Switzerland. When he learned that his record had been broken by a 13-year-old, he could not understand why the I.T.F. would allow someone under 14 to compete.“It doesn’t seem correct or fair to me, because the rule has existed for a long time,” said Banzer, who works for a financial services provider in Vaduz, Liechtenstein’s capital. “I have no problem if someone breaks my record, but then he has to be 14 years plus one, two, three or four days. Almost 14 is not 14.”AdvertisementNicola Lombardini, a spokesman for the San Marino Tennis Federation, said that the federation sent a photocopy of De Rossi’s passport to the I.T.F. before his first match, a 6-0, 6-1 loss to Jean-Baptiste Poux-Gautier of Andorra on May 12, 2011.“I’m sure the I.T.F. would have called us if there was a problem,” Lombardini said in a Skype interview. “No one said anything, so for sure the record is ours.”A note underneath the records page on the Davis Cup website says, “Players must now be 14 or over to participate in the Davis Cup.” But Nick Imison, an I.T.F. spokesman, said that it was likely that an exception was made to allow De Rossi to play, since he was almost 14. But he did not know if San Marino requested the exception or if De Rossi’s date of birth simply slipped past whoever was supposed to notice it.De Rossi, who recently earned his first ATP point and now has a world ranking of 1,774 and a career Davis Cup record of 7-13, saw no problem and was proud to have the record, saying, “2011 was considered my 14th year, so I guess it was O.K.”When he returned to his middle school classroom after his first Davis Cup tie, played in Macedonia, there was little fanfare. After all, one of his classmates had already competed on the national soccer team in a World Cup qualifier.Situated on the slopes of Mount Titano on the Adriatic side of Italy, San Marino is the world’s fifth-smallest country, with about 32,000 residents and only eight tennis courts.“These things are not unbelievable here,” Lombardini said. “Everyone in San Marino has a great chance to break records.”Yaka did not pick up a tennis racket until he was 29. A year later, he was the top player in Togo, a West African nation that has not competed in Davis Cup since 2003 because of a lack of resources.At 60, Yaka played doubles during a Davis Cup round-robin match in Mauritius in 2001, after another player had overslept and missed his flight. It was a straight-sets loss, but his opponents told a reporter in 2010 that Yaka played well and even won over the local crowd.Advertisement“I was still beating the young players, even at 60,” he said. “I didn’t even find out that I held the record until a newspaper in South Africa wrote something about me in 2006.”By that time, he had immigrated to Maryland, where he found work as an assembler at an electronics factory. His co-workers did not believe him when he told them he was the record holder. And it was hard to prove them wrong because the I.T.F. transposed and misspelled his name, referring to him as Yaka Garonfin Koptigan.When an article was published in 2010, correcting the error and confirming his record, his colleagues were impressed and Yaka was thrilled. But neither he nor the I.T.F. realized that Pellandra had already broken the record.Pellandra, a retired businessman, was the Davis Cup captain for San Marino when he played in 2007. He added his name to the roster for a Davis Cup round-robin event in Cairo in May of that year because the team needed at least three players and he had only two.William Forcellini, one of his teammates, wilted in the Cairo heat during his singles match, and with nothing more than the pride of the San Marino team on the line, Pellandra borrowed Forcellini’s rackets and took the court for the final match, a doubles encounter against Egypt.While Yaka’s Davis Cup experience came in a deciding match, Pellandra took the court in what is called a dead rubber, a meaningless match in Davis Cup parlance.Get the big sports news, highlights and analysis from Times journalists, with distinctive takes on games and some behind-the-scenes surprises, delivered to your inbox every week.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.“It was a lot of fun,” Pellandra recalled through an interpreter. “The other players were perfect gentlemen. They hit the ball softer to me and were trying to keep the rallies going. It was like a show.”AdvertisementDown, 1-2, in the first set after less than 10 minutes on court, Pellandra retired with a leg injury. The I.T.F. said that it made no distinction between finished matches and unfinished matches.Yaka said that he was disappointed when he discovered late last year that he no longer held the record.“They are right: If he hit the ball a few times, he played the Davis Cup,” he said of Pellandra.He added, “Now maybe someone else will step on the court, hit the ball twice and say they have the record.”At 75, Yaka no longer plays tennis, but he watches the Tennis Channel every day and roots for Novak Djokovic. He needs to work at his cleaning job until 2019 before he can retire, he hopes in Togo, where he says he will start playing tennis again.Pellandra is also 75, and he still plays doubles twice a week with friends. He manages San Marino’s Davis Cup team and will accompany De Rossi and the rest of the squad for this week’s round-robin action in Estonia, where they could face Liechtenstein, which is captained by Josef Banzer, Kenny’s father.Lombardini suggested that the oldest-youngest disputes could be settled on the court, San Marino style.“We can all play some tennis, then go out for pizza and a good bottle of wine,” he said.A version of this article appears in print on March 1, 2016, on Page B8 of the New York edition with the headline: Not All Records Age Gracefully.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.