By KAREN CROUSEFEB. 28, 2016
PALM BEACH GARDENS, Fla. —  Adam Scott pulled his 8-iron and stared at his target. He had not won a golf tournament using a short putter in more than five years, but on Sunday at the Honda Classic, the shortest club in his bag plagued him less than the shortest hole on the PGA National Champion course: the 151-yard par-3 No. 15.In Saturday’s third round, Scott deposited two balls in the water hazard on his way to a quadruple-bogey seven. He arrived at the hole Sunday with a one-stroke lead over his playing competitor Sergio García in what amounted to a two-man battle. After taking his time settling over the ball, Scott stepped away and briefly conferred with his caddie before addressing the ball again. He put his shot 30 feet from the pin, positioned on the right-front quadrant of the green, mercilessly close to the water. He two-putted for a par.On the next hole, a 444-yard par 4, Scott three-putted from 40 feet for a bogey but maintained his one-stroke lead over García, who also made a 5. Scott then parred in for his first PGA Tour victory since the 2014 event in Fort Worth, Tex. Scott, a former world No. 1, closed with an even-par 70 for a nine-under 271, one stroke better than García, who posted a 71. Justin Thomas (69) and Blayne Barber (70) shared third at five under.It was Scott’s first victory using a short putter and a non-anchored putting stroke since the Singapore Open in 2010.Advertisement“I really wanted to win a lot,” Scott said, adding, “I want to feel somewhat relevant, still out there when it comes to being one of the best players in the world.”AdvertisementScott, whose 32 putts in the final round were the most he had all week, was asked if he was relieved to have the victory to silence the chatter about his putting in the wake of the anchoring ban that took effect at the start of 2016.“Probably good for everybody who likes talking about it, absolutely,” Scott said, laughing. “And, therefore, good for me because maybe we don’t have to go over it too much anymore.”Scott had to engage in some positive self-talk on No. 15 even before the wind kicked up as he was getting ready to hit, prompting him to step away.“I’d be lying if I said I just didn’t even think about yesterday,” Scott said.As soon as he backed off, the wind died down.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.“So I quickly went back in and hit it,” Scott said, adding, “And I hit a pretty good shot.”Scott became the first player to win on the P.G.A. Tour despite making a quadruple bogey during the week since Phil Mickelson at the 2009 Tour Championship. Since the start of the 2015-16 wraparound season, Scott has played in seven official events worldwide and finished first or second four times. A year ago, he was just starting his PGA Tour season at around this time.“Hopefully, I haven’t peaked too early,” he joked.Scott’s golf has been a mixed bag since he became the first Australian to win the Masters, in 2013. Thirteen months later, he supplanted Tiger Woods as the world No. 1, only to drop as low as No. 16 last October. Scott, 35, began this week at No. 13 and will return to the top 10 when the new rankings are released.Scott’s 12 PGA Tour victories are the most of any active player under 40, but he is haunted by the thought that he might have won more.“To be honest, I probably do work harder than I did 10 years ago,” Scott said. “I think one of the reasons why I didn’t succeed at the biggest events 10 years ago was I didn’t work smart enough or hard enough. There was a guy who was doing it smarter and better than everyone, by far, at that point.”AdvertisementScott was referring to Woods, 40, who has not played in this tournament since walking off the course in the fourth round in 2014 with back spasms. He has not played a competitive round anywhere since last August. He since has undergone multiple back procedures. There is no timetable for his return.Woods, who lives in nearby Jupiter, Fla., showed up on Thursday at a dinner held at the home of Jack and Barbara Nicklaus for potential members of this year’s United States Ryder Cup squad. Twenty-two players showed up. Woods was there in his role as a vice captain. At the dinner, Nicklaus said of Woods, “He looked very good, he looked very healthy and he really misses playing, so that’s good.”Nicklaus won five times, including three majors, after his 40th birthday in January 1980. He finished with 18 major titles. Woods has been stuck on 14 since 2008. When Scott was in his early 20s, he was being hailed as a potential rival of Woods. Over a decade later, he can hear his career clock ticking.“I know once I get to 40 years old, it’s just the facts, it’s going to get harder and harder for me,” Scott said. “Because there’s some 17-year-old right now who will be 22 out here killing it and I’m going to be 40 and it’s going to be hard for me to keep pace.”A version of this article appears in print on February 29, 2016, on Page D4 of the New York edition with the headline: Brandishing a Short Putter, a Relieved Scott Wins the Honda Classic .  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.