By DAVID WALDSTEINMAY 13, 2016
LOS ANGELES — Bartolo Colon stood in the on-deck circle staring out at Clayton Kershaw, one of the most dominant pitchers in baseball, as Eric Campbell stood at the plate in one of many mismatches that took place on this cool evening at Chavez Ravine.In his previous game, Colon had homered for the first time in his 19-year career, and on Wednesday, Noah Syndergaard had reinforced the notion of Mets pitchers as dangerous hitters by whacking two home runs.But any chance that Colon would follow that up with another stunning display of batsmanship was highly unlikely against Kershaw, who was on his way to a brilliant three-hit, 13-strikeout shutout.Some of the best hitters in the world fail against Kershaw, let alone an endearing, rotund part-time bat swinger like Colon.AdvertisementAfter Campbell grounded out, Colon briefly dipped his head and walked to the plate for his turn against the three-time National League Cy Young Award winner. Predictably, it did not go as well as things had last Saturday in San Diego.AdvertisementColon struck out looking on four pitches and walked back to the dugout to refocus on his real job, pitching. But that side of his work did not go very well, either.“I wasn’t expecting to take any swings,” Colon said through an interpreter. “The inning prior was a little long, so I was trying to get some rest.”The Dodgers touched him for five runs in five innings, including a three-run homer by Yasmani Grandal and a solo shot by Chase Utley, villain of villains to Mets fans. Colon was removed for a pinch-hitter in the sixth, so he had only the one at-bat.Kershaw was at his best, dominating the Mets over nine nearly flawless innings as the Dodgers won, 5-0. It was Kershaw’s second shutout in his last three games. He also shut out the Padres on May 1 in a game the Dodgers won, 1-0.Get the big sports news, highlights and analysis from Times journalists, with distinctive takes on games and some behind-the-scenes surprises, delivered to your inbox every week.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.Kershaw (5-1) struck out 13 batters — including all three in the ninth — giving him five straight games with at least 10 strikeouts, a new Dodgers record. That is an impressive mark for a team that has featured some of the game’s top hurlers, like Sandy Koufax, Don Drysdale, Orel Hershiser, Don Sutton, Fernando Valenzuela and Hideo Nomo.In his 250th career start, Kershaw improved to 7-0 in 10 starts against the Mets, with a 1.17 E.R.A., and he is 81-0 over all when he gets four or more runs in support.Dodgers Manager Dave Roberts noted Kershaw’s fastball command and his slider depth, and his curveball was another potent weapon.Advertisement“We had the best pitcher on the planet going,” Roberts said, adding, “You give him the lead, he smells the finish line — he smells blood.”Kershaw now has 14 shutouts, the most among active pitchers. Colon is second with 13.Over his previous three starts before Thursday’s game, Kershaw had struck out 34 batters without issuing a single walk. It was the second time he had constructed such a streak, including one last year.The only other pitcher in the last 100 years to put together three straight games with at least 10 strikeouts and no walks was Chris Archer of the Tampa Bay Rays, also last year.But in the first inning, Kershaw walked David Wright on a full-count fastball out of the zone. It was the first base on balls Kershaw had allowed since April 21.The first hit was somewhat cheap, a roller through the right side of the infield by Asdrubal Cabrera, who had two of the hits, leading off the fourth. Kershaw struck out Wright swinging and then got Yoenis Cespedes to ground into a double play to end the inning.Kershaw continued to handcuff the Mets, setting down the next five batters until Curtis Granderson doubled into the right-field corner with two outs in the sixth.It was only the second extra-base hit by a lefty that Kershaw had surrendered all season (49 at-bats). But Kershaw struck out Cabrera looking to end that threat.In the ninth, Kershaw struck out Lucas Duda, Granderson and Wright.We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.