AdvertisementSupported byBy Daniel E. SlotnikJohn Young, a baseball scout who founded Reviving Baseball in   Inner Cities, an organization that bolsters participation in the sport in underprivileged and often minority areas, died on Sunday in Orange County, Calif. He was 67.His death was announced by Major League Baseball’s commissioner, Rob Manfred. A baseball spokesman said the cause was complications of diabetes.Young grew up in South Central Los Angeles at a time when baseball was immensely popular within the city’s black and Latino neighborhoods. He played briefly for the Detroit Tigers before he became a scout and first noticed a dearth of black and Latino baseball prospects from poor American neighborhoods in the mid-1980s.League officials and pundits attributed the decline in participation to baseball’s often plodding pace, its expensive equipment and facilities, and the exploding popularity of football and basketball. Young thought the affected neighborhoods lacked adequate baseball programs, which were readily available to white youths in the suburbs.“Nowadays, kids think baseball is a white man’s game,” he told The Sun Sentinel, a Florida newspaper, in 1992.Without a good feeder program to help them, potentially talented children often missed the chance to be recruited by colleges or the majors. In 1989, Young addressed the problem by creating Reviving Baseball in Inner Cities, or RBI, in his hometown. (In baseball, those letters typically stand for “runs batted in.”)The program was originally aimed at boys in their early teens. But teenagers in South Central Los Angeles were reluctant at first — only 11 showed up for the first tryout. Young said he thought baseball could intimidate would-be players who were unfamiliar with the sport.“We get kids who come into this program: They are kids from tough neighborhoods — they see a lot of gang violence, you know, tough kids — but they are afraid of baseball,” he said in an interview on “PBS NewsHour” in 2003.By the end of the first season, 180 children were participating. RBI soon expanded to other cities.Major League Baseball began administering the program in 1991 and, combined with individual teams, has contributed more than $40 million worth of resources to the organization, which now includes softball, a scholarship program and an annual World Series. More than 230,000 children and teenagers participate annually in programs in 200 cities in the United States, Canada, Curaçao, the Dominican Republic, Puerto Rico and Venezuela.RBI proved successful in fostering major league talent; former participants include outfielders Coco Crisp and Justin Upton and Yankees pitcher C. C. Sabathia.John Thomas Young was born in Los Angeles on Feb. 9, 1949. In 1967 he graduated from Mount Carmel High School, where he was an all-league baseball and basketball player. He was drafted by the Cincinnati Reds but turned down their offer and attended Chapman College. He played on its N.C.A.A. Division II championship baseball team in 1968.The Tigers selected him in the first round of the 1969 amateur draft, but he appeared in only two major league games, in 1971. He played in the minors until 1978 and then became the first African-American director of scouting for the Tigers in 1981. He also scouted for the Padres and the Marlins.He is survived by his wife, the former Sheryl Shannon; two sons, Dorian and Jon; and a daughter, Tori Young.Advertisement