By ANDREW KNOLLMAY 12, 2016
The N.H.L.’s Eastern Conference finals, which begin Friday in Pittsburgh, feature two swift, skilled teams that have developed depth out of necessity and forged momentum from solidarity.The Tampa Bay Lightning returned most of the roster that lost in the Stanley Cup finals last season, but they have been without their star center Steven Stamkos. That has not stopped them from compiling the best winning percentage and goal differential in the postseason. Their opponents, the Pittsburgh Penguins, transformed their identity over the course of the season, bringing key figures into the fold along the way.Pittsburgh (3.36) is the second-highest scoring team in the playoffs, and Tampa Bay (1.90) has allowed the fewest goals per game among the remaining playoff teams.Of the final four teams, Pittsburgh won the Cup most recently, in 2009, and is in the conference finals for the fourth time since Sidney Crosby entered the league in 2005. The Lightning, the 2004 champions, are in the conference finals for the fourth time in their 23rd season in the league.Pittsburgh finished the regular season in second place in the Metropolitan Division, with the second-best record in the Eastern Conference, after winning 14 of its last 16 games.AdvertisementAfter ousting the Rangers in five games in the first round, the Penguins slid into the conference finals off center Nick Bonino’s overtime winner in Game 6 against the Washington Capitals, who had the best record in the N.H.L. in the regular season. Bonino and his linemates, Carl Hagelin and Phil Kessel, were all acquired in trades over the past year. They combined for 18 points in six games against the Capitals, producing four goals and three assists in the series clincher.AdvertisementThe off-season additions of forwards Eric Fehr and Matt Cullen paid dividends as they also generated chances, quickened tempo and figured into key goals against Washington. That was all while the superstar centers Crosby and Evgeni Malkin accounted for one goal and three assists between them in the series.On defense, Kris Letang continues to anchor the Penguins. When he was suspended for Game 4 against the Capitals, another shrewd, economical in-season trade pickup, Trevor Daley, picked up the slack. He was on the ice for all three Pittsburgh goals, including one of his own, in a 3-2 overtime victory.The rookie goaltender Matt Murray also continued to shine. He did not cede his net to Marc-Andre Fleury, the Penguins’ career leader in wins, who was cleared to return from a late-season concussion during the second round. Murray outlasted the former Vezina Trophy winner Henrik Lundqvist in the first round and Braden Holtby, the Vezina favorite this season, in the second round. Next up: another Vezina finalist, Ben Bishop.What was once a work-in-progress roster now seems concrete under Coach Mike Sullivan, who was hired in December after only six games as an N.H.L. head coach since 2006.Tampa Bay, seeded second in the Atlantic Division, reached the conference finals for the second year in a row by defeating the Detroit Red Wings and the Islanders in five-game series.In the absence of Stamkos, who may return after an operation in April to address a blood clot, the Lightning have received superb support from their other top producers. Center Tyler Johnson has usually been flanked by wings Alex Killorn and Nikita Kucherov, and the line has carried Tampa Bay offensively with 34 points in 10 games. Kucherov shares the N.H.L. lead in postseason goals with nine. The former No. 3 overall pick Jonathan Drouin, who spent much of the season in the minor leagues, also has emerged as a force with 9 points.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.Tampa Bay’s top defenseman, Victor Hedman, has been an all-around threat in the postseason, producing 9 points, 33 shots on goal and a plus-four rating. Another key cog on defense, Anton Stralman, who sustained a broken leg late in the regular season, may be back soon.Bishop, the Lightning’s 6-foot-7 goalie, continues to give them an opportunity to win every game. He leads all remaining goalies in the playoffs in save percentage, goals-against average, shutouts and victories. Bishop has also buoyed the Lightning penalty kill, which has been the best among the teams left in the postseason.His 4-0 shutout of the Islanders in the elimination game capped a two-game stretch in which he allowed only one goal in more than 121 minutes. Bishop has four shutouts in five series-clinching wins during the past two postseasons, and he has allowed only one goal in those five games.Because of an editing error, an earlier version of this article misidentified the Pittsburgh Penguins’ division. It is the Metropolitan Division, not the Atlantic Division. The article also misstated the timing of Eric Fehr and Matt Cullen joining the Penguins. They were acquired in the off-season, not late in the season.A version of this article appears in print on May 13, 2016, on Page B9 of the New York edition with the headline: Mirror Images Face Each Other in Eastern Finals.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.