By MATT HAYESMAY 12, 2016
PONTE VEDRA BEACH, Fla. — Jordan Spieth stepped to the tee on a steamy Northeast Florida morning, playing a competitive round for the first time since the world had watched him implode on the biggest stage of all.His first shot Thursday might have been his best, a bomb of a drive down the middle of the fairway with the dew skipping off his ball as it rolled to a stop.Then came the rest of his first round at the Players Championship, and Spieth seemed closer to his unforgettable meltdown at the Masters last month than to figuring out what went wrong.The popular explanation on the tour is that Spieth’s swing needs tweaking. But for the second straight day, Spieth hinted at something that cannot be fixed by pounding balls on the driving range.Advertisement“It got off whenever, and I haven’t really been able to trust it at that level since then,” Spieth said of his swing. “On the driving range, it’s there now. It’s just a matter of being able to trust it on the golf course with trouble around.”AdvertisementThat lack of trust was evident Thursday in a wildly uneven round (four birdies, two bogeys, one double bogey) that ended at even par, nine back from Jason Day’s lead.Spieth might as well be a world away right now.His swing coach, Cameron McCormick, has suddenly become the most popular interview on the Tour, but Spieth has not gotten his swing back because, more than anything, he is trying to become comfortable trusting it.Instead of playing like the best player in the world, Spieth looked like a golfer trying to get his head straight. This is not a one-day fix, or a one-tournament fix. Spieth, 22, is still learning to respond when the game is not as easy as it once felt and looked.That is why the overriding question for the last month on the Tour was how McCormick would make meticulous, minute changes to Spieth’s swing and mechanics and make it all better.What would make everything better is a birdie or two — or the three straight Spieth ran together on his second nine holes to pull himself out of an early funk.But those three birdies were followed by two bogeys, a birdie, a par and a maddening double bogey to end the round.Get the big sports news, highlights and analysis from Times journalists, with distinctive takes on games and some behind-the-scenes surprises, delivered to your inbox every week.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.“I have put it behind me,” Spieth said of his misery at the Masters, where he blew a five-stroke Sunday lead with nine holes to play.AdvertisementAfter four hours on Thursday on the Stadium Course at T.P.C. Sawgrass, though, Spieth seemed no closer to flushing whatever “it” is out of his system.Any pro on the Tour will say that the physical differences among players — distance off the tee, striking the ball consistently, hitting greens in regulation — are not nearly as critical as steely, steady mental makeup.“There’s nothing more important,” Phil Mickelson said.A swing coach is not going to fix what happened to Ernie Els last month at the Masters, where he six-putted from 3 feet on the first hole. Els finished with a 66 on Thursday, three strokes off Day’s lead.A year ago in this tournament, Day shot an 81 to finish a disappointing final round. He improved 18 strokes on his first trip back, tying the course record with a 63 on Thursday.“I’ve got a really bad memory,” Day said. “It’s kind of good in golf when you can’t remember the bad things.”There can be a whole lot of bad on a course as unforgiving as Sawgrass, where narrow fairways littered with water and bunker hazards lead to tough, undulating greens. All of Spieth’s physical skills will not save him here; it is a mental grind, hole by hole.Spieth began with seven straight pars before birdieing five of the next 10 holes. The problem: three bogeys, all of which resulted from poor decisions.He recovered from two straight bogeys on Nos. 5 and 6 — he played the back nine first — with a 20-foot birdie on No. 7.AdvertisementHe saved a poor tee shot on No. 8 with a testy par putt before his final hole of the day — a hole that showed the stark difference between the elite golfer playing with mental fortitude and the elite golfer still searching.Day, playing in Spieth’s group, finished his terrific round by stepping to the par-5 ninth hole and hitting a safe 2-iron into a narrow fairway full of hazards to set up a makable approach shot.Spieth, meanwhile, pulled out his driver and mis-hit the ball, knocking it within 10 yards of water to set up a tough approach. Day birdied the hole; Spieth skied across the green on his approach and finished his round with a three-putt double bogey.Asked to explain what had happened on the ninth, Spieth said, “I hit it seven times.”It was a simple response to a complex issue that is not going away.A version of this article appears in print on May 13, 2016, on Page B9 of the New York edition with the headline: Spieth Returns, but Struggles With a Fickle Swing.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.