NOV. 20, 2016
Manchester United’s manager, José Mourinho, rose from his chair and was about to leave the postmatch news conference when he turned to his audience, threw his arms up and said, “Finally, I’ve lost to Arsenal.”It was a tongue-in-cheek remark, but it summed up his feelings perfectly. United had conceded an 89th-minute goal by Olivier Giroud in a 1-1 draw against visiting Arsenal in the Premier League on Saturday, leaving Mourinho and his team with an increasingly familiar deflated feeling at Old Trafford this season. United has dominated its last three home games in league play — against Stoke, Burnley and now Arsenal — and come away from all of them with draws.Mourinho is cutting a frustrated figure at United, which remains a work in progress in his first season in charge. But he has not lost in 12 Premier League meetings with Arsenal, including his two stints with Chelsea and one game with United, and he stretched his unbeaten run in competitive meetings with Arsenal Manager Arsène Wenger — his bitter coaching rival — to 14 matches.AROUND THE PREMIER LEAGUE Liverpool stayed on top of the standings despite a frustrating 0-0 draw at Southampton, where the team struggled to get past goalkeeper Fraser Forster.  Yaya Touré returned from his Manchester City exile to score twice, inspiring the team to a 2-1 victory over host Crystal Palace.  Harry Kane scored in the 89th minute and again in injury time to propel host Tottenham to a 3-2 win over West Ham. Tottenham is the only unbeaten team in all four leagues in England.AdvertisementREAL MADRID PREVAILS IN DERBY Cristiano Ronaldo scored three goals, and Real Madrid handed its rival Atlético Madrid a painful 3-0 loss in Atlético’s last league derby at Vicente Calderón Stadium, which it will leave next season.The victory ended Real Madrid’s six-game winless streak against Atlético, its crosstown rival, and gave it a 4-point lead in the Spanish league over Barcelona, which was unable to overcome the absence of Lionel Messi and Luis Suárez in a 0-0 draw with visiting Málaga. That result ended a home scoring streak for Barcelona that started in February 2015.COSTLY VICTORY FOR P.S.G. Paris St.-Germain moved level on points with Monaco, the French league leader, with a 2-0 home victory over Nantes, but at a cost: Ángel Di María, who had opened the scoring, left the field in the 35th minute with an apparent injury to his right thigh.AdvertisementWith a Champions League match scheduled at Arsenal this week, P.S.G. Coach Unai Emery said Di María had been taken off “as a precaution.”BAYERN HANDED ITS FIRST LOSS Borussia Dortmund striker Pierre-Emerick Aubameyang scored an early goal that sent visiting Bayern Munich to its first defeat of the season, 1-0, and forced Bayern, the four-time defending champion, to surrender the top spot in the Bundesliga to promoted Leipzig.The freshman Frank Jackson led five players in double figures with 17 points, and top-ranked Duke defeated Penn State, 78-68, in the Hall of Fame Tip-Off tournament in Uncasville, Conn.Amile Jefferson added 16 points and 16 rebounds for the Blue Devils (3-1), who lost forward Chase Jeter to an ankle injury early in the game. Tony Carr had 20 points and Shep Garner 15 for Penn State (2-2).In another game at the tournament, E. C. Matthews hit two late 3-pointers and finished with 18 points in No. 21 Rhode Island’s 76-71 comeback victory over No. 24 Cincinnati (2-1). The Rams (4-0) will face Duke for the tournament championship on Sunday.HOOSIERS ROMP AT HOME James Blackmon Jr. made five 3-pointers and had 20 points in all to help No. 6 Indiana rout visiting Liberty, 87-48.Indiana (3-0) scored the first 9 points and built a 32-point lead in the first half. Liberty (1-2) tried to fight back with 3-point attempts but missed most of them.AROUND THE N.C.A.A. Jock Landale scored 15 points inside, and Calvin Hermanson had 16 points from the perimeter, forming an inside-outside attack that swept No. 17 St. Mary’s (3-0) to a 61-57 victory over Dayton (2-1) in the Gaels’ first road game.  Joseph Chartouny scored 14 points, and host Fordham (3-1) beat St. Peter’s (1-2), 63-41, in the Johnny Bach Classic.  Tyler Nelson scored 23 points, 5 of them in overtime, to help Fairfield (3-0) overcome a double-digit second-half deficit and beat host Wagner (1-2), 70-64.AdvertisementAnthony Davis had 38 points and 16 rebounds, Jrue Holiday added 22 points and 9 assists, and the host New Orleans Pelicans beat the Charlotte Hornets, 121-116, in overtime for their second straight win.New Orleans, which had not won back-to-back games all season, overcame a 14-point fourth-quarter deficit.Get the big sports news, highlights and analysis from Times journalists, with distinctive takes on games and some behind-the-scenes surprises, delivered to your inbox every week.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.AROUND THE N.B.A. Goran Dragic scored 22 points, Hassan Whiteside added 18 points and 18 rebounds, and the visiting Miami Heat held on for a 114-111 victory over the Washington Wizards. The point total was the highest in a game this season for Miami, which also won a second straight game for the first time.  Al Horford’s follow shot with 1.3 seconds left gave the Boston Celtics a 94-92 road victory over the Detroit Pistons. The Pistons became the last N.B.A. team to lose at home.  Joel Embiid scored a season-high 26 points in 20 minutes, and the Philadelphia 76ers routed the visiting Phoenix Suns, 120-105, for their most convincing win of the season.Lydia Ko and Ariya Jutanugarn will settle the L.P.G.A. Tour’s biggest awards and prizes Sunday at Tiburon in Naples, Fla., as they chase Charley Hull in the CME Group Tour Championship.Hull birdied all four par-5 holes in a bogey-free, six-under-par round of 66 to take a one-stroke lead over Brittany Lincicome (66) and So Yeon Ryu (69). Hull, a 20-year-old Englishwoman, had a 13-under total of 203. She is winless on the tour.The top-ranked Ko, the second-round leader after a 62, had a 73 to drop into a tie for third at 11 under, with the second-ranked Jutanugarn (65), In Gee Chun (68), Jennifer Song (66) and Lizette Salas (67).Ko needs a victory to top Jutanugarn in the race to be named player of the year and would also take the season point title and a $1 million CME Globe bonus with a win. Ko is also fighting Jutanugarn for the money title and Chun for the Vare Trophy for the lowest scoring average.ROOKIE SAVES HIS LEAD The Canadian rookie Mackenzie Hughes atoned for a triple bogey that had cost him the lead by making a tough par save and three birdies for a two-under 68 at the RSM Classic in St. Simons Island, Ga. He will take a one-shot advantage into the final round. Hughes was at 16-under 196.AdvertisementBilly Horschel, who has not won since capturing the FedEx Cup at the Tour Championship two years ago, holed a 10-foot birdie putt on the 18th hole of the Seaside course at Sea Island for a 65. Camilo Villegas overcame a double bogey early in his round and finished with four straight birdies for a 64.Joining them at 15-under 197 was another PGA Tour rookie, C. T. Pan of Taiwan. He shot a 67 playing in the final group.Jeff Carter scored his team-high seventh goal of the season, and Peter Budaj made 21 saves to help the Los Angeles Kings beat the visiting Devils, 4-2. Tanner Pearson, Alec Martinez and Jake Muzzin also scored for the Kings. John Moore and Adam Lappin scored for the Devils, who have lost their last two games after winning five straight.SABRES’ SKID ENDS Cal O’Reilly scored the lone goal in a shootout, and the Buffalo Sabres ended a six-game losing streak with a 2-1 home victory over the Pittsburgh Penguins. Sabres goalie Anders Nilsson stopped 46 shots through overtime and all three shootout attempts he faced.Daniel Suarez won the Xfinity Series title at Homestead-Miami Speedway in Florida, becoming the first foreign champion in a Nascar national series.Suarez, a 24-year-old from Mexico, won Saturday’s race, the Ford EcoBoost 300 — the season finale — besting his fellow championship contenders Elliott Sadler, Justin Allgaier and Erik Jones on a restart with three laps to go.A version of this article appears in print on November 20, 2016, on Page SP9 of the New York edition with the headline: Home, for United, Is Where the Draw Is.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.