By HUW RICHARDSMAY 12, 2016
LONDON — The winner hoisting the European Rugby Champions Cup will be doing it for the first time Saturday, but that doesn’t mean it will be a surprise.Neither can be considered an upstart like this season’s English Premier League soccer champion Leicester City.The Paris club Racing 92 will be playing in its first final and London-based Saracens in its second. Both are among a select group of clubs, dominated by Toulon and Clermont Auvergne, that have overpowered the competition since the Irish provincial franchises ceased to be financially competitive.But this season, Clermont was surprisingly eliminated at the pool stage, while Toulon’s run of three consecutive titles ended when it lost to Racing in the quarterfinals. Now that both finalists have seized their chance, they don’t intend to go away anytime soon.Advertisement“Of course you want to win it. But if we do, I’m hoping that it’s the start of something, rather than the end,” said Saracens Coach Mark McCall during a news conference Tuesday. “We’ve got a really brilliant age profile in our squad, we’ve got people signed up for the long term, people who are unbelievably ambitious and hungry to get better who are in their early and mid-20s, so I believe we’re going to be playing in a lot more of these matches.”AdvertisementWith Racing 92 President Jacky Lorenzetti outlining limitless ambitions with the team’s move from the 109-year-old Stade Colombes to a new, state-of-the-art, multipurpose venue next season, these teams could be seeing a lot of each other over the next few years.They already know a fair amount about each other; the final in Lyon, France, will be their sixth meeting in the Champions Cup since 2010. Saracens are 4-1 in those meetings, winning the last four, including their quarterfinal matchup in 2014. Most games have been squeakers, though, with the margin of victory reaching double digits only once.Forget trash-talking; the tone this week has been respectful.“They’re a great side, strong throughout and their players have played a big part for England this year,” Mike Phillips, the veteran Welsh scrumhalf for Racing 92, said in a conference call Tuesday. “They’ll be full of confidence. They have a superb defense, with great line speed and tackling. We have to dominate the breakdown, get to the advantage line and kick well, be really accurate and make the most of what is likely to be a small number of opportunities.”While French teams traditionally are known for having strong attacks, Saracens have been the best this season, averaging 34.1 points a game, while Racing has the toughest defense, conceding only 12.8 points a game.Saracens flyhalf Owen Farrell is the leading scorer, with 106 points, while the American wing Chris Wyles has scored the most tries, 5.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.Two Racing players lead in tackles, with the Welsh lock forward Luke Charteris having 107, while the New Zealand back-row forward Chris Masoe has 87.Saracens are looking to become the first team to finish the tournament with a perfect 9-0 record.While Saracens have been built around a youth movement, developing players like the 21-year-old lock Maro Itoje, Racing has bolstered itself by signing veterans from New Zealand. The 32-year-old wing Joe Rokocoko, who scored 47 tries for the New Zealand All Blacks, recalled his decision last summer to sign with Racing.“I could either sit back and enjoy the sunset or have another go at competitive rugby, and I made the right choice,” Rokocoko said. “This is an incredible opportunity for any player, the biggest trophy there is apart from the World Cup.”AdvertisementMasoe, 36, brought expertise he gained at Toulon, his previous club.“He knows how to prepare and what to do in the week — when you train, and he’s often last in doing something extra, and when to switch off and joke about,” Rokocoko said. “The young players listen, because he delivers on the weekends.”The Kiwi who attracts most of the attention is, of course, Daniel Carter, the current and three-time world rugby player of the year, the career leading scorer in international matches and a World Cup champion.“He’s brought touch, experience and know-how, and he’s fit in well. It’s all been good,” said Phillips.Carter raises a distinct set of problems for opponents, said McCall, the Saracens coach, who will try to limit his influence on Saturday.“If we can do that, it means our pack have got on top in the scrum, in the lineout,” McCall said. “It means we’ve put a little more pressure on him than he’s experienced before. But if you run down his channel and think you’re going to shake him up, you’re not going to.”Carter will undoubtedly have a serious influence on Saturday’s final. But when in his long career has he not?A version of this article appears in print on May 13, 2016, in The International New York Times.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.