
On Pro Basketball By                     
 ANDREW KEH
 
MAY 11, 2016
SAN ANTONIO — Things were not quite supposed to play out this way. The San Antonio Spurs were not supposed to be one loss away from elimination in the Western Conference semifinals.San Antonio won a remarkable 67 games during the regular season, and its excellence this season was overshadowed only because the Golden State Warriors effervescently compiled an N.B.A.-record 73 wins. In any case, these were the two best teams, destined to fight for the conference crown.Yet that foreordained matchup is in peril, because San Antonio finds itself fighting for its playoff life, trailing its best-of-seven series, three games to two, against the Oklahoma City Thunder.The meeting between the Spurs and the Thunder (55 wins) was presented as this: A well-drilled veteran team with a resplendent offense and the league’s best defense meeting a superstar pair, Kevin Durant and Russell Westbrook, who lacked much support.AdvertisementYet the Thunder duo has gained the upper hand, carrying the team to a win away from the conference finals. For neutral fans, the series has been a blessing. It has been a showcase of high-intensity, high-skill basketball. The Spurs and their fans, however, have been unnerved.AdvertisementKawhi Leonard was asked late Tuesday night whether he found it surprising to be one game from elimination. “Definitely,” Leonard said. “Your goal is to play till June. But it’s not over yet, so I’m not thinking about that. I’m thinking about winning.”The Spurs lost one game at home in the regular season. They have lost two at home in this series after falling in Game 5 on Tuesday night. Whatever happens next, they have been made to look mortal. Embodying the Spurs’ unsteady state has been Tim Duncan, the longtime franchise cornerstone, who has suddenly been recast as a feeble figure.Duncan played more than 28 minutes Tuesday, but he made just one of six shots. He dunked in the first half, drawing raucous cheers from the crowd, which seemed intent on sending him positive vibes. He blocked Westbrook at the rim with just under five minutes to go and received more booming applause from the crowd moments later as he took a seat on the bench.Duncan, who could decide to retire this summer, did not speak to the news media after the loss. It may end up being his last game at AT&T Center.Get the big sports news, highlights and analysis from Times journalists, with distinctive takes on games and some behind-the-scenes surprises, delivered to your inbox every week.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.“It’s not over by any means,” the Spurs’ Danny Green said. “Stay positive. Bring the energy. We’ve won there before. We have to do it again or we’re going home, simple as that.”Oklahoma City has made life tough for San Antonio, but every game, except San Antonio’s Game 1 victory, has been close. And after each game, it has been the same routine: dissecting some small play here, another minor call there, looking at various little things that might have influenced the result.The referees, for instance, have been under the microscope. Spurs Coach Gregg Popovich does not often talk about officiating after the fact, but he said Tuesday that it was “obvious” that Leonard had fouled  Westbrook in  a late noncall situation, when the Spurs needed to foul. And he said he was “concerned” about a late foul call Durant had drawn, when it appeared that Green had been tripped into him.Advertisement“But every call doesn’t get called,” Popovich said. “That’s the way the game is.”The Spurs have not quite looked like themselves. They had 39 assists in Game 1. They had 19 each in Games 2 and 3. After notching just 12 in their loss in Game 4, they had 19 again Tuesday. Popovich this week pointed out that game play, as a whole, tends to slow down during the playoffs. But he acknowledged the team needed to be sharper moving the ball.After Game 5, the Spurs were ruing their inability to rebound. The Thunder beat them in that category, 54-36.“That’s hurt us through the entire series,” Popovich said.The Spurs have struggled of late to find good shots. LaMarcus Aldridge has symbolized the downturn. He made 33 of 44 field-goal attempts through the first two games, scoring 79 points, while confounding the Thunder with his one-on-one moves. In Games 3, 4 and 5, though, he faded, making only 22 of 60 shots and totaling 64 points.“We all have to put pressure on ourselves,” Aldridge said. “We have to go out there and play like it’s our lives on the line. We have to compete at a high level and do anything we have to do to get the win.”On top of all that, Oklahoma City has looked poised. Durant has played majestically, particularly in Game 4, when he put on a scoring exhibition. Westbrook has been impossible to corral. Even when he has not shot the ball well, his constant motion to the basket has punctured the Spurs’ defensive shape. His rebounding was cited by several Spurs players after the game.Yet amid all this, Popovich was defiant when asked how much credit Thunder Coach Billy Donovan deserved after pushing the Spurs to the brink of elimination.“I didn’t know the series was over yet,” Popovich said.A version of this article appears in print on May 12, 2016, on Page B12 of the New York edition with the headline: Seemingly Invincible, Spurs Now Look Mortal.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.See More »