By TYLER KEPNERMAY 12, 2016
It is a rarer feat than a perfect game, a performance even the greatest strikeout pitcher in major league history, Nolan Ryan, could never achieve. On Wednesday night, Max Scherzer of the Washington Nationals struck out 20 batters in a nine-inning start.Scherzer overwhelmed the Detroit Tigers in a 3-2 victory at Nationals Park. He tied the record set by Roger Clemens in 1986 and later matched by Clemens in 1996, Kerry Wood in 1998 and Randy Johnson — in the first nine innings of an extra-inning game — in 2001.Just as in those games, Scherzer issued no walks in his masterpiece. He threw 119 pitches and allowed six hits and two runs, one coming on a homer by J. D. Martinez to start the ninth inning. Scherzer struck out Miguel Cabrera, allowed a single and then fanned Justin Upton to tie the mark.One out remained, giving Scherzer a chance to hold the record on his own. But James McCann bounced to third base for a game-ending forceout at second.Advertisement“I think it was about the eighth inning when I punched out somebody and they said that was 18 — that was the first time I heard the number, so I knew I had a shot at going out for the ninth and 20,” Scherzer told reporters after the game.AdvertisementA different Washington pitcher, Tom Cheney of the old Senators, holds the single-game record for strikeouts, with 21, set on Sept. 12, 1962, in Baltimore. But Cheney, who went 19-29 in an otherwise uneventful career, needed 16 innings to do it.Get the big sports news, highlights and analysis from Times journalists, with distinctive takes on games and some behind-the-scenes surprises, delivered to your inbox every week.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.Ryan, the career strikeout leader with 5,714, had four games with 19 strikeouts — three in 1974 and one in 1977. But he pitched more than nine innings in three of those games.Scherzer joined Washington before last season, signing a seven-year, $210 million contract after seven strong seasons, mostly with the Tigers. He won a Cy Young Award for Detroit but had completed only one of his 198 career starts.Now, at 31, Scherzer is more durable than ever, and his highlights are more remarkable, including two no-hitters last season. In his first, on June 20, he nearly authored the 24th perfect game in major league history, before losing his bid by hitting Pittsburgh’s Jose Tabata with a pitch with two outs in the ninth. In his second, against the Mets at Citi Field on Oct. 3, Scherzer tied Ryan’s 1973 record for strikeouts in a no-hitter, with 17.It has not always been easy for Scherzer. In his last start, against the Chicago Cubs at Wrigley Field, he allowed seven runs in five innings. The last time he had pitched in Washington, on April 26 against Philadelphia, Scherzer needed 116 pitches to plod through five innings.“My fastball’s in a little bit of a funk,” he said that night, explaining that he was not getting the proper arm extension to attack the strike zone at his usual rate.Scherzer changed all that on Wednesday, attacking the zone ferociously, leading to a game for the ages. He threw 96 strikes and just 23 balls and got a salute on Twitter from Wood.“Congratulations to @Max_Scherzer on an impressive and dominant performance tonight,” Wood wrote. “Welcome to the club!” He followed with a hashtag and a word to describe Scherzer’s stuff: filthy.A version of this article appears in print on May 12, 2016, on Page B12 of the New York edition with the headline: Scherzer’s Gem Is a Rare One, With 20 Strikeouts.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.