By BEN SHPIGELFEB. 29, 2016
The Jets’ contract impasse with the standout defensive lineman Muhammad Wilkerson, spanning years and regimes, will reach an expected stage Tuesday. The Jets intend to designate Wilkerson as their franchise player before the 4 p.m. deadline, according to a person in football with knowledge of their plans, in a maneuver that allows them to retain his rights while extending the window for brokering a long-term contract.For two years, Wilkerson has been seeking an extension, and he and the Jets have differing views on his value. He skipped all of the team’s voluntary off-season workouts last year because he was irked by the pace of negotiations, and this latest development is sure to bother him further.Get the big sports news, highlights and analysis from Times journalists, with distinctive takes on games and some behind-the-scenes surprises, delivered to your inbox every week.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.With the franchise tag, the Jets and Wilkerson, 26, have until July 15 to reach a multiyear contract. If the sides cannot reach an agreement, Wilkerson would make $15.7 million next season and then become an unrestricted free agent in 2017.Among General Manager Mike Maccagnan’s off-season decisions, opting to franchise Wilkerson ranks as an easy one; the Jets were not about to let one of their best defensive players explore free agency without at least positioning themselves for potential compensation.But Maccagnan now faces the challenge of determining whether to explore trading Wilkerson, who lost some leverage in May when the Jets used the sixth overall pick on another lineman, Leonard Williams, whom they expect to blossom into a star. A deal would free up that $15.7 million, but it would not be easy to consummate: Not only must the other team be willing to meet Wilkerson’s salary demands, it must also compensate the Jets to their satisfaction, with draft picks or players.Under the terms of the nonexclusive tag, Wilkerson will be permitted to negotiate with other teams. The Jets can match any offer, and in the event that Wilkerson signs elsewhere, they would receive two first-round picks.A version of this article appears in print on March 1, 2016, on Page B10 of the New York edition with the headline: Jets Are Said to Be Planning Franchise Tag for Wilkerson .  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.