By ANDREW KEHFEB. 28, 2016
Amar’e Stoudemire sat down on the floor of the visitors’ locker room at Madison Square Garden, stretched his legs into a computerized massage machine and looked up to greet the dozen reporters hovering in a circle above him.Stoudemire played four and a half seasons with the Knicks before negotiating a buyout last year to join the Dallas Mavericks, and on Sunday night, as a member of the Miami Heat, he was returning to play at the Garden for the first time since leaving New York.Stoudemire joked that he felt lost when he arrived at the arena. Yet the time away did not appear to dim any of his perspective on his former team.In a wide-ranging discussion before the Heat’s 98-81 victory, Stoudemire lamented the decline of the Knicks during the past two seasons, appeared to lob some subtle criticisms of Carmelo Anthony and reproached his former teammates for their halfhearted embrace of the triangle offense.Advertisement“It’s been a lot going on,” Stoudemire said of the Knicks, “and it hasn’t really been great over the years, and it’s hard for me to watch from the outside looking in because I was so involved in creating a positive atmosphere around the Knicks, and then now, it seems that went the opposite way.”AdvertisementWith the loss, the Knicks fell to 25-36. They have dropped 14 of their past 17 contests. Before the game, Kurt Rambis, who has frequently invoked the postseason as a goal since becoming interim coach on Feb. 8, tempered those expectations.“I know it’s a long shot,” he said. “It’s not like I’m delusional or anything.”The Knicks appear set to miss the playoffs for the third straight season. Stoudemire said he was proud to have helped begin a revival in the Knicks organization when he arrived in 2010. But things have been in decline since a 2013 run to the Eastern Conference semifinals.According to Stoudemire, one of the problems, at least last season, was that the team did not completely buy in to the triangle offense, which the Knicks installed when Phil Jackson took over as team president.“I think maybe three-fourths of the team thought it was great,” said Stoudemire, who counted himself among those who liked it. “But if you don’t have a full team that buys into a system, it’s never going to pan out.”Stoudemire implied that internal disharmony wounded the Knicks in the final years of his tenure. He suggested, for example, that the Knicks did not make a greater effort to re-sign Jeremy Lin after the 2011-12 season because of antagonism in the locker room. His comments aligned with a narrative that players, most importantly Anthony, were uncomfortable with the attention paid to Lin during his breakout season.“If he stayed, it would have been cool, but everyone wasn’t a fan of him being the new star, so he didn’t stay long,” Stoudemire said of Lin, heaping praise on his work ethic. “A lot of times, you’ve got to enjoy someone else’s success, and that wasn’t the case for us during that stretch. You’ve got to enjoy that. You’ve got to let that player enjoy himself and cherish those moments. But he was becoming a star, and I don’t think everyone was pleased with that.”Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.Each time Stoudemire was asked about Anthony, his response alluded to the popular notions of Anthony’s shortcomings.For example, when Stoudemire was asked if he felt sympathy for Anthony, who has expressed frustration with losing, he said: “When you get involved in a situation, you have to take ownership of it. You have to make sure you make the right decisions for your team and teammates. You have to become a complete player in order to bring your team out of a rut. Everyone can’t do it. It’s not always easy.”AdvertisementLater, Stoudemire was asked whether he might have any late-career advice for Anthony, who would have to waive a no-trade clause to leave the Knicks this summer.“You have options,” Stoudemire said. “If you want to win, if that’s the main priority, if physically you can’t do it as a player and make your teammates better and get them to a point where they can win, then you might want to surround yourself around a team that’s built to win.”After the game, Anthony mostly brushed aside questions about Stoudemire’s comments.“What happened last year was a blur to me, bro, to be honest with you,” he said.And he seemed incredulous when a reporter asked him about Lin. “Still?” he asked, adding that he doubted Stoudemire was talking about him.Stoudemire said he followed the logic about finding a new situation as he felt his years in the league take their toll. And it was the same logic, to an extent, that compelled Joe Johnson to negotiate a buyout of the remainder of his contract with the Nets and sign with the Heat last week.“This is my 15th season,” Johnson said in the Heat locker room before the game. “I had a chance to get out and get a chance to play with a playoff-contending team. Obviously, I looked into it, talked with my agent, my family, and we all came to an agreement that it was probably the best thing to do.”Johnson started for the Heat and scored 12 points. Dwyane Wade scored 26 to lead Miami, while Stoudemire added 8 points and 7 rebounds.Anthony played a game-high 41 minutes and scored a team-high 25 points. But it was not enough. He dropped his head and put his hands on his hips as a “Let’s go, Heat!” chant filled the arena with less than a minute to play.An article in some editions on Monday about the Knicks’ 98-81 loss to the Miami Heat misstated, in some copies, the Knicks’ progress in the 2013 playoffs. They reached the semifinals — not the finals — in the Eastern Conference.A version of this article appears in print on February 29, 2016, on Page D3 of the New York edition with the headline: Stoudemire Laments Knicks’ Decline, Then Helps Sustain It .  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.