By THE ASSOCIATED PRESSNOV. 19, 2016
LONDON — Andy Murray and Novak Djokovic will have a season-ending showdown for the ATP World Tour Finals title and the No. 1 ranking.Murray and Djokovic, the world’s top two players, reached the final, to be played Sunday at O2 Arena, with victories on Saturday that could not have been more different. Murray survived a match point to beat Milos Raonic in 3 hours 38 minutes — the longest three-set match in ATP finals history — and Djokovic needed just 66 minutes to dispatch Kei Nishikori.Murray arrived at the tournament needing only to do better than Djokovic to finish the year ranked No. 1, a spot he took over from Djokovic after winning the Paris Masters two weeks ago.Now, they will meet in Sunday’s final. It will be a fitting end to a season that began with Djokovic’s quest to hold all four major titles at once — which he completed by beating Murray in the French Open final — and ended with Murray’s remarkable run and his ascent to the top of the rankings.Advertisement“This has never happened in the history of tennis,” Djokovic said. “I’m privileged to be part of the history. This is one of the biggest matches we will ever play against each other.”AdvertisementDjokovic may be in better shape for Sunday, having overwhelmed Nishikori, 6-1, 6-1. Nishikori held his serve just once in the match.“I pretty much executed everything I tactically planned to do,” Djokovic said. “My level had been going in the right direction. I’m very glad I get to experience this feeling on the court. Now it’s coming up to the last match of the year, the match everybody anticipated.”Get the big sports news, highlights and analysis from Times journalists, with distinctive takes on games and some behind-the-scenes surprises, delivered to your inbox every week.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.Murray, who had won all six of his meetings with Raonic this year, including a straight-sets victory in the Wimbledon final, twice squandered chances while serving for the match in the third set. But he converted on his fourth match point during a tiebreaker to win, 5-7, 7-6 (5), 7-6 (9).“It was unbelievably tough,” Murray said. “I had to fight very, very hard. Being broken twice serving for the match was frustrating. It was one of the harder matches I’ve played indoors. They are never this long.”Murray needs one last push to cap his stunning second half to 2016, in which he won at Wimbledon and the Olympics before topping the rankings for the first time.“I’m tired,” Murray said. “I’ve played so much tennis the last few months. I’ll just give my best effort tomorrow. It’s going to be tough, obviously, but I’ll give my best shot.”A version of this article appears in print on November 20, 2016, on Page SP10 of the New York edition with the headline: Murray and Djokovic Aim for Dual Prize.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.