By DAVE CALDWELLFEB. 28, 2016
Five months after signing a seven-year, $57.75 million contract extension, center Eric Staal beat Martin Brodeur with a wrist shot with 31.7 seconds remaining in regulation to lift the Carolina Hurricanes over the stunned Devils in Game 7 of a first-round playoff series in 2009.Staal, then 24, had scored 40 goals in the regular season and seemed worth every penny. The Hurricanes made it to the Eastern Conference finals that year but were swept by Sidney Crosby and the Pittsburgh Penguins, the eventual Stanley Cup champions.Staal was named the Hurricanes’ captain the next season and went on to earn a reputation for his versatility and durability. But a 4-1 home loss to the Penguins in 2009 would prove to be his final Stanley Cup playoff game with the Hurricanes. Now he has a chance to return after being traded to the contending Rangers on Sunday for a player and two future draft picks.Carolina has become a perennial also-ran, and a playoff berth for the team this year appears to be in serious doubt. Staal’s production has also declined, with 96 goals in 349 games in the last five seasons — 10 in 63 games this season.AdvertisementHis big contract was to expire at the end of this season, so Carolina reluctantly decided to move on. And so had Staal, 31, who waived the no-trade clause in his contract to join the Rangers and his younger brother by three years, defenseman Marc Staal.AdvertisementIn return, the Hurricanes will receive the Rangers’ second-round picks in the 2016 and 2017 drafts and forward Aleksi Saarela, a third-round pick last year. The Hurricanes will pay half of Staal’s remaining 2015-16 salary.“We’re looking at a player that we think could be energized by this trade,” Rangers General Manager Jeff Gorton said Sunday in a conference call.Although Gorton hinted that the Rangers might also pick up a fringe player before the trade deadline Monday at 3 p.m., his decision to acquire Staal qualifies as the team’s bold move to fortify its roster for what the Rangers hope will be another deep playoff run.The latest runs have been stirring, but not deep enough. The Rangers have made it to the Eastern Conference finals in three of the last four years, but they reached the Stanley Cup finals only in 2014, losing to the Los Angeles Kings in five games.Sign up to receive an email from The New York Times as soon as important news breaks around the world.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.With Henrik Lundqvist, their record-setting goaltender, turning 34 on Wednesday, the perception is that the window is closing on serious Cup runs with the current core, which includes Marc Staal.“All of his experiences are going to help us,” Gorton said of Eric Staal.He also said that the Rangers would not trade defenseman Keith Yandle, another pending unrestricted free agent. Yandle recently became more valuable after filling in for Ryan McDonagh, the team’s captain and top defenseman, who missed six of eight games with two injuries.Yandle was acquired at the trade deadline last year from the Arizona Coyotes for the prospect Anthony Duclair, defenseman John Moore and a first-round pick. Until Yandle stepped in for McDonagh, it appeared to be a bad trade for the Rangers.Advertisement“We looked at it like we’d have two good runs with Keith,” Gorton said, referring to the playoffs, “and that’s how it looks like it’s going to work out.”Gorton projected Eric Staal as a “top-nine forward” for the Rangers. He is good at face-offs, can also play wing and can kill penalties — a boost to a team that ranked 26th among 30 teams entering Sunday. Moreover, Staal is a leader.Two other Staal brothers, Jordan and Jared, also went from the family’s sod farm in Thunder Bay, Ontario, to the N.H.L.; in April 2013, Eric, Jordan and Jared played on the same line with the Hurricanes.“You never want to have to do this, but you’re looking at the big picture, and we couldn’t get comfortable on a contract term,” Ron Francis, Carolina’s general manager and a former teammate of Eric Staal’s, said at a news conference Sunday in Raleigh, N.C. “You can’t lose an asset like that for nothing. It’s too important to the franchise moving forward.”Before he was traded, Eric Staal had reportedly been seeking a contract extension with the Hurricanes that would pay him about $9 million a year. When asked if he might be more than just a rental — playing for the Rangers only until the end of his contract — Gorton said, “I think we’ll take it as it goes here.”Eric Staal did help the Hurricanes win the Cup in 2006. And in a February 2011 game between the Hurricanes and the Rangers in Raleigh, he hit his brother Marc with such force that Marc sustained a concussion, the aftereffects of which kept him out for half of the next season.So it is possible to say that Eric Staal, who has already been assigned sweater No. 12 and is expected to be at Madison Square Garden for the Rangers’ morning skate Monday before their game against the Columbus Blue Jackets, is competitive enough to deck one of his brothers.Whether he can help propel the Rangers to their first Cup in 22 years remains to be seen.A version of this article appears in print on February 29, 2016, on Page D5 of the New York edition with the headline: In Uniting Staal Brothers, Rangers Add Heft for Playoff Run.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.