AdvertisementSupported byOn BaseballBy Tyler KepnerPORT ST. LUCIE, Fla. — The Mets would not have reached the World Series without Daniel Murphy. His joy ride through the National League playoffs, when he belted seven homers in nine games and hit .421, was every hitter’s dream.“Oh, there’s no better feeling as a baseball player,” said Neil Walker, who has replaced Murphy as the Mets’ second baseman. “You’re not even thinking; you’re just stepping into the box and saying, ‘I better get ready for fastballs, and if I see it in a zone, I’m going to put a barrel on it.’ When you’re doing that, balls are going in the gaps, going out of the stadium, and you’re kind of shocking yourself.”Walker played in eight playoff games for Pittsburgh the last three seasons, hitting .065 with a single and a double. That small sample is no more a reflection on Walker than the N.L. playoffs were on Murphy. Any good major league hitter, in theory, could get hot or cold for a stretch. Murphy showed both extremes in one postseason; in the World Series, he was 3 for 20 with seven strikeouts and a costly error.The Mets moved on without him, though Murphy, after a practice with the Washington Nationals in Viera, Fla., on Saturday, said he did not feel rejected.“I mean, they made an offer, the qualifying offer,” said Murphy, who signed a three-year, $37.5 million contract with the Nationals. “The biggest thing that Sandy was looking for, they really liked Dilson, and they should because he’s a good player. I think they wanted some flexibility, and Neil Walker provided that.”Sandy Alderson, the Mets’ general manager, did not give the job to Dilson Herrera, who will turn 22 this week. Manager Terry Collins said it could have been a burden on Herrera to replace an accomplished veteran like Murphy. Walker — who will be a free agent after this season, possibly clearing the spot for Herrera — will be unfazed.“Neil’s got pretty good credentials, too,” Collins said. “He can hold them up against anybody’s. We’re very, very lucky to get him, and when we got him, we were very excited, because we think, hey, look, we’re still pretty good at that spot.”They are basically unchanged. Both players are 30 years old with seven seasons in the majors. Advanced metrics place both among the lower tier of defensive second basemen. Walker has a .769 career on-base plus slugging percentage, Murphy .755. Walker has a .272 career batting average, Murphy .288. Neither attempts many stolen bases. They even wear the same uniform number this season: 20.“The types of things he brings, kind of an offensive mind-set to second base and a grinder mentality from a defensive standpoint — and an offensive standpoint, for that matter — is what I try to do as well,” Walker said. “There’s no flash to my game. There’s nothing special that I do. I just try to do things the right way.”One difference is that Walker switch-hits, while Murphy bats only left-handed. Walker batted .237 with no homers as a right-handed hitter last season, and he has sought to improve from that side in his early sessions with the hitting coach Kevin Long.Walker said he wanted to simplify his right-handed swing, not overhaul it, concentrating on planting his front foot in time to stay back and finish his swing. His bad habits, he said, can be fixed.“I know it’s in there, I know I’ve done it in the past, but I need to do a better job of doing that,” Walker said. “But I know that if I’m healthy, I’m going to hit between .265 and .290, I’m going to drive in runs. I can hit in the middle of the order, and I know I can drop some balls out of the ballpark. That’s been what I’ve done.”Until now, Walker had done it all in Pittsburgh, where he was born and where his ties run deeper than the Penguins toiletry kit he keeps in his locker.Walker’s father, Tom, a former major league pitcher, played winter ball in Puerto Rico with the Pirates star Roberto Clemente. On New Year’s Eve 1972, he helped Clemente load supplies onto a plane for a mission to help victims of an earthquake in Nicaragua. Walker offered to join Clemente, but he was single, and Clemente told him to stay and enjoy the holiday. Clemente was killed when the overloaded plane crashed just after takeoff.“My dad says he remembers going to celebrate, then waking up the next day and it being like the pope died in Puerto Rico,” Walker told The Times, in 2013. “He said there were people on the beaches for days upon weeks, looking out, just waiting for something, for part of the plane to rise up from the depths.”Neil Walker would become part of the Pirates team that ended a drought of 20 losing seasons to capture the last three N.L. wild cards. He expected to be traded this winter, he said, but when David Wright called in December to welcome him to the Mets, it took a few days to process.“When the dust settled, I couldn’t have been happier with where I landed,” Walker said. “I thought this was a very good fit for me, a very good clubhouse, and I thought I could provide value to this team.”Walker should provide the same value, roughly, as the player he replaces. If he helps lift the Mets back to October, he will have done his job. As for finding another playoff dynamo, the Mets will take their chances once they get there.Advertisement