By SETH BERKMANMAY 12, 2016
A troubling, recurring theme has emerged in the first innings of Michael Pineda’s starts this season at Yankee Stadium.The scene often includes the pitching coach Larry Rothschild making trips to the mound and Pineda looking toward the outfield and wearing a sullen expression, with his hands on his hips.On Wednesday, Pineda gave up a first-inning home run with two outs for the fifth time in five home games this season. The three-run shot by Kansas City Royals catcher Salvador Perez was part of a four-run inning as the Yankees fell, 7-3.Pineda was as hittable as a piñata, with Alcides Escobar leading off with a single. Escobar was caught stealing second base, but Pineda put himself in another hole by hitting Lorenzo Cain, who had blasted three home runs on Tuesday. A single and a walk to load the bases brought Rothschild out for another chat. Pineda responded by allowing a sacrifice fly by Alex Gordon before Perez bashed his home run.AdvertisementThe barrage left Pineda with an E.R.A. of 21.60 in first innings at home. He departed in the sixth, having thrown a season-high 114 pitches and allowed six runs.Advertisement“I tried to do the best in the first inning, but I’m hanging my slider,” said Pineda, who took several deep breaths before answering questions.Manager Joe Girardi said Pineda’s slider had no movement in the first.“It was up in the zone, and it turned into a big home run for them, and then he settled in, so we’ve got to get him going,’’ he said. “We’ve got to get him going early.”When asked whether there was any thought of taking him out of the rotation, Girardi said: “That’s nothing that we’ve talked about. We look at Michael as starter, and we think Michael can be a really good starter.”Get the big sports news, highlights and analysis from Times journalists, with distinctive takes on games and some behind-the-scenes surprises, delivered to your inbox every week.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.The Yankees’ offense cut the deficit to 4-3, led by Carlos Beltran’s 399th career homer, but Pineda unraveled once more in the sixth, unable again to secure a crucial third out.After walking Christian Colon and giving up a single to Jarrod Dyson, Pineda was replaced by Nick Goody, who hit Escobar to load the bases and then served up a 2-2 pitch that Cain lined up the middle to bring in two more Royals runs.After scoring 16 runs in the first two games of their series against Kansas City, the Yankees’ offense was able to consistently put runners on against Yordano Ventura but finished 1 for 9 with runners in scoring position against him.Dustin Ackley batted fifth and played first base for the second straight night. Before the game, Girardi said he planned to give Mark Teixeira two days’ rest beginning Tuesday to address neck spasms.AdvertisementThe Yankees’ overall health appears to be improving. Jacoby Ellsbury ran the bases before the game, the next step in his rehabilitation from a strained right hip, but he has yet to attempt to sprint at full speed.“He is making progress,” said Girardi, who added that he hoped to have Ellsbury back in the lineup this weekend. “He is not ready to play.’’C. C. Sabathia also confirmed that he planned to throw 30 to 40 pitches in a bullpen session this week and that he anticipated coming off the 15-day disabled list when he is eligible on May 20.Girardi said he did not foresee Sabathia or Alex Rodriguez spending more than the minimum 15 days on the disabled list. Rodriguez has been inactive since May 4 with a strained right hamstring.The Yankees have played better recently without some of their biggest expected contributors — and biggest contracts — taking two games from the Red Sox and Royals. But they have yet to win three consecutive games this season, falling to 0-5 in such situations after Wednesday’s loss.A version of this article appears in print on May 12, 2016, on Page B16 of the New York edition with the headline: Pineda Again Yields Big First-Inning Blow as Royals Drop Yankees.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.