By DAVID WALDSTEINMAY 11, 2016
LOS ANGELES — A long-awaited Dodger victory over the Mets finally came late Tuesday when Trayce Thompson came off the bench and delivered the decisive blow with two outs in the bottom of the ninth inning.Neither team had scored a run for almost seven full innings, but Thompson hit a pinch-hit home run off reliever Hansel Robles to give the Dodgers a 3-2 victory.It was the first game-ending pinch homer by the Dodgers since September 2013, and it delighted the fans, who waited around until Thompson’s teammate Justin Turner doused him with a cold drink bucket to celebrate.The game had elements similar to the decisive Game 5 of the teams’ division series last October, including the same score, only reversed.AdvertisementThat was the last time Jacob deGrom had pitched at Dodger Stadium until Tuesday. Though the playoff game was not deGrom’s most dominating performance, it was one of his most courageous and resourceful. He pitched out of precarious difficulties throughout the game to help the Mets reach the National League Championship Series.AdvertisementOn that day, he allowed two runs in the first inning and then threw five scoreless innings to outduel Zack Greinke. On Tuesday, he gave up two runs in the first inning again, then pitched around trouble for six scoreless innings.DeGrom was coming off his first loss of the season, in San Diego, where he allowed three runs in five innings. The first batter Tuesday was Chase Utley, who hit the second pitch he saw into left field for a double.Next up was Corey Seager, who also doubled to left, scoring Utley. Seager took third on Turner’s groundout, then scored on a sacrifice fly by Adrian Gonzalez, giving the Dodgers a quick 2-0 lead.It did not last long. The Mets scored twice in the top of the second, thanks in part to an error by Utley.Yoenis Cespedes opened the inning with a single to left, and Wilmer Flores reached on an infield single. Michael Conforto, dropped to sixth in the batting order against the Dodgers left-hander Alex Wood, hit a bouncer to the right side.Utley fielded it and threw toward second base for a possible force, but his throw sailed wide of the base and into left field, allowing Cespedes to score and Flores to take third. Flores came home on a single to left by Kevin Plawecki, who has a five-game hitting streak.Get the big sports news, highlights and analysis from Times journalists, with distinctive takes on games and some behind-the-scenes surprises, delivered to your inbox every week.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.Wood escaped the rest of the inning without further damage, and the starters settled into a duel after that.AdvertisementAs in Game 5 last October, deGrom squirmed out of trouble with critical pitches at key junctures. For example, the Dodgers had runners at first and second and nobody out in the second inning, but deGrom got Carl Crawford and Wood for the first two outs and then struck out Utley swinging at a breaking ball to end the inning.In the third, deGrom got the first two batters out, but Gonzalez singled and Yasmani Grandal doubled to right. Only Gonzalez’s sluggish pace prevented a run on the play, and then deGrom struck out Joc Pederson looking at a 3-2 changeup, erasing the threat.That was not the only time that Gonzalez’s slow gait would help deGrom. With two outs in the fifth, Gonzalez hit a drive to deep center. Gonzalez jogged as he watched the flight of the ball, which struck the top of the wall about a foot from being a home run.Gonzalez, who turned 34 on Sunday, began to sprint — as best he could — but Cespedes fielded the ball cleanly and made a strong throw to shortstop Asdrubal Cabrera, who applied the tag at second for the final out of the inning.Yasiel Puig hit three balls hard in his first three at-bats against deGrom. The first went for an infield single in the second inning, when David Wright made a diving stop. But Wright’s rushed, underhanded throw dragged first baseman Eric Campbell off the bag.In the fourth, Puig hit a deep ball, but to center, but Cespedes caught it at the wall. In the sixth, Puig hit another sharp liner to center, but Cespedes was there to make that catch, too.After deGrom left, it was Antonio Bastardo’s turn to pitch in and out of trouble. The Dodgers put runners at first and second with nobody out, but Bastardo got out of it with a fielder’s choice, a long fly ball to the warning track by Grandal and a routine groundout by Pederson.Robles took over for Bastardo to start the bottom of the ninth. On the game’s final pitch, Plawecki, the catcher, called for a slider, but Robles shook him off, preferring to throw a fastball.Advertisement“Yeah, I put the slider down,” Plawecki said, “but ultimately I want my pitcher to have conviction in what he’s throwing. If he doesn’t feel comfortable growing the slider in that situation, then I’ve got to trust him on that.”Robles left the ball up in the power zone, though, and Thompson deposited it into the left-field bleachers for his first game-ending home run.Robles, through an interpreter, said he shook off Plawecki’s initial signal to get inside Thompson’s head and confuse him.“But he confused me,’’ Robles said.We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.