
On Soccer By                     
RORY SMITH

APRIL 30, 2017
LIVERPOOL, England — Chelsea’s fans had been working their way through the champion-in-waiting’s songbook for about half an hour, ever since the first goal went in. They touched on all the old, traditional standards — “Now You’re Going to Believe Us,” “We’re Top of the League” and so on — and gave air to more recent releases, too, like “Tottenham Hotspur, We’re Waiting for You.”With every recital, the volume grew louder; with every added goal, too. By the time the final whistle went, and Chelsea’s 3-0 victory against host Everton was confirmed, it sounded as if the faithful had reached the top of their range.Not quite. Chelsea’s players headed to the Bullens Road Paddock — the corner of that atmospheric old stadium where the traveling fans are corralled — as soon as the match was finished. After exchanging pleasantries with Everton’s coaching staff, Antonio Conte, the Chelsea manager, walked over to join his team.Conte is an accomplished rabble-rouser, and evidently things were not sufficiently boisterous for him. When he arrived on the touchline, he raised his arms and pumped his fists, and then jumped on the back of his tallest player, goalkeeper Thibaut Courtois. The fans roared their approval, and the decibel level steadily rose, the songs of defiance and delight echoing around Goodison Park, empty apart from that one ecstatic corner.AdvertisementChelsea will be champion, Conte knows that; this was, by some distance, the most exacting test left to the club, and it was passed with comparative ease. Chelsea now remains 4 points ahead of its nearest challenger, after Tottenham defeated Arsenal in their London derby a couple of hours after Conte’s celebration in Liverpool.AdvertisementThere are four games left. Three of Chelsea’s are at home, against some of the Premier League’s lesser lights. Convention dictates that Conte talk about “taking it game by game,” demanding that his players should not get ahead of themselves, but these are just platitudes now.Perhaps if the situation were reversed — if Tottenham were leading Chelsea — it would be different. Maybe if Liverpool or Manchester City or Arsenal were sitting at the summit, then there would still be room for doubt.All of those teams, after all, are cast in the modern Premier League mold. At their best, they are vibrant, exciting, brash. They are all capable of playing more thrilling soccer than Chelsea, built to be efficient and effective and only rarely beautiful.But they are also more fragile, more flawed, more prone to error, more susceptible to pressure. They might melt in the heat of a title race, even a heavily handicapped one. Chelsea is cut from different cloth.Get the big sports news, highlights and analysis from Times journalists, with distinctive takes on games and some behind-the-scenes surprises, delivered to your inbox every week.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.Given that Conte’s team has now led the Premier League for 20 games — it went to the top of the standings on Dec. 11, and has not offered so much as a sliver of light since — and has looked unassailable for months, it is curious that so much praise it has received has, on the surface, been so qualified.“The main thing you notice about Chelsea this season is that they are very fit,” said Slaven Bilic, the West Ham United manager. “They work hard, they are very solid, and on top of that, they have that quality up front which is basically making the difference in every game. If you compare them with the other title contenders, Chelsea is more solid than Manchester City, Arsenal and Liverpool.”It was not exactly a paean to greatness, and it was far from unique. Manchester United Manager José Mourinho’s suggestion that Chelsea is just an “amazing defensive team” can probably be discounted as partisan politics; Manchester City Manager Pep Guardiola’s assertion that it is only efficiency in “both boxes” that has separated Chelsea from its rivals should be treated with similar caution.AdvertisementBut there are others — far less self-interested observers — who have made the same point. Claude Puel of Southampton described Chelsea as playing with a “strong defense and counterattack.” Bournemouth’s Eddie Howe talks about Chelsea “doing very well, with the system they play.” Burnley’s Sean Dyche centered on the fitness of Conte’s players, too.Everton’s Ronald Koeman, in defeat here Sunday, suggested Chelsea did not need to play “to a high football level to know they will win a game.”“It is a difficult system to play against,” he added. “They are really experienced, they know how to wait, and then they are really clinical. They do not need many chances.”It all sounds, somehow, damningly faint: fixating on how much farther they run, or how well-drilled they are, as if it is somehow cheating, when other, more exciting, more gifted teams would be more romantic or more deserving champions.And yet, in that asterisked praise — Chelsea, the best* team in England (but not the most talented) — is the reason that it is Conte’s team preparing for a parade and not all of the others. The Premier League fetishizes entertainment, an entertainment that depends on a degree of imperfection. It is teams with easily exposed and easily exploited flaws, teams that can touch the sky one minute and plumb the depths the next, that provide compelling viewing.Chelsea under Conte has not bought into any of that. It is ruthless, and it is clinical, and it is all of those things its reluctant admirers mention — and that is why it will be the champion. It does not see entertainment as a virtue. Entertainment is a byproduct, or it is a weakness. Winning — now there’s a virtue.Sunday was a case in point. Chelsea was not spectacular, though its first and third goals showcased the talent at Conte’s disposal. But the club did not panic. It demonstrated its calm and patience — qualities sadly lacking in the saloon-brawl atmosphere of English soccer — and it found its reward.In Conte’s first postmatch interview, after he had left the field, his heart still pulsing, he mentioned his autobiography. Its title is “Head, Heart and Legs.” They are the three qualities he wants his team to embody. Preferably in that order. That’s the order that wins you titles.A version of this article appears in print on May 1, 2017, on Page D5 of the New York edition with the headline: All Tests Met, Chelsea Lacks Only in Flash.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.See More »