By BRUCE WEBERMAY 10, 2016
Ramón Carlín, a Mexican washing-machine magnate who was a 50-year-old sailboat skipper of scant experience when he entered — and unaccountably won — the first Whitbread Round the World Race, a Mother Nature- and death-defying competition of more than seven months and 27,000 nautical miles across storm-tossed and near-frozen seas, died on Thursday in Mexico City. He was 92.His death was confirmed by his son Enrique.Seventeen yachts of varying styles and dimensions set out from Portsmouth, England, on Sept. 8, 1973, for the first Whitbread competition, a much-ballyhooed regatta often called the first fully crewed sailing race to circumnavigate the globe. (Two other boats joined the competition for separate legs later on.)The race, now known as the Volvo Ocean Race and last held in 2014-15, was something of a novelty in its first incarnation; some 3,000 spectator boats followed the contestants out of Portsmouth harbor, and the captains and crews had varying levels of experience. But crews trained by the British Navy as well as some of Europe’s most accomplished sailors, including Chay Blyth, a Scotsman (now known as Sir Charles Blyth), who had previously sailed around the world solo, took part.Certainly Mr. Carlín’s Swan 65 yacht, a 65-foot fiberglass craft christened Sayula II and purchased specifically for the race, was viewed as an inevitable also-ran. Before the start, British newspapers ridiculed the idea of a Mexican yachting crew; at least one cartoon depicted a boatful of clownish, tequila-swilling sombrero-wearers under patched sails.AdvertisementMr. Carlín’s quest did, in fact, seem quixotic. He had begun recreational sailing just two years earlier. His crew, which included family members (his wife was the cook on the first leg of the journey) mixed in with a few experienced salts, were barely acquainted as the race began.AdvertisementAccording to a new documentary about the race, “The Weekend Sailor,” he had sent his son Enrique, then a teenager, to school in Ireland to divert his interest in marrying his under-age girlfriend and was visiting him when he saw an advertisement for the race. He’d been a casual sailor for only a couple of years and didn’t own a boat capable of such a journey.“My father asked, ‘Hey, shall we go around the world?’” Enrique Carlín told the filmmakers. “And I said, ‘Sure, no problem.’” (Enrique would eventually marry the young woman anyway, and some 40 years later they are still together.)Ramón Carlín (pronounced car-LEEN) recalled: “When I registered in the race, they asked me what kind of boat I had. I told them I didn’t have one, but they could be sure I’d be there when the regatta started.” He added: “Since I had almost no experience, I turned to friends. I asked them to recommend a boat for sailing around the world.”That first Whitbread race was conducted in four legs, the winner of each determined by corrected time — that is, actual sailing time minus a handicap factor that is determined by the boat’s dimensions and aspects of its construction — and the winner of the race by accumulated corrected time. The first leg, from Portsmouth to Cape Town, may have been the easiest, though one sailor on a British boat was swept overboard in a fierce squall; he was later rescued.During the second leg — from Cape Town, through raucous seas whipped up by rocketing winds known as the Roaring Forties, to Sydney, Australia — all the boats were savagely battered. Sayula, hit with a mammoth wave, capsized and nearly sank; its crew members were pitched into the sea, but fortunately they were all attached to the boat by safety harnesses, managed to clamber back aboard and survived. In spite of the near tragedy — two sailors on other boats were not as lucky — Sayula won the second leg on corrected time, the only leg in which it finished first.A third sailor — Bernie Hosking, the same man who had earlier been swept overboard and rescued — was lost from Captain Blyth’s boat, Great Britain II, on the third leg, which took the racers from Sydney across the frigid Southern Ocean surrounding Antarctica, around Cape Horn at the southern tip of South America and up the coast to Rio de Janeiro. Rounding the fierce promontory of the Cape, where the hazards include gale-force winds, sleetlike rain and a minefield of icebergs, sailors face some of the most treacherous waters in the world. According to a history of the race on the race’s website, up to that time fewer than 10 sporting yachts had endured the journey.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.On the fourth leg, from Rio across the Atlantic back to Portsmouth, several boats, including Sayula, were hampered by becalmed winds. The start of the final leg had a staggered start — the larger, more powerful boats started later — so they would arrive at the finish more or less together. Fourteen boats completed the race. Sayula’s time, 155 days 9 hours, became a corrected time of 133 days 13 hours, nearly two days faster than the runner-up.“The winning difference was my boat and that crew,” Mr. Carlín said afterward. “We had no time to train. My plan was to get to know the crew and teach them how to manage the boat during the first leg, but all of them turned out to be very good.”AdvertisementRamón Carlín Lima was born on Aug. 31, 1923, in Puebla, east of Mexico City, where he spent most of his life. Though his mother, Magdalena Lima, was a teacher, he never finished high school; he moved to Mexico City in his midteens and worked in a soap factory after the death of his father, Moises Carlín, who had run a grocery in Puebla.In the late 1940s, he was selling household goods — cookware, glasses, small appliances — door to door, and in 1960 he founded a highly profitable company, Comercial Doméstica, that sold washing machines and other home appliances.Mr. Carlín’s first marriage ended in divorce. In addition to his son Enrique, his survivors include his wife, Francisca Larios; another son, Octavio; six daughters, María Teresa, Gloria, Alicia, Emma, Marta and Lourdes; 19 grandchildren; and 22 great-grandchildren.Mr. Carlín may have been an unlikely adventurer, but by the early 1970s he was nonetheless seeking an adventure. And though his seagoing experience was minimal, his leadership instincts and skills were not. He made sure that the crew had creature comforts: The boat was fitted out with proper berths, a bar and a galley, and supplied with food and drink far more appealing than normal sea rations.“He was enthusiastic; he did everything in a first-class way,” Bob Martin, an American who served on the crew, said in an appreciation of Mr. Carlín published on the race website after his death. “He cared about us, we had the best food and the boat was beautifully equipped.”The veteran sailors on the crew also gave him credit for delegating properly, keeping his cool and being willing to perform the rudimentary but necessary tasks that many captains find beneath them.“If someone was sick, he would take his night watch,” said a British crewman, Butch Dalrymple-Smith.“He would dry our wet gear if we forgot to do it. Others would scream. He just wasn’t like that. Everything that made the difference between success and failure can be traced back to Ramón.”Mr. Carlín “was a perfect skipper, really,” Mr. Dalrymple-Smith added.An obituary last Wednesday about Ramón Carlín, a sailboat skipper who won the first Whitbread Round the World Race, misstated the surname of a sailor who was lost during that race. He was Bernie Hosking, not Hocking.Kirk Semple contributed reporting from Mexico City.A version of this article appears in print on May 11, 2016, on Page A24 of the New York edition with the headline: Ramón Carlín, Casual Sailor Who Won a Round-the-World Race, Dies at 92.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.