By ANDREW DASMAY 10, 2016
FIFA on Tuesday began laying the groundwork for the 2026 World Cup, announcing a bidding process in which it would decide on a possible expansion of the field by this fall and select the host country for the event in May 2020.The process that was unveiled Tuesday at FIFA’s congress in Mexico City will unfold in four phases. The first will be a so-called strategy and consultation period in which FIFA will consider a possible expansion of the World Cup field; a review of the organization’s stance on joint bids by multiple countries; and the introduction of human rights and environmental and sustainability requirements for bidders.FIFA said it would resolve those questions by May 2017, but said in a statement that the decision on the number of teams, formats and, intriguingly, the eligibility of confederations to bid was expected by October.The United States, which hosted the World Cup in 1994, is expected to eagerly bid for the 2026 tournament. Under FIFA’s current continental rotation system, the 2026 host most likely would come from Concacaf, the region encompassing North and Central America and the Caribbean. In addition to the United States, Mexico and Canada have also said they plan to bid.AdvertisementEngland has also expressed interest in hosting another World Cup, and Australia and New Zealand have discussed a joint bid. But with Russia (Europe) and Qatar (Asia) hosting the next two tournaments, FIFA would need to abandon its rotation system for either to be eligible. Under that system, confederations are barred from hosting if they have hosted either of the previous two World Cups.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.After the strategy questions are put to rest this year, the more formal bidding process will take place in the second phase, from June 2017 to December 2018. FIFA will use the year after that to evaluate the bids, through February 2020. The vote for the host will take place in May 2020.FIFA last picked a World Cup host in 2010, when it chose Russia (2018) and Qatar (2022) on the same day. That vote has come to be seen as rife with corruption and vote-trading, and it has since taken a toll on FIFA’s reputation and leadership.AdvertisementFIFA elected a new president, Gianni Infantino, in February to replace its longtime chief, Sepp Blatter. Infantino has suggested several possible changes to the World Cup, including expanding it to 40 teams from 32 to allow more countries to take part. Infantino has also expressed support for joint bids, which have become common for the European championships, but some in FIFA have frowned on the idea because of the inherent security, logistics and visa issues involved in a tournament spanning international borders.A version of this article appears in print on May 11, 2016, on Page B9 of the New York edition with the headline: FIFA Announces Timeline for ’26 World Cup Bidding.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.