By ROB HUGHESMAY 10, 2016
LONDON — The huge banner bearing the face of Manuel Pellegrini and the words “This Charming Man” sagged in the stadium as Manchester City said goodbye to its departing coach.Fewer than a quarter of the 54,000 fans at City’s last game at home this season stayed to hear him say, “These have been three unforgettable, wonderful years; thanks for all. I will never forget you.”Most quickly forgot him.City supporters, who through thick and mostly thin used to regard themselves as the “real” fans in Manchester, had turned their backs. They vacated the stadium after Sunday’s 2-2 tie against Arsenal left their club in fourth place in the Premier League.Maybe City followers have morphed into Manchester United fans, gorged on the expectation that money buys everything.AdvertisementAnd perhaps many of the club’s supporters have started to believe the critics who have won nothing in their lives, yet write Pellegrini off as a loser and a charmless man.AdvertisementWhat has charm to do with winning? Real Madrid once fired Vicente del Bosque because his face looked “tired,” according to the club president. Del Bosque went on to coach Spain to World Cup and European titles.Liverpool won everything it could for almost two decades as Bob Paisley and Joe Fagan quietly and determinedly carried the mantle that Bill Shankly left as manager.Shankly, for sure, was an inspirational man as the coach in the ’60s through the first half of the ’70s. But Paisley and Fagan not only succeeded him, they surpassed his achievements in terms of trophies and medals.Leicester, let it be said one more time, outfoxed the high and mighty in the English league this season. But City, United, Arsenal, Chelsea and Liverpool let it happen. The collective failings of the wealthy clubs allowed Leicester to romp to the league title, and Claudio Ranieri, the Italian coach once mocked as an eternal loser, is now being hailed as the new Caesar at Leicester City.What the critics of Pellegrini fail to emphasize is that he was a lame-duck manager from the start of this season. It was an open secret that City wanted Pep Guardiola in charge and had been talking to the Bayern Munich coach for at least a year.Indeed, what City really wants, and is prepared to pay for, is to turn itself into the F.C. Barcelona of Manchester.Shortly after City’s chairman, Sheikh Mansour bin Zayed al-Nahyan, began spending his Abu Dhabi millions on the club, he hired Ferran Soriano as chief executive, who then hired Txiki Begiristain as director of football. The two held top roles at Barcelona when Guardiola became the head coach there.AdvertisementThe orders may have been: Give me Barça, give me Total Football, give me tiki-taka. And why not? It is heavenly soccer played on earth.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.Of course, you need Lionel Messi, Xavi Hernández and Andrés Iniesta at the top of their form to play like that. And there’s the rub. Messi is still extraordinary, but Xavi has gone into semiretirement in the desert, while Iniesta is sated with fame, fortune and the wear and tear of being a Spanish saint for the past seven years.City could buy some of the best of the rest. Sheikh Mansour’s money-is-no-object approach bought a fine spine for City, with Vincent Kompany commanding the defense, Yaya Touré’s huge size so powerful in midfield, David Silva a little magician and Sergio Agüero scoring the goals.When a former City coach, Roberto Mancini, ruffled the feathers of the stars by trying to impose his own ego upon them, the club simply paid off Mancini and brought in Pellegrini.He had enough charm then. He soothed the stars and embedded in them the buccaneering soccer he had instilled at Villarreal in Spain. And, yes, he charmed both the board and the media.City won the Premier League in Pellegrini’s first season, scoring an unprecedented 156 goals in all competitions that year. But even then, louder than a whisper, was the undercurrent that City would ditch him to take Guardiola, if it could.Guardiola was committed to trying to win the Champions League for Bayern Munich. He has easily won the Bundesliga title in his three seasons there but has lost in the semifinals of the Champions League every year, failing to measure up to what his predecessor, Jupp Heynckes, did — win the European title.Guardiola rose up through Barcelona, both as a player and as a coach. As manager, he took a Barça team that already was a power to an even greater height.At Bayern, he inherited a team whose setup has been dominant in Germany for many years.In Manchester, it will be different. He has to rebuild a team that in some parts is agonizing to watch and in other parts is not up to standard. The core players like Kompany, Silva and Agüero undoubtedly have talent, but they also are prone to injuries.AdvertisementThe fourth major influence on City’s team, Touré, turns 33 this week and was sold to Manchester when Guardiola was coach at Barcelona. Critics have thought Touré is too laid back to use his skills to the fullest, and of all the players that Pellegrini has trusted, he would have to be the most disheartened to hear that Guardiola was coming.Pellegrini, ever the gentleman, said a month ago that he always felt that City would go for Guardiola. He held no grudges, made no excuses that his authority was being usurped.Guardiola told reporters in February that he could multitask and manage dealing with both his current and future clubs. The reality is that City, for some time, has planned to rebuild its team for Guardiola — and that both City and Bayern missed their prime target this season, losing in the Champions League semifinals.Blaming the personality of Pellegrini for City’s failure is misguided at best, mischievous at worst.A version of this article appears in print on May 11, 2016, in The International New York Times.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.