AdvertisementSupported byGlobal SoccerBy Rob HughesLONDON — When Zinedine Zidane was a player, he could raise his game like few other men to breach almost any defense. As a coach, he no longer has that power. And in his own stadium, with a team of players as expensive as any on earth, the futility of that predicament clearly tortures him. Zidane railed to no effect as Real Madrid lost, 1-0, on Saturday to Atlético Madrid in their derby match. Zidane’s problem was that he no longer wears the white jersey of Real Madrid during games, but instead a heavy black overcoat as the coach. Zidane exhorted and shouted to his players from the sideline, but his instructions fell on deaf ears. As he waved his arms and clenched his fists, sections of Santiago Bernabéu Stadium waved white handkerchiefs and called for Real Madrid’s president, Florentino Pérez, to resign.This humiliating act is becoming a ritual in the Bernabéu. This is the third straight year that Atlético, the supposedly upstart neighbor, has won in Real’s stadium. On Saturday, as before, Atlético’s steely and superbly organized defense squeezed out Real’s superstars, the so-called “Galácticos.”Afterward, Zidane insisted that his team had given up on nothing and that it would pursue the titles in La Liga and the Champions League to the end. His players, though, were less defiant.Sergio Ramos, the captain, said the championship is “practically out of our reach.” Cristiano Ronaldo admitted the team’s chances are gone now. Barcelona is out of sight in the Spanish league, and even Atlético is four points ahead of Real.There were bitter edges to some of what Ronaldo appeared to say about a lack of quality among his teammates, but he later tried to smooth those comments and explain that he was referring to the lack of available players due to injuries. Across the corridor, on the Atlético side of this drama, Coach Diego Simeone was once again running through the names and positive traits of the players in his lineup. Both sides could agree on a number of things. That Atlético achieved more with less-expensive talent. That it got more results out of fewer possessions. And that Atlético was more prepared, despite having less time to get ready — Real had a full week to prepare, while Atlético had only a few days after playing P.S.V. Eindhoven in the Champions League on Wednesday night. “The problem wasn’t fitness,” Zidane told reporters. “The game today was more mental. They played on Wednesday and did not have much time to recover — and look at the game they played.”There spoke a man of experience. “I’m always going to be behind the players, and they are behind me,” Zidane said. “I’m going to look for a solution, but I can’t be happy, and the players cannot be happy.”“Next year we may have to change,” he said. “There could be a change of manager, too.”In that last reflection, he touched upon the instability of Real Madrid under Pérez, who is in his second stint as president. Pérez had resigned 10 years ago to the day Saturday after his Galácticos fell behind Barcelona in the league, just as they are doing again now.On Saturday, the stars who worked hardest were largely in Atlético’s red and white. Antoine Griezmann, a once-mercurial winger who now buys into Simeone’s demanding work ethic, scored the only goal, shortly after halftime.Even Griezmann seemed surprised at the space that opened up in front of him. He ran at a retreating Real defense, right down the center. Griezmann passed the ball out wide to his left, received it back from Filipe Luís, and calmly side-footed his low shot between goalkeeper Keylor Navas and a post.Before and after that, the home club had more possession. The away team defended in heavy numbers, but it seldom displayed any impending sense of fear. Ronaldo — now 31 and not quite the Ronaldo he once was — had his chances, but he fired either at the keeper or over the bar. And the more forlorn the superstar looked, the more Atlético’s defenders, Diego Godín and Juanfran, would help their younger colleagues in defense.In 26 Liga games this season, Real has scored 71 goals, more than Barcelona. In 26 games, Atlético has conceded just 11 goals, fewer than any other top club in Europe.And to those, like Chelsea, who have pondered whether Simeone could do a similar job for their team without being so defense-oriented, it would be fair to note that Atlético spends only about one-third as much as Real, Chelsea and others do on players. The Atlético way was personified before halftime, when Griezmann lost the ball on the halfway line, and his only instinct was to run back 40 yards and try to take the ball from Isco, the Real player who had stolen it from him. That is engrained in all Atlético players, be they the star striker or someone else. The essence of it entails chasing down every ball and harassing every opponent as Atlético tries to find the breaking points.Ronaldo sounded close to that when he said, “We spoke in the changing room, but it stays there. Zidane can’t play, but in my opinion he’s doing a phenomenal job. He’s a very calm person, very optimistic, and he’s making us better. You have to give him time and leave him alone.”Ronaldo had spoken hastily about teammates’ not being on his level. He later explained: “I was referring to my fitness level, not level of play. When you don’t have players like Bale, Pepe, Benzema or Marcelo, its not easy to win a competition. I am no better than my teammates.”The Champions League, he said, excites him, but Real’s chances of winning the Spanish league are done.Advertisement