AdvertisementSupported byRoundupBy The Associated PressOne bad swing by Adam Scott led to two balls in the water on the same hole Saturday in the Honda Classic in Palm Beach Gardens, Fla. Even with a quadruple bogey, though, he managed to be satisfied with a four-under-par 66 and a share of the lead with Sergio García.A bizarre and breezy afternoon ended at PGA National with two leaders whose fortunes changed mightily in the final hour.Scott looked better than ever through 14 holes at seven under, only once having had to save par. He was three shots ahead going to the tee on the par-3 15th, and it was starting to look like a runaway. About 20 minutes later, he was one shot behind García.“Pretty costly,” Scott said. “But fortunately, I had a couple shots to spare. Hopefully, it won’t cost me too big in the grand scheme of things.”García lost the lead with a bogey from the bunker on the 17th and then caught Scott with a short birdie on the 18th for a 67.They were at nine-under 201.Blayne Barber had a 69 and was four shots behind.Scott and García were quick to point out that Sunday might not be a two-man race, and there was plenty of evidence to back them up.Rickie Fowler had a one-shot lead going into the third round and was the first player at the Honda Classic to go bogey-free through the opening 36 holes. Then, on Saturday, he could not make a birdie. Fowler made bogey on the easiest hole at PGA National, the par-5 third, and wound up with a 74 to fall five shots behind.Nothing went right for Jimmy Walker, starting with the first tee. Playing alongside Fowler, he was introduced as “Jimmy Fowler.”Walker had the lead with a birdie on the third hole. He did not make another birdie until the 18th hole, and that was to break 80. Walker finished the round 11 shots out of the lead.“Who can tell me that the guys that are four under are not going to go and play like Adam did today?” García said. “We’ll see how the day goes. And then if it becomes a two-horse race on the last three or four holes, I’ll welcome that. But I will expect some of the guys behind to shoot a good number and make it tough for all of us.”Thanks to one swing by Scott, those guys at least have a chance.Still, Scott did not seem overly bothered by the quadruple bogey, mainly because of the 17 other holes he played so well.“I did a lot of things really well today, so it’s exactly the round I needed,” he said. “I need to put one more together tomorrow. It’s going to be an exciting day for me.”THOMPSON SURGES IN THAILAND Lexi Thompson shot an eight-under-par 64 in the third round of the L.P.G.A. Thailand to establish a four-stroke lead over In Gee Chun at Siam Country Club in Chonburi.The fourth-ranked Thompson fired nine birdies — against a lone bogey on the 16th — for an overall 16-under 200. She has won four of the six tournaments she has led after the third round. Chun carded three birdies on both the front and back nines for a six-under 66. Amy Yang (70), the overnight leader and defending champion, had five birdies and three bogeys to fall five shots out of the lead. OOSTHUIZEN LEADS BY 3 The former British Open winner Louis Oosthuizen shot a five-under-par 67 to take a three-stroke lead through three rounds of the Perth International in Australia. Oosthuizen, making his first tournament appearance in Australia, had a 54-hole total of 15-under 201 on the Lake Karrinyup Country Club course.Peter Uihlein (71) and Romain Wattel (65) were tied for second. Advertisement