By THE ASSOCIATED PRESSFEB. 26, 2016
PALM BEACH GARDENS, Fla. —  Rickie Fowler is not setting any course records at the Honda Classic. He will gladly settle for more great golf, and the 36-hole lead.Fowler got back to work last week in Florida after his big disappointment in the Phoenix Open and shot the course record at the Medalist (66). The next day, he went an hour north to the Floridian and shot 60 to break the course record held by Justin Thomas.He set a more obscure record Friday with his four-under-par 66 to build a one-shot lead over Jimmy Walker. Fowler became the first player to go bogey-free over the opening 36 holes in the Honda Classic since it moved to PGA National in 2007.“That’s a big accomplishment around this golf course — not just one day, but back-to-back,” Fowler said. “So pleased with how I’ve managed my game.”AdvertisementIn his first start since he lost a two-shot lead with two holes left in Phoenix, Fowler put himself right back in position to win.AdvertisementFowler was at eight-under 132. Walker finished his round of 66 with a 25-foot birdie on the 17th and a 40-foot eagle putt on No. 18. Sergio García, playing with Fowler, stayed with him until the final four holes. García had a 69 and was two shots behind.Adam Scott also played bogey-free in calmer and warmer weather. He holed a 10-foot eagle putt on the third hole and two-putted for birdie on his final hole for a 65 that left him three shots behind.Scott has yet to shoot over par in 10 rounds this year, with nine of those rounds in the 60s.Rory McIlroy left without speaking and will not be back this week. He missed the cut for the second straight year at the Honda Classic.McIlroy tried to play off a muddy patch in the hazard left of the par-3 fifth green, hit off the rocks into the water, took a penalty drop and made triple bogey. A birdie on the final hole gave him a 72, and he missed the cut by one shot.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.The cut was at three-over 143, and Phil Mickelson made it on the number.Mickelson, coming off a runner-up finish at Pebble Beach after losing a two-shot lead going into the final round, failed to make a birdie in his round of 74. “I hit 15 greens today and I didn’t make a single birdie,” he said. “That’s a frustrating deal.”Fowler had a similar round to the one he had Thursday — no bogeys, a 66, and a tough par save on his 10th hole to keep his round going. He chipped in for par on No. 10 in the opening round.On his 10th hole (No. 1) on Friday, he was in the trees well right of the fairway and managed to get out near the front of the green for a simple up-and-down.His longest par putt was 12 feet on No. 4 after driving into a bunker, and he ended the day with a 25-foot birdie putt.AdvertisementYANG LEADS IN THAILAND  Amy Yang carded a three-under 69 to lead by one halfway through the L.P.G.A. Thailand.Yang trailed Lexi Thompson, the first-round leader, by two before teeing off at Siam Country Club in Chonburi, then had consecutive bogeys on Nos. 5 and 6, but rallied with four birdies, on holes including the par-3 12th.At nine under over all, Yang was one shot ahead of her countrywoman Q Baek (71) and two Americans, Jessica Korda (66) and Thompson (72).Korda’s low round of the day, matched by Haru Nomura of Japan, was capped by a 12-foot eagle putt on her last hole.A version of this article appears in print on February 27, 2016, on Page D6 of the New York edition with the headline: No Record This Time, but Fowler Clings to the Lead .  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.