By THE ASSOCIATED PRESSFEB. 27, 2016
DALLAS —  Ryan McDonagh scored an important goal in the third period for the Rangers on Saturday night. The one he prevented may have been just as crucial.McDonagh’s late play set the stage for a winning goal by Kevin Klein with 2 minutes 53 seconds left as the Rangers beat the Dallas Stars, 3-2.McDonagh banked in a shot off goalie Kari Lehtonen’s back for a 2-1 lead 8:26 into the third period. Less than a minute later, he helped prevent a tying goal by sliding over a loose puck behind goalie Henrik Lundqvist at the goal line.Referees whistled the play dead and said a video replay could not determine whether the puck had crossed the line.Advertisement“It was hard from my angle to see it, if it was crossing the line or not,” Lundqvist said. “It’s such a tight call, you probably have seen it better on your screens than I have. Even though it maybe looked like it was going over, you couldn’t see it.”AdvertisementLundqvist had stopped a wrist shot by Tyler Seguin for one of his 36 saves in the game. Dallas’s Jason Spezza tried to knock the loose puck into the net.“It doesn’t matter what I saw,” Stars Coach Lindy Ruff said. He yelled from the bench after the decision was announced.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.“I thought it was a goal,” Spezza said. “I guess if there’s no call on the ice, they say it’s inconclusive.”The Stars later tied it at 2-2 on a goal by Valeri Nichushkin with 4:01 left.For the winner, Klein sent a shot from the slot into the upper right corner.“We had some bounces going our way in the end,” Lundqvist said. “The guys came up with a really big play the last couple of minutes there, but after that it was mayhem.”The Stars pressured the Rangers’ goal but could not score after pulling Lehtonen for the final 1:12.Chris Kreider scored on the power play for the Rangers. The Rangers are in second place in the Metropolitan Division, 16 points behind the Washington Capitals.Colton Sceviour had a goal and an assist for the Stars, and Lehtonen made 26 saves. Dallas has lost four of its past five home games and has a 1-point lead in the Central Division over the Chicago Blackhawks.A version of this article appears in print on February 28, 2016, on Page SP9 of the New York edition with the headline: An Alert McDonagh Rescues the Rangers .  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.