AdvertisementSupported byRugbyBy Huw RichardsTWICKENHAM, England — England against Wales is one of those rivalries that guarantees passionate play, even when only local pride is on the line. And there will be much more at stake on March 12 when the two teams meet here in the next round of the Six Nations championship.Both teams won over the weekend, and they are the only unbeaten teams left, which means their matchup in two weeks most likely will decide the tournament champion. England advanced to 3-0 with a 21-10 victory over Ireland on Saturday, and if it beats Wales, it has a chance to win its first Grand Slam — a clean sweep of the tournament — since 2003. After a draw in the opening weekend against Ireland, a Grand Slam is out of the question for Wales, which moved to 2-0-1 with a 19-10 win over France on Friday. But if it does win at England, it would be the heavy favorite to win the championship. England and Wales share the record, with 26 titles each. Wales is the stable, veteran team with an experienced coach, the New Zealander Warren Gatland, who is in his ninth year in charge. Veteran does not always mean old. Winger George North extended his tournament scoring lead among active players with his 10th try on Friday, but he is only 23. England has a new coach, the Australian Eddie Jones. And it is gradually integrating new players like the lock Maro Itoje, who made his first start Saturday, and center Elliot Daly, who made his debut as a replacement in the final 15 minutes. “Winning ugly” perfectly described how both England and Wales triumphed in Week 3, as each team bludgeoned its opponent into submission. Moments when players looked for space rather than contact were rare, and handling errors were more frequent than passing movements.“Today was a pretty decent step up,” said Jones, whose team also has away wins at Scotland and Italy. “We left points out there, but we’ll probably get those points in the future.”England had the better of a plodding first half but led only 6-3 at halftime. It seemed possible that it might be punished for its wastefulness early in the second half, when flanker James Haskell was suspended for 10 minutes for a high tackle. His victim, Ireland scrumhalf Conor Murray, took advantage of the man advantage by scoring the opening try.England struck back with two scores in four minutes, by the wing Anthony Watson and fullback Mike Brown. Ireland was unable to respond, even when England’s replacement scrumhalf, Danny Care, had to sit out the last nine minutes of the match with a yellow-card suspension for obstruction.“We had a bit of fatigue from the first half, when they put a lot of pressure on us,” said Ireland Coach Joe Schmidt. “There are some positives for us, but we need to get results.”Ireland, last year’s champion, has only one point after three games and is in fifth place. Wales prides itself on its ability to improve as tournaments progress, and it will have to play better than it did Friday in Cardiff, Wales, if it wants to beat England. Friday’s game was low-quality all the way around. Wales defended well, but its single try was a comedy of errors. North bungled a kick downfield from Dan Biggar but was presented with a simple score when French flyhalf Jules Plisson propelled the ball back into his path. Biggar kicked 14 points for Wales.France (2-1) can still be champion if it wins its last two matches, though currently it looks no better than it has over the past four seasons, when it produced its worst string of results since the 1920s.France would do well instead in the next round to hold off Scotland (1-2), which has produced some of the most creative rugby in a tournament that has been low in both quality and imagination. Scotland finally got a tangible reward Saturday when it beat Italy in Rome, 36-20 to end its nine-match losing streak in the Six Nations.“It’s a significant win. Winning’s what it’s all about,” said Scotland’s captain, Greig Laidlaw, who was chosen man of the match after scoring 21 points. “Now we have to understand how we won it and move on to the next game.”Scotland took charge early with tries in the first 15 minutes by its two flankers, John Barclay and John Hardie. The Scots then withstood a spirited revival by Italy (0-3), which scored on tries by hooker Leonardo Ghiraldini and lock forward Marco Fuser, before a late score by Scotland wing Tommy Seymour put the game out of reach. The Five Nations tournament became the Six Nations when Italy joined, and the 11th last-place finish in 17 seasons looms for the Italians, who will close out the competition with games in Dublin and Cardiff. Advertisement