
On Baseball By                     
 TYLER KEPNER
 
FEB. 27, 2016
KISSIMMEE, Fla. — He stifled the Yankees in the summer, eliminated them in the fall, haunted them in the winter and looms over them in the spring. Even when he visited New York in January, the city stood still for Dallas Keuchel.“I don’t think ever again in my life will I see Times Square that silent, like it was when I got there,” he said.The reason was a snowstorm, which hit after Keuchel had arrived to receive his American League Cy Young Award at the baseball writers’ dinner. But it almost seems as if Keuchel, the Houston Astros’ bearded left-hander, can will himself to humble the Yankees and their city. Fans recognized him at a Nets game and begged him for mercy.“Don’t kill us come opening day,” Keuchel said, repeating what he heard in Brooklyn. “They firmly knew.”AdvertisementThe Yankees’ schedule starts where last season ended: at home against the Astros, facing Keuchel, who held them scoreless for 16 innings in the regular season and six more in the A.L. wild-card game. Including October, Keuchel was 22-8 with a 2.49 E.R.A. last season, despite one of the slowest average fastballs in the game.“He doesn’t have high-velocity numbers, or the word ‘wipeout’ when people describe his stuff,” Astros Manager A. J. Hinch said. “But what he is exceptional at is finding a way to get guys out.”According to Fangraphs, Keuchel’s fastball averaged 89.6 miles per hour last season, ranking 65th among qualified starters. The pitchers just above and below him on the list — C. C. Sabathia and Aaron Harang — combined for a 4.80 E.R.A. last season. Yet Keuchel found a way to thrive, as if he belonged to the generation that preceded him.Keuchel’s parents grew up with Charlie O’Brien, the longtime major league catcher whose career wound through Atlanta in 1995, when the Braves won the World Series. Keuchel, 28, was 7 years old that season and visited the Braves one day with O’Brien. He idolized their three future Hall of Fame starters: Tom Glavine, Greg Maddux and John Smoltz.Keuchel was high school teammates in Tulsa, Okla., with O’Brien’s son, Chris, now a minor league catcher for Baltimore. Keuchel threw only 83 to 85 m.p.h. then, but his acumen and drive gave him a spot at the University of Arkansas, and the Astros drafted him in the seventh round in 2009.AdvertisementKeuchel has become a fearless finesse pitcher like Glavine and a master craftsman like Maddux, after struggling early in his career, just as they did.“It’s almost identical,” Charlie O’Brien said. “They had to learn who they were, that’s the biggest thing. They knew: ‘I can’t throw fastballs past people all the time. I’ve got to pitch, I’ve got to change speeds, I’ve got to throw guys’ timing off.’ And that’s what they did. Once they figured it out, they never changed. All they did was get better and better, and that’s why Dallas is going to have a successful career.“He’s never been a guy that throws 95 or 97, like some of these young kids today. Those guys, when their stuff goes, most of them can’t make the transition. But he’s always had to compete and pitch, and now he’s refining it and getting even better.”Jeff Luhnow, the Astros’ general manager, ran the St. Louis Cardinals’ draft in 2009. He scouted Keuchel and projected him to go in the top 10 rounds, with a two-seam fastball (or sinker) that was ready for the major leagues. It was an accurate report, as far as it went — which was not very far. Keuchel has never forgotten the industry’s tepid projections.“I feel like I’ve been slighted, and I’m going to make sure people know who I am,” he said. “That’s my main goal: to make sure people in baseball remember they missed out on Dallas Keuchel, the 221st pick over all in the ’09 draft. I mean, that’s not all I think about. But it’s mainly what I think about.”On the mound, he thinks about one thing: using the late movement of his pitches to disrupt hitters’ timing.“And that’s the key word — disrupt,” Keuchel said. “I’m trying to make it a craft, like artwork.”Keuchel induces the batter to hit the ball weakly, off the handle or the end of the bat. Then he can trust his fielders, or himself, to take care of it. Keuchel, who played center field when he was not pitching in high school, has won two Gold Gloves. Like Maddux, who won 18, he commands pitches that can run in either direction on both sides of the plate.Get the big sports news, highlights and analysis from Times journalists, with distinctive takes on games and some behind-the-scenes surprises, delivered to your inbox every week.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.“He always presents to the hitters a strike, whether it’s a strike or not, as it crosses the strike zone,” said Brent Strom, the Astros’ pitching coach. “So there’s always a sense that these pitches are hittable, but he’s done a really good job of dictating how they’re hit.”AdvertisementSometimes, of course, they are not hit at all. Keuchel ranked fifth in the A.L. in strikeouts last season, with 216, and speaks of one of them with awe. Working from the extreme third-base side of the rubber last August, he tempted Detroit’s Miguel Cabrera with a fastball down the middle that suddenly veered low and away, far off the plate. Cabrera, a four-time batting champion, took the bait.“At those moments, it’s like, ‘I made a ball come out of my hand and it ended up a foot off the plate and he swung and missed it,’ ” Keuchel said. “It’s like, I’m getting the best hitter in the game to swing at something so far out of the zone, it had to have looked like a strike, at some point.”Keuchel dominates with his two-seamer and slider (he calls it a slurve), and with a changeup that O’Brien encouraged him to throw inside to left-handers, citing Glavine. O’Brien has always believed Keuchel could win — he called him the most competitive high school pitcher he has seen — but stressed the value of the changeup to his arsenal.“It might have been a game where he had pitched pretty well, and he said, ‘Tonight, I didn’t need it,’ ” O’Brien said. “And I said: You need it. The changeup is a pitch-saver. It’ll save you 10 pitches a game.”Keuchel threw the most pitches in the majors last season, but 62 qualified starters averaged more per inning than his 15.1. He led the A.L. in innings pitched, with 232, and said that since his goal was to work nine innings every start, his ideal total would be 300. No pitcher has done that since Steve Carlton in 1980, but Keuchel was probably serious.“He wants to finish every game,” Hinch said, “and you would think that all major leaguers have that mentality, but they don’t.”Keuchel started the wild-card game on three days’ rest, and said he was so focused that he felt strong enough to go nine innings. Only a mound visit from Hinch, with two on and two outs in the sixth, could break his concentration. Keuchel knew then that he would face just one more batter, Alex Rodriguez, who flied out to center.AdvertisementThree relievers finished off the Yankees without another hit, and Keuchel beat Kansas City in Game 3 of the teams’ division series with seven strong innings. A relief outing in Game 5 did not go well, but Keuchel had asked to pitch on two days’ rest, and the Astros would not deny him.“Sometimes you have to put a governor on him to protect him from himself,” Luhnow said, “because he’s always going to want to be out there.”The Astros control Keuchel’s rights for three more seasons, and Luhnow said the team had talked with him informally about a contract extension. For now, the Astros know he will be back in the Bronx on April 4, hoping to start another playoff run against the team he masters most of all.A version of this article appears in print on February 28, 2016, on Page SP1 of the New York edition with the headline: Guile Sharpens Perpetual Thorn in Yankees’ Side.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.See More »