By THE ASSOCIATED PRESSMAY 10, 2016
RIO DE JANEIRO — Rio de Janeiro has missed a once-in-a-lifetime chance to clean polluted Guanabara Bay, the site for Olympic sailing, Brazil’s most decorated Olympic athlete said in a recent interview.“We always hoped that having a big event like the Games would help,” the athlete, Torben Grael, told Canada’s CBC television. “We ourselves put a lot of pressure to make it happen, but unfortunately it didn’t happen when they had money. And now they don’t have money, and so it’s even worse.”Grael has won five Olympic medals in sailing: two gold, a silver and two bronze. He has sailed for years in Guanabara Bay and hoped the Olympics would prompt a wholesale cleanup.“I don’t think we’re going to see that change now,” Grael said, according to a transcript of the interview given to The Associated Press this week. “It’s part of the way politics administration goes here. Everything grows very quick and very disorganized.”AdvertisementBrazil is in the middle of its worst recession in decades, and the state of Rio de Janeiro has been described as “broke” by its acting governor, Francisco Dornelles.AdvertisementThe state is responsible for maintaining the bay, which has been described as an open sewer by many local and foreign sailors.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.Rio treats only about half its sewage, dumping the rest untreated into the water around the city.A yearlong analysis of water quality by the A.P. has found dangerously high levels of viruses and bacteria in Olympic and Paralympic sites for sailing, rowing, canoeing, triathlon and long-distance swimming.The International Olympic Committee, backed by the World Health Organization, has repeatedly said athletes are not at risk.“I don’t think you’re going to get sick,” Grael said. “It just looks terrible.”Many athletes are expected to arrive in Rio in advance to build up immunity to possible diseases. Others will come in just days before, hoping to minimize the impact. Many will take antibiotics, bring bleach to cleanse equipment and try to limit their contact with the water.“You know the garbage can slow your boat, and that’s not good,” Grael said. “I think they’re going to be careful collecting the garbage in the racing areas, but that’s going to be just for the Games, and after the Games it’s going to be what we know.“We thought we could have some change, some legacy there. But it’s not going to happen, unfortunately.”A version of this article appears in print on May 11, 2016, on Page B11 of the New York edition with the headline: Olympian Says Brazil Missed Chance in Rio.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.