By THE ASSOCIATED PRESSMAY 9, 2016
BALTIMORE — Since Barbaro’s final gallop, at the 2006 Preakness Stakes, time has trickled by ever so slowly for the trainer Michael Matz.A decade ago, Matz saddled Barbaro, the frisky Kentucky Derby winner, with designs of pulling off an encore at Pimlico Race Course. Soon after emerging from the starting gate, though, Barbaro stumbled and broke his right hind leg.Despite the efforts of an esteemed veterinarian, the unrestricted financial backing of the horse’s owners and the outpouring of love from racing fans around the world, the injuries that Barbaro sustained at the Preakness ultimately led to his death, on Jan. 29, 2007, by euthanasia.For those who knew Barbaro, a whimsical thoroughbred, vivid memories linger.“When you’re looking for another horse like that, it seems like it’s been ages,” Matz said. “I’m hoping, but I don’t have a great deal of confidence I’m going to find it or it’s going to find me.”AdvertisementThat is because, as one of Barbaro’s owners, Roy Jackson, said, “he was a one-in-a-million horse.”Barbaro, a dark bay colt, entered the Preakness unbeaten in six races, but that was not the only reason Matz loved him.“Especially this time of year, there are always memories of Barbaro,” Matz said. “One minute he wins the Kentucky Derby in front of 160,000 people, and on Monday afternoon he’s out in the paddock rolling around in the grass and having a good time. Those are the things that stand out.”Get the big sports news, highlights and analysis from Times journalists, with distinctive takes on games and some behind-the-scenes surprises, delivered to your inbox every week.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.After tumbling to the dirt at the Preakness, Barbaro was transported to the New Bolton Center at the University of Pennsylvania’s rural Kennett Square campus, where Dr. Dean Richardson performed surgery.Although Barbaro’s broken leg healed, he developed laminitis, a painful and often crippling hoof condition, in his left hind leg. After several more procedures, Barbaro was found to have laminitis in both front legs.AdvertisementAt that point, Richardson, along with Barbaro’s owners, Roy and Gretchen Jackson, decided the horse could not be saved.Although Richardson said he was confident he did everything possible to keep the horse alive, he looks back with no small measure of regret.“It’s not like there have been evolutionary changes in the technology over the last 10 years to repair this type of fracture,” Richardson said. “In retrospect, however, there are certainly some subtle things that I would probably do differently today if I were to approach the same type of fracture.“If you ask me, would I love to have another chance at saving Barbaro, the answer is categorically yes. That’s more because I care so much about him, because he’s a real special horse.”Barbaro’s situation was unusual in that the Jacksons were willing to spend thousands of dollars for veterinary care to keep him alive — and not necessarily because of his potential as a stud.“It’s not that horses can’t be repaired; it’s just that many times the economics of repairing a horse’s injury are not aligned,” Richardson said. “You don’t have the combination of an owner who has the resources and a horse that justifies that expense.”The Jacksons and Barbaro fit the description.“He deserved whatever we could do to try to save him,” Roy Jackson said. “The stud thing, it didn’t matter.”Barbaro’s ashes are buried at Churchill Downs, the site of his biggest victory. A bronze statue of the horse stands atop his remains.Advertisement“Sometimes I sit on the sideline there, watch people take pictures in front of the statue,” Jackson said. “I think it’s a great memorial for him.”Barbaro’s dam, La Ville Rouge, lives on the Jacksons’ estate in Chester County, Pa. That fact, and the love Barbaro received 10 years ago, have helped his owners move on.“We don’t dwell on it much,” Roy Jackson said. “We got letters from people in every state and 14 foreign countries. We think back on the huge outpouring of support we got. That’s what I think about more than the injury.”Richardson has taken a similar stance.“The bitterness of losing him lessens over time,” he said. “But I’ve got a picture of Barbaro on my office wall and a painting of him at home. I certainly do still think about him.”Matz has 70 stalls at Fair Hill Training Center in Maryland. He hopes to fill one of them with a horse capable of competing for the Triple Crown.“All trainers are looking for that, and I was lucky enough to get one in Barbaro,” he said. “The worst part of it is, we never will really know how good he really was.”A version of this article appears in print on May 10, 2016, on Page B13 of the New York edition with the headline: Memories of ‘One-in-a-Million Horse’ Remain Fresh.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.