AdvertisementSupported byYankees 6, Royals 3By Billy WitzWhen the Yankees’ bullpen gate opened and Aroldis Chapman jogged toward the pitcher’s mound, the typically staid Yankee Stadium came to life, and the baseball game morphed into a carnival act.Heavy-metal music blared, and flaming graphics lit up the scoreboard. Relievers in the bullpen made side bets on how fast Chapman’s fastball would top out, and fans’ oohs and aahs were based on the speed his pitches registered, not their location.With the Yankees in need of a distraction from their disappointing start, the debut of Chapman, the hardest-throwing pitcher in baseball, was most welcome.He was even able to overshadow the Yankees’ hitters — who hit five home runs — despite showing some signs of vulnerability in finishing off a 6-3 victory over the Kansas City Royals on Monday.Chapman, whose pitches reached 101 miles per hour, had been suspended for 30 games under Major League Baseball’s new domestic violence policy. In his return to the mound, as much as his fastball energized the crowd, it seemed to have at least as great an effect on the clubhouse.“It’s adding another huge piece, getting him,” catcher Brian McCann said after the Yankees, in last place in the American League East, had won for the fourth time in its last six games. “It kind of lifts the spirits up a little bit.”The team got a pick-me-up early on in launching five solo homers off Royals starter Chris Young, two by Carlos Beltran.Last summer, when General Manager Brian Cashman was asked if he had considered pursuing Young, he waved away the suggestion.Young had signed with Kansas City as a free agent after earning comeback player of the year honors with Seattle in 2014. But the Yankees had no interest, Cashman said, because Young is one of baseball’s most extreme fly-ball pitchers and fly balls at Yankee Stadium — especially ones to right field — often turn into home runs.Cashman’s assessment was spot-on Monday as the Yankees hit each of their home runs over the inviting right-field porch, with Beltran joined by Brian McCann, Brett Gardner and Aaron Hicks. Gardner, Hicks and Beltran homered in the third inning, when Young, who has allowed a major-league-leading 13 home runs, was knocked out of the game.“Young is a guy that’s going to throw fastballs up in the strike zone and try to get you to chase with the slider,” Beltran said. “We didn’t really chase the slider much, and he was able to show a few fastballs in the middle of the strike zone, and we were able to square them, and we were able to get good results out of that.”The early barrage, along with a strong spot start from Ivan Nova, allowed the Yankees to unveil their new toy: Chapman, whose return gives Manager Joe Girardi a devastatingly deep bullpen, with Andrew Miller and Dellin Betances also able to close out games. The three lead the majors in strikeouts by relievers since the start of 2014.Although Betances and Miller warmed up, neither entered the game.But Chapman did.“It was a show,” Betances said. “As soon as he starts throwing the ball in the bullpen, the whole crowd gets up and takes out their phone.”In the dugout, players and coaches leaned on the railing and stole glances at the top of the center-field scoreboard, where each pitch’s velocity is displayed.During his suspension, Chapman worked out in Tampa, Fla., and pitched against 18- and 19-year-olds in extended spring training. He began this outing as if there were not much difference.He struck out Omar Infante with a 97-m.p.h. fastball and then Cheslor Cuthbert with one that reached 101 before Paulo Orlando ripped a 90-m.p.h slider over the head of Hicks, the center fielder, for a double.Alcides Escobar hit a single to center to drive in a run before Chapman gloved a comebacker from Lorenzo Cain and made his softest toss of the night, flipping the ball to first baseman Mark Teixeira.“That guy’s one of the hardest pitchers to hit,” Escobar said. “His first pitch tonight was coming in at 100. That’s not easy.”There was some question about what type of reception Chapman might receive because he has expressed little contrition about the actions that had led to his suspension. (He fired eight gun shots into his garage after an altercation with his girlfriend, according to a police report.)But the cheers relieved him.“I was very excited and happy to see the fans receive me the way they did, but I was looking to stay focused and get the job done,” Chapman said through an interpreter. “A lot of people have been asking me about that. But after the reaction I got today, I can say it was incredible.”It was as complete a game as the Yankees have played this season, and it harked back to last season, when they owned baseball’s second-best record as late as July 27. Not only did they belt homers and get strong pitching Monday, but Teixeira had two superlative scoops of errant throws from shortstop Didi Gregorius, turning a potentially troublesome inning into a smooth one.Nova was outstanding in replacing C. C. Sabathia, who went on the disabled list with a strained groin, having thrown eight shutout innings against the Baltimore Orioles on Wednesday. Nova, who had lost out to Sabathia for the final spot in the rotation, allowed only one run in four and two-thirds innings, on a homer far over the center-field wall by Alex Gordon, reminiscent of the blast he hit in Game 1 of the World Series.Kirby Yates, who allowed one hit in one and two-thirds scoreless innings of relief, picked up the win. And Ben Gamel, a rookie outfielder, had something to celebrate, too: He stroked a single to left field in his first career plate appearance, as a pinch-hitter in the eighth.Advertisement