
Keeping Score By                     
JAY SCHREIBER

MAY 9, 2016
The Mets began the season with a rock-star starting rotation around which they would happily wrap their identity. DeGrom, Syndergaard, Harvey, Matz — even Bartolo Colon would be in the mix.Yet at the start of play on Monday, the Mets found themselves with a whole other distinction: They led the major leagues in home runs, including one already famous blast from Colon himself. This shift in story line has probably caught Mets fans by surprise because throughout the years, the team, when good, has tended to be identified with pitching more than slugging.This season, the pitching has been solid enough, and the win-loss record (19-11 through Sunday) is impressive, but it is the Mets’ power at the plate that has been sort of stunning. Entering Monday’s games, the Mets had hit 47 home runs, three more than second-place St. Louis.Meanwhile, the Yankees, their Bronx Bombers nickname notwithstanding, were tied for 24th, with just 25 home runs, having failed to take advantage of the cozy right-field dimensions at Yankee Stadium. (That quickly changed on Monday night, when the Yankees blasted five home runs in the Bronx before the game was half over.) And the Cubs? Baseball’s best team this season had 37 homers, which tied it for 10th in the major leagues.AdvertisementMore significant, the Cubs were No. 1 in runs scored, with 184, or 51 more than the Mets, who were tied for 14th with 133. Likewise, the Cubs led all of baseball in on-base percentage with a .368 mark, while the Mets were in 10th place at .325. Part of that gap was because of team batting average (the Cubs were at .263 and the Mets at .244) and part was because of walks, with the Cubs having drawn 47 more than the Mets.All of that is a reminder that runs, however you score them, count more than home runs. But for now, it is interesting to see the Mets flex their muscles in unexpected ways.In their 54-year history, they have led the majors in home runs just once, in 1989, when they hit a fairly modest 147, with Howard Johnson accounting for 36. The Mets did not, it should be noted, make the postseason that year, finishing six games behind the Cubs in the National League East with an 87-75 record.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.The Mets’ best home run total came 17 years later, when the 2006 team, which did make the playoffs, topped out at 200 homers, although six other teams that year actually hit more.AdvertisementThe big home run hitters for the Mets that season were Carlos Beltran, who, with 41, tied Todd Hundley (1996) for the most single-season homers by a Met; Carlos Delgado (38); and David Wright (26).This season, the Mets’ leading home run hitter entering Monday was Yoenis Cespedes, with 11, followed by Neil Walker (nine) and Lucas Duda (seven). Wright, in his new role as a not-quite-full-time third baseman, had just four, although his on-base percentage (.405) was pretty impressive.Having played just 30 games, or a little bit less than 20 percent of the season, the Mets would end up with close to 250 home runs, far more than their record, if they kept up their current pace. It would also be a lot more than the 177 homers they hit in 2015, when they ended up tied for eighth in the team rankings.In all likelihood, though, the Mets’ home run surge will eventually tail off. And at some point, their pitching will probably pre-empt everything else as they try to repeat as division champions and maybe make it back to the World Series.Then again, if Colon hits another homer, all bets are off. Maybe this will be the year the Mets slug their way to a championship.A version of this article appears in print on May 10, 2016, on Page B13 of the New York edition with the headline: Known for Pitching, Mets Make a Mark With the Long Ball.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.See More »