AdvertisementSupported byBy Allan KredaSYOSSET, N.Y. — There is no doubt the Islanders made strides this season, winning a playoff round for the first time since 1993. But they head for summer vacation with more questions than answers.A key mystery was solved Tuesday, when the Islanders met the news media for the final time after falling to the Tampa Bay Lightning in five games in the second round of the N.H.L. playoffs. Defenseman Travis Hamonic, who last fall asked to be traded to be closer to his family near Winnipeg, Manitoba, said he had rescinded the request and would be staying with the Islanders.“I never wanted to leave,” said an emotional Hamonic, 25, an Islander for his entire six-year career. “I love it here. To know things back home have stabilized, that’s the main thing. I couldn’t be more happy.”But still looming for the Islanders, who reached the 100-point mark for the second straight season and qualified for the playoffs for the third time in four years, are decisions about the unrestricted free agents Kyle Okposo, Frans Nielsen and Matt Martin. There also could be changes when the new majority owners, Jonathan Ledecky and Scott Malkin, take control from Charles Wang on July 1.If Okposo leaves, John Tavares, the team’s star and captain, will again be searching for a right wing to match his talent and skill. The Islanders would also lose a core player who has been vital to their improvement in recent seasons.Okposo, 28, could garner a significant raise on the open market from his just-completed five-year, $14 million contract.“I’m proud of what has happened the last 10 years since I’ve been a member of this organization,” said Okposo, a first-round draft choice by the Islanders in 2006.Nielsen, 32, is the longest-tenured Islander, first skating for them in 2006-7. For him, the idea of donning a different jersey seemed too peculiar to consider.“We’ll see how it all unfolds,” said Nielsen, who scored 20 goals in the regular season and added three in the playoffs. “I don’t know what can happen.”Uncertainty also exists for General Manager Garth Snow, who was not available for comment. George McPhee, a longtime member of the Washington Capitals’ front office, was brought on as an adviser to Snow this season. The team’s new owners could decide change is necessary for a franchise that has captured just one playoff series under Snow, who was hired by Wang in 2006 shortly after retiring as the team’s backup goaltender.Jack Capuano, the team’s coach since November 2010, would not speculate on what may be ahead for his squad.“Garth is very engaged with our coaching staff and our players,” Capuano said. “We have some unrestricted guys, and I don’t know if they are going to be back or not. That’s a decision that financially will come from our general manager.”Capuano expressed relief that Hamonic, perhaps his team’s best defenseman this season and during the playoffs, would be returning.“You need those type of guys to win,” Capuano said. “You always want what is best for player and family. Knowing Travis will be part of our hockey team going forward is a big plus.”Most players tried to focus on the future.“We will be better prepared next year,” said Tavares, who scored in double overtime to eliminate the Florida Panthers in the first round but was held to one goal against the Lightning. “I’m proud of our fan base. It was great to reward them. Hopefully next year we can build on that. We have to find a way to get over the hump.”Nielsen also spoke of unfinished business. Three trips to the postseason and experiencing games beyond the first round seemed uppermost in his thoughts with summer looming.“I was here when we started to a rebuild,” said Nielsen, a Danish-born forward drafted by the Islanders in 2002. “It will be fun to see it through and how far we can go.”The pending free agents said there had been virtually no discussions on new contracts between Snow and their agents during the season. That was probably related to the coming transfer of majority ownership, which has been in the works for nearly two years.For Martin and Nielsen, Islanders their entire careers, a summer of uncertainty will be a new experience.Martin, 27, has embraced life on Long Island, including starting a foundation based there. He did not seem in any rush to leave the only franchise he has known.“My heart is here,” said Martin, part of an effective fourth line with Casey Cizikas and Cal Clutterbuck. “I want to be an Islander. This is where I grew up as a player and in a lot of ways as a person.”Clutterbuck spoke of the bond among his linemates, often the best trio on the ice.“We definitely have a good thing going, you want to bottle that up for a long time,” said Clutterbuck, 28, who scored 15 goals this season, five of them game-winners. “It’s a pleasure playing with those guys. It has injected energy into my career.”Ryan Strome, briefly sent to the minors this season and a healthy scratch for three playoff games, could think only about getting back on the ice. Strome, 22, had only eight goals after scoring 17 the previous season.“I wish the off-season was a lot shorter,” he said.Advertisement