By THE ASSOCIATED PRESSAPRIL 30, 2017
GENEVA — Sheikh Ahmad al-Fahad al-Sabah of Kuwait, a powerful power broker in soccer and the Olympic movement, resigned from his post on FIFA’s governing council and said he was resigning from all of his soccer roles after allegations in a United States federal court that he bribed Asian officials.Sheikh Ahmad said Sunday in a statement that he would withdraw from a May 8 election in Bahrain for the FIFA seat representing Asia, which he holds.“I do not want these allegations to create divisions or distract attention from the upcoming A.F.C. and FIFA congresses,” he said, referring to the Asian Football Confederation, which governs the sport on that continent.Sheikh Ahmad, a longtime president of the Olympic Council of Asia, contacted the ethics panels of FIFA and the International Olympic Committee after the allegations were made in Brooklyn federal court on Thursday. He has denied any wrongdoing.AdvertisementFIFA President Gianni Infantino said he had “taken note” of Sheikh Ahmad’s decision to resign from FIFA, adding in a brief statement, “I want to thank him for taking this decision, which certainly was not easy to take but is in the best interest for FIFA.”AdvertisementThe current case involves the FIFA audit and compliance committee member Richard Lai, an American citizen from Guam, who pleaded guilty to wire fraud conspiracy charges related to taking around $1 million in bribes, including from Kuwaiti officials. The cash was to buy influence and help recruit other Asian soccer officials prepared to accept bribes, Lai said in court. FIFA said Friday that it had provisionally barred Lai from the sport pending a broader ethics review.Sheikh Ahmad resigned his candidacy ahead of a FIFA panel’s decision on whether to remove him on ethical grounds.The FIFA Review Committee, which rules on the integrity of people seeking senior FIFA positions, has been studying his candidacy since the allegations emerged, The Associated Press reported on Saturday.The FIFA Ethics Committee is making a separate assessment of whether to provisionally suspend Sheikh Ahmad, a longtime leader of Kuwait’s soccer federation who was elected to FIFA’s ruling committee in 2015.Get the big sports news, highlights and analysis from Times journalists, with distinctive takes on games and some behind-the-scenes surprises, delivered to your inbox every week.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.Resigning from his soccer positions does not necessarily put Sheikh Ahmad out of reach of FIFA ethics prosecutors and judges if any action is deemed to be warranted. In 2012, the former FIFA presidential candidate Mohamed bin Hammam of Qatar was barred for life by the ethics committee days after he resigned.Bin Hammam was also clearly identified in Lai’s court hearing for having paid Lai a total of $100,000 in bribes to support Bin Hammam’s failed challenge to Sepp Blatter, who was then FIFA’s president, in 2011. Bin Hammam was removed from that election contest amid accusations that he had bribed Caribbean soccer officials.Sheikh Ahmad has also contacted the I.O.C. Ethics Commission about the allegations against him, the I.O.C. said Saturday.AdvertisementAs president since 2012 of the global group of national Olympic bodies, known as ANOC, Sheikh Ahmad’s support has often been cited as key to winning Olympic elections and awards to host the Games. He was widely credited for helping Thomas Bach win the I.O.C. presidency in 2013.Although Sheikh Ahmad was not named in Justice Department and court documents last week, he has become one of the most significant casualties of the sprawling United States investigation of bribery and corruption in international soccer that began with a wave of arrests in Zurich two years ago.Sheikh Ahmad could be identified in a transcript of Lai’s court hearing which said, “Co-conspirator #2 was also the president of Olympic Council of Asia.” Sheikh Ahmad has been the president since 1991.Lai admitted that he agreed to help recruit other Asian officials who voted in FIFA elections and who would back Kuwait’s interests.Guam’s soccer federation leader since 2001, Lai pleaded guilty to wire fraud conspiracy charges and failing to disclose foreign bank accounts. He agreed to pay more than $1.1 million in forfeiture and penalties, and he will be sentenced at a later date.The American federal investigation of corruption linked to FIFA has indicted or accepted guilty pleas from more than 40 people and marketing agencies linked to soccer in the Americas since 2015.Lai’s case marked the first major foray into Asia, and it suggested other soccer officials potentially recruited by the Kuwait faction could be targeted.The Asian election for FIFA seats on May 8 in Manama, Bahrain, is the same day as a FIFA Council meeting that Sheikh Ahmad will not attend. The FIFA congress will be held in the city three days later. The United States Soccer Federation and its partners from Canada and Mexico are hoping to emerge from that congress with an exclusive bidding window to make their case for hosting the 2026 World Cup.A version of this article appears in print on May 1, 2017, on Page D5 of the New York edition with the headline: Kuwaiti Sheikh Resigns From FIFA Post Amid a Bribery Investigation.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.