By ANDREW KEHMAY 10, 2016
SAN ANTONIO — Late Tuesday afternoon, before the San Antonio Spurs and the Oklahoma City Thunder faced off in Game 5 of their Western Conference semifinal series, Spurs Coach Gregg Popovich was asked to describe how difficult it was to win a postseason game.Popovich can be uncompromising in these situations. Questions he deems inane or uninteresting are dismissed with a monosyllabic retort, perplexed stare or pithy insult — sometimes all three. But this query sufficiently moved him.“I think the best way to describe it is, if you do win a game or a series, it’s an unbelievable relief,” Popovich said. “One would think there would be joy. But it’s just an unbelievable relief. When you lose, it’s a devastating feeling.”He went on: “The key is to get over it quickly, either way, to not think it’s such a big deal if you win and the end of the world if you lose. But, as it happens, those feelings arise because it is so difficult to end up being a winner.”AdvertisementAll night, Popovich’s words rang true as the Thunder rallied for a 95-91 victory, giving them a three-games-to-two lead.Save for a blowout win by the Spurs in Game 1, this has been a tense, hard-fought affair. The sellout crowd screamed in delight and anger. Players chirped incessantly at the referees, signaling their annoyance in operatic facial contortions and hand motions.Popovich slicked his hair back with a minute left as the Thunder walked the ball up the court with the game tied and barked in anger as Kevin Durant (23 points) drew a foul — it appeared Danny Green fouled Durant only after tripping over Steven Adams’s leg. Durant made his two free throws, putting Oklahoma City up, 92-90.Get the big sports news, highlights and analysis from Times journalists, with distinctive takes on games and some behind-the-scenes surprises, delivered to your inbox every week.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.Tony Parker was fouled on the next Spurs possession and made only one of two free throws. The crowd roared when Green (20 points) stripped the ball from Durant with 29.9 seconds left. But Parker missed a midrange jumper, leaving 9.3 seconds on the clock.On the final inbounds play, Russell Westbrook (game-high 35 points) drove along the baseline, where the Spurs tried to grab and foul him. But the referee blew the whistle only as Westbrook slipped to the basket for a layup. He made his free throw, giving the Thunder a 95-91 lead with 6.3 seconds left, sealing the game.AdvertisementThe Spurs’ Manu Ginobili said the referees’ decisions were beside the point. “We should have arrived to that point in a better situation,” he said.All night, Popovich’s body language on the sideline provided nonverbal commentary on the game. He waved his players up the court like a third-base coach. He slapped the air when frustrated. He sipped seriously from a paper cup. He yelled and did a 360-degree twirl when the Spurs took a 24-second violation in the fourth. At the final buzzer, as fans booed the referees, he walked off the court staring at the ground.He will have a day to get over it. Game 6 will take place Thursday in Oklahoma City.“I didn’t think anything got away from us,” Popovich said after the game. “We made mistakes, but if one team didn’t make any mistakes, the score would be 150-10.”The Spurs were in control for much of the game, despite a slow start. They fell behind, 9-2, while missing five of their first six shots, and needed to call timeout to regroup. They shot 7 for 22 in the first quarter, with none of their stars finding a rhythm. The Thunder looked slack, too, committing seven turnovers, and after a scrappy first quarter, with no easy baskets, Oklahoma City was ahead, 22-16.Kawhi Leonard (26 points, 6 rebounds, 5 steals and 4 assists) was the first San Antonio player to assert himself, stirring the crowd with a sequence of athleticism and hustle in the second quarter. He scored 6 straight points — a running bank shot, a dunk and a layup — forcing the Thunder to call timeout early in the second quarter.It was a vociferous crowd, and a dunk from Tim Duncan — which broke a personal scoreless stretch of more than 34 minutes — prompted fans to rise from their seats with about three minutes left in the half. The building grew louder, still, when Green sank a 3-pointer from the left corner in the final seconds of the second quarter, giving the Spurs a 48-43 lead.For a time, everything seemed to be going San Antonio’s way. In one turn of events, Leonard dribbled the ball off his foot as he ranged across the 3-point arc. But it rolled straight to Green, who nailed a 3-pointer, putting the Spurs ahead, 59-47, with 8 minutes 18 seconds left in the third quarter. Green, scoreless in Game 4, made six 3-pointers.But the Spurs’ fortunes turned drastically in the final quarter, setting up a must-win game for them on Thursday.A version of this article appears in print on May 11, 2016, on Page B11 of the New York edition with the headline: Thunder Pull Out Win and Are One Game Away From Ousting Spurs.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.