By CHRISTOPHER CLAREYOCT. 21, 2016
It has not quite gone according to plan in Singapore. When the national government paid about $70 million to secure the WTA Finals for five years beginning in 2014, officials there were counting on the drawing power of Serena Williams, Maria Sharapova and Li Na.But Li, the breakthrough Chinese star, retired abruptly in 2014 before even playing in the elite Singapore event. Sharapova qualified in 2014 and 2015 but is out of contention, and out of action, this season because of a doping suspension that will not end until April.The latest blow came on Monday, when Williams announced that she would miss the WTA Finals for the second straight year.Williams played, and won the title, in the tournament’s first year in Singapore, but injuries and late-season blues have kept her from returning to the season-ending championship, which she has won five times. Williams, now 35, cited a lingering right shoulder injury on Monday.Advertisement“It really doesn’t look good two years in a row not playing,” said Chris Evert, a former No. 1 player who will be in Singapore. “But at the same time, at this stage of playing for 20 years, Serena’s got to think about herself, too, and her goal of winning Grand Slams. So she’s being tugged in a lot of ways, I’m sure.”AdvertisementWilliams’s absence left a bigger hole in the field and the festivities last year, when she was clearly the world’s dominant player and had come within two matches of completing a calendar-year Grand Slam.This year, Williams has lost the No. 1 ranking to Angelique Kerber and has played in only eight tournaments, her lowest total since 2011 and the lowest by far of any member of the current top 10 players.It is remarkable that Williams is still No. 2 with so light a schedule, but it is also a reflection of her rivals’ inconsistencies, Victoria Azarenka’s pregnancy (which ended her season in June) and Williams’s own formidable results when she did play.In singles play in this year’s four Grand Slam tournaments, she was a finalist at the Australian Open, a finalist at the French Open, the champion at Wimbledon and a semifinalist at the United States Open, where she was upset by Karolina Pliskova in what turned out to be Williams’s final match of the season.“Her body is starting to have a few tweaks and break down a bit, but my question is, can she get excited about playing again?” Evert said. “She can’t get away with playing 70 percent anymore and winning titles. She has to be at 90 percent.“The players are more confident now. She doesn’t have that aura of invincibility about her that she had before.”Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.Still, Williams has debunked enough armchair theories about herself during two decades on tour that a wait-and-see approach seems the soundest.What is clear is that Singapore is, for the second straight year, a preview of what women’s tennis might look like at the top when Williams finally decides to stop pounding serves on the biggest stages.AdvertisementSteve Simon, the WTA’s chief executive, is busy trying to create a new, less cluttered structure for the circuit — one that may cater to viewers’ shorter attention spans with changes in scoring and format.The eight-woman lineup in Singapore includes well-established figures like Kerber, who even received Williams’s vote for WTA player of the year; Agnieszka Radwanska, the defending champion; and Dominika Cibulkova, the fired-up Slovakian who this season came back strong from injuries.The lineup also includes big-hitting, next-wave talents like the erratic but dangerous Garbiñe Muguruza, who beat Williams to win the French Open in June; Pliskova; and, most reassuringly from an American perspective, Madison Keys.At 21, Keys is the first American woman not named Williams to take part in the WTA Finals since Lindsay Davenport — Keys’s former coach — in 2005.Keys has already been named a future No. 1 by Williams, who told her so at the net after beating her in the final of this year’s Italian Open in Rome. Keys has been hearing such speculation since she was in her midteens and could already pound tennis balls flat with her big groundstrokes and serve.Although she has still not won a top-tier tour title or reached a Grand Slam final, she has made significant progress under her new coach, Thomas Hogstedt. She continues to try to strike the right on-court balance between going for it and thinking her way through it.“I think with a lot of players, hunger comes before results, and I think with Madison, her results came before hunger,” said Evert, who has known Keys since Keys was a child.Evert added: “Making the Finals is another step, another baby step. But really, it’s taken her four years of baby steps to get into the top eight, and I think because she’s had those baby steps, she’s not in a position where she’s going to get overawed or intimidated by her success. And she’s definitely not going to take it for granted.”A version of this article appears in print on October 22, 2016, on Page D4 of the New York edition with the headline: With Williams Out in Singapore, Door Swings Open to a Sport’s Future.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.See More »