
On Pro Basketball By                     
 HARVEY ARATON
 
FEB. 27, 2016
Carmelo Anthony was back to being the last Knick out of the shower Friday night, as opposed to being the first one through the Madison Square Garden exit, as was the case earlier in the week. Normalcy was restored. He had returned to his standard postgame speaking slot as the resident star.Anthony was upbeat after the Knicks again looked like a team with a path forward, not one in plummeting descent, albeit against an opponent, the Orlando Magic, from their Eastern Conference neighborhood of also-rans.Interestingly, Anthony often smiles even in the immediate aftermath of failure. It was impossible to miss the big, goofy grin he wore after air-balling a game-ending 3-point attempt and making 5 of 20 shots from the field in a 108-105 defeat at Indiana on Wednesday night.“It’s because it’s something he’s not used to,” Jose Calderon, the Knicks’ much-maligned but standup point guard, said before Friday’s 108-95 victory over the Magic. “It’s like he’s thinking, ‘Man, this is crazy,’ like he just can’t believe it.”AdvertisementIt’s an affectation to mask the bewilderment of error, age, whatever. But Anthony is as polarizing a figure to Knicks fans as any politician. That smile in Indiana undoubtedly fueled critics’ claim that he cares more about his brand than his much-discussed chances of winning a championship.AdvertisementAmateur psychological evaluations aside, nobody knows what is in Anthony’s head, or heart. This season, his team-oriented efforts have been richly and rightly applauded. But to Calderon’s point, the most distraught Anthony has looked as a Knick might have been at the conclusion of a 1-point defeat at San Antonio in early January.Derek Fisher — remember him? — had to race from his coaching station to console Anthony after he surrendered to Kawhi Leonard’s defense and passed to an open Calderon for a 3-point attempt that missed.Anthony seemed terribly conflicted by his correct decision. “He saw me open; I shot it,” Calderon said. “We’ve got to trust each other.”There lies the continuing problem. However relative Anthony’s personal or team aspirations are at any given moment, he can only talk himself into believing he can attain both during his remaining contractual years in New York with the most optimistic of arguments.Hard evidence to the contrary arrived in the form of the beating the Knicks absorbed on Monday from a very good Toronto team — the same team that holds the Knicks’ 2016 first-round draft pick. Afterward, Anthony was atypically available to reporters as soon as the locker room opened — the old Patrick Ewing policy — so he could get away quickly to “decompress.”Anthony communicated his dissatisfaction with the Knicks’ effort without the scolding tone of a Kobe Bryant or Michael Jordan. He is an amiable fellow who generally seems pleased with the blessed life he is living, ring or no ring.Get the big sports news, highlights and analysis from Times journalists, with distinctive takes on games and some behind-the-scenes surprises, delivered to your inbox every week.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.He is entitled. As Calderon said, “some of the greatest Hall of Famers never won a ring; so much is about the right spot at the right time.”AdvertisementRationale aside, Anthony also appears to understand that there is diminishing value to Broadway stardom without the necessary co-stars and that, at 31, he has an increasing inability to carry the show.Ten years ago, commenting on Allen Iverson’s similar epiphany in Philadelphia and subsequent trade request, Doc Rivers said, “The pressure of carrying your team is unbearable, and no single player has done it successfully.”He included Jordan, who had a so-called supporting cast that won 55 games without him in the 1993-94 season.The Knicks claimed their 25th victory Friday night. Nine more over their final 22 games would total 34, or double their franchise-low 17 of last season. That’s a reasonable outcome but a comedown from the narrative in the first half of the season largely created by the stunning debut of Kristaps Porzingis.Then the reality of the long and winding season intruded. Anthony’s surgically repaired knee began barking. Phil Jackson, the team president, had to admit he mistakenly put Fisher in a position he wasn’t ready for. By Friday night, the interim coach Kurt Rambis was calling out Porzingis for camping out at the top of the key and launching 3-pointers “that I flat-out don’t like.”Porzingis will learn, but a 20-year-old’s timetable is not very compatible with Anthony’s, which will be the primary story line from here into summer.Clearly, Anthony wants to stay in New York, but come July, he will be watching to see if Jackson can land an impact free agent — not the best bet in a limited class and with impending cap space everywhere.Miami, the Knicks’ opponent Sunday, could be the kind of team Anthony would consider waiving his no-trade clause for, although Chris Bosh’s health uncertainty could complicate the matter. Either way, Pat Riley — Jackson’s Heat counterpart, fellow septuagenarian and rival — will be more invested in retooling, not rebuilding.AdvertisementRiley would probably at least be able to promise Anthony a return to the playoffs, something Jackson, in all likelihood, could not. Rebuilding is a process, not a proclamation. Consider teams like Detroit, Milwaukee, New Orleans — well ahead of the Knicks on the trail of developing talent yet still straining for mediocrity.If Jackson can procure a young asset and a draft pick in a trade, Anthony will have pardoned himself for the original sin of forcing the Knicks to unload a bundle of resources on Denver when he might have signed as a free agent for the following season and cost the Knicks nothing.The movement for aligning stars had already begun in Boston and Miami, but Anthony went for the most money and did so again when he re-signed with the Knicks in 2014. He has tried to stay upbeat through five years, but the happy smile wanes with the playoffs nearly out of reach, and the decision to stay or go becomes as understandably torturous as that snap judgment in San Antonio to pass or shoot.A version of this article appears in print on February 28, 2016, on Page SP5 of the New York edition with the headline: Smiles Come, and Smiles Go. Soon, Anthony Might Follow.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.See More »