AdvertisementSupported byKnicks 108, Magic 95By Seth BerkmanWhen Kurt Rambis took over as interim coach of the Knicks this month, he set a lofty goal of steering the team with a 23-31 record to the playoffs.Despite Rambis’s edict, the Knicks have lost 13 of their last 16 games. Before Friday’s contest against the Orlando Magic at Madison Square Garden, Rambis clarified his aspirations, saying the players needed to shift their attitude and believe they are worthy of the postseason. “In making that statement, to me it’s more of a mind-set,” Rambis said. “You have to have this mind-set of a player of ‘We’re going to win.’ You want to think of yourself as an individual — you want to think of this team as winners.”For one night, at least, the Knicks used balanced scoring — seven players tallied double figures including all five starters, led by Carmelo Anthony’s 19 points — to easily handle the Magic, 108-95. On Thursday, after another demoralizing defeat, in which Anthony had air-balled a potential tying 3-point attempt at the buzzer against the Indiana Pacers, the Knicks shifted the focus of their practice to the film room.They emphasized protecting the paint (stopping inside penetration) and also closing in on shooters so they are not left scrambling to help one another when the ball is quickly passed around the perimeter. “It’s a two-part component and you’ve got to be connected and engaged in order to make that happen well,” Rambis said. As Rambis explained his approach to ironing out the Knicks’ defensive deficiencies that have contributed to their plunge in the standings, he frequently gestured with his hands and circled his fingers in the air, dictating what players should be doing and where they should be on the court.“The connection that he’s talking about, if somebody gets beat you have their back; if that person gets beat, you have their back,” Anthony said. “Everybody’s on this train. A lot of time recently, we haven’t been connected as a team like that. I thought tonight we did a better job of being connected.” The Knicks trailed early, but were sustained by Jose Calderon’s 10 first-quarter points. At one point, with the Knicks leading by 23-17, Elfrid Payton snared a long rebound and drove down the court, beating Calderon while Kyle O’Quinn hesitated and then did not commit to stop the uncontested dunk.Rambis angrily called timeout, and O’Quinn tried to explain himself walking back to the bench. Perhaps showing how committed he is to drilling in the new defensive mentality, Rambis did not play O’Quinn after the first quarter.If the Knicks’ defense showed some improvement, the Magic were out of sync from the start. Whenever they began to chip away at the Knicks’ lead, which was as large as 24 points in the third quarter, it seemed the Knicks broke down the Magic’s defense with crisp, quick give-and-go passes for easy baskets. The Knicks also won the battle inside, picking up 36 free-throw attempts and making 30. They held a 62-44 lead at halftime, with 28 points in the paint.“I kept writing on the board, ‘Paint and paint’ — protect the paint at the defensive end, attack the paint at the offensive end,” Rambis said. With 8 minutes 54 seconds remaining in the second quarter, a putback layup by Kristaps Porzingis gave the Knicks a 40-29 advantage, and the Magic never trimmed the deficit to single digits. Porzingis added 18 points on 7 for 15 shooting, and fared well down on the block against the strength of Magic forward Aaron Gordon. Porzingis said he frequently peppered Anthony with questions on how to improve his low-post scoring — whether it be when they are soaking in the tub after a game or if he pulls up a highlight video of Anthony on Instagram and asks how to duplicate his move set.  With the Knicks showing no signs of cracking against a dull effort by the Magic, the home crowd began chanting for Jimmer Fredette, the recent call-up, early in the third quarter. Throughout the night, the call periodically rose again, reaching a crescendo as the final minutes ticked down. But Rambis never called on Fredette. Instead, the crowd would have to be placated by the Knicks’ first home win since Jan. 29.REBOUNDSThe Knicks shot 46.2 percent from the field, including 4 of 16 on 3-point attempts. Advertisement