

 Benjamin Hoffman
 

KEEPING SCORE
FEB. 27, 2016
Every time a poor free-throw shooter is fouled intentionally, it seems to reopen the debate about whether the N.B.A. should take action against the strategy.Commissioner Adam Silver has acknowledged the growing sentiment that a change is necessary, but he said in his annual address during All-Star weekend that it would take time to figure out how to best address the issue.“We’re just beginning to formulate what an alternative would look like,” Silver said. “Until there’s a clear alternative that emerges, it’s easy to say, ‘I hate the strategy,’ but it’s a much more difficult strategy to decide just what the new rule should be.”While the league and its fans wait to see what the eventual change may be, it is worth wondering if the tactic of repeatedly sending DeAndre Jordan of the Los Angeles Clippers, Andre Drummond of the Detroit Pistons and, to a lesser extent, Dwight Howard of the Houston Rockets to the free-throw line is worth it, even under the current rules.AdvertisementWell-timed intentional fouls have always been a part of basketball, and there is no question that they can affect the outcome of a game. But the results of concerted efforts to have one player go to the line over and over — either to try to force the opponent to remove a star player or to try to make up a large deficit by reducing its offensive efficiency — appear inconclusive.Advertisement DeAndre Jordan Jordan, a big center, is an elite rebounder and defender, but he has struggled at the free-throw line throughout his career. This season, Jordan has been sent to the line for 10 or more free-throw attempts in 17 games, making only 41 percent in those games as opposed to the 44.5 percent he has hit in the rest of his games.Because of his ineffectiveness, the strategy of fouling him does appear sound: The Clippers averaged well under a point per possession on those plays, whereas the team averages 1.08 points per possession over all.Yet even though the math seemingly supports the fouling of Jordan, the strategy has not done much good for the Clippers’ opponents.In one particularly ugly game in November, the Portland Trail Blazers sent Jordan to the line for 34 attempts, including 18 over the last 3 minutes 51 seconds. Jordan made just 12 shots, but the Clippers won easily, 102-87.“That just means more practice,” Jordan told reporters at the time when asked about all of the attempts. “It gets boring. And it makes me miss my reservations after the game. But other than that, it’s the same.”As for the six games in which Jordan had 10 or more free-throw attempts and the Clippers lost, it would be hard to pin the losses on his futility at the line. In four of the games, the score was well out of reach for much of the game, and in one, Jordan was 3 for 4 from the line after being intentionally fouled in the fourth quarter. In the only other loss, Jordan hit 7 of 12 attempts, thus negating any sort of advantage fouling would generally provide. Andre Drummond With Drummond, who has had a breakout season as a scorer and rebounder, the strategy of repeatedly fouling has proved a bit more effective because he is a far worse free-throw shooter than Jordan. In the 19 games in which Drummond has been given 10 or more free-throw attempts, he has gone 95 for 254 (37.4 percent). Yet his team still won 13 of the games.Get the big sports news, highlights and analysis from Times journalists, with distinctive takes on games and some behind-the-scenes surprises, delivered to your inbox every week.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.His worst hacking came in January when the Houston Rockets intentionally fouled him 21 times and sent him to the line for 36 attempts, of which he made just 13. The 23 misses set an N.B.A. record, and at least on some level the tactic worked: Drummond was forced out of the game for good with 5:32 left in the fourth quarter. Ultimately, though, the Rockets could not turn the effective strategy into a win, with the Pistons holding on for a 123-114 victory.Advertisement“That’s the game the league wants, so that’s what fans get to watch,” Pistons Coach Stan Van Gundy told reporters after the game, in which the seldom-used K. J. McDaniels fouled Drummond five times in the first nine seconds of the third quarter.In the team’s six losses in games in which Drummond had 10 or more free-throw attempts, the Pistons could have used more help from him at the line. The team lost by 4 points in a game in which Drummond missed nine free throws, by 5 points in a game in which he missed seven, and by 7 in a game in which he missed 11.But the clearest case of a team’s hacking Drummond into submission was on Dec. 23, when the Hawks harassed him to the point that he missed 11 of his first 16 attempts as Atlanta built a big lead.“It worked,” Drummond told reporters. “They won the game. I’ve just got to make free throws. That’s the tactic they took, and it worked for them tonight.” Dwight Howard Howard, the Rockets’ center, is perhaps the most unusual case because, on the face of it, there is no reason teams should be intentionally fouling him. For the third consecutive season, he is making more than 50 percent of his free-throw attempts, thus negating the points-per-possession advantage that is gained by fouling an awful shooter.Howard has not been impervious to the strategy; in four games, he had 10 or more attempts and made fewer than 40 percent of them. Over all, though, he is a good enough shooter that a team is taking quite a risk by fouling him intentionally.A version of this article appears in print on February 28, 2016, on Page SP5 of the New York edition with the headline: Even When Shots Miss, Intentionally Fouling May Not Pay Off.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.See More »