By SETH BERKMANMAY 10, 2016
The Yankees were exhibiting the classic signs of another collapse. From the inaccurate starting pitching, blown leads and an uncharacteristically shaky performance by the back end of the bullpen, all signs pointed to another loss.But in recent days, the Yankees’ bats have come alive. So even after Lorenzo Cain hit his third home run of the night, the Yankees’ offense answered. First, Brett Gardner smacked a tiebreaking double in the eighth inning. Two batters later, Brian McCann hit a two-run double off the center-field wall, propelling the Yankees as they outlasted the Kansas City Royals, 10-7, on Tuesday night at Yankee Stadium.Aroldis Chapman picked up his first save for the Yankees, pitching a scoreless ninth. The Yankees’ fourth win in five games on their current homestand came on a night when Masahiro Tanaka battled through his worst start of the season.After the game, Manager Joe Girardi could not pinpoint why his lineup had suddenly turned potent again.Advertisement“Maybe it’s the weather heating up; it’s not raining?” Girardi said. “All of a sudden we’re swinging the bats like we’re capable of. And you’re getting contributions up and down the lineup.”AdvertisementThose contributions have been missing when Tanaka took the mound.Through the Yankees’ largely unremarkable first 30 games, Tanaka had become the one constant on the roster. As dependable as a seven-iron, he kept them out of rough patches every five or six days.But Tanaka’s dazzling performances were often wasted by the Yankees’ exasperating inability to provide him run support. In the first six games Tanaka started, the Yankees backed him up with a total of 15 runs.On Tuesday, the Yankees anted up, scoring five times over the first three innings. But the Royals displayed the relentlessness they showed against the Mets in last year’s World Series. Kansas City often attacked Tanaka immediately.Alcides Escobar singled off Tanaka’s first pitch. Alex Gordon took Tanaka’s first offering of the second inning and drove it to left-center field for a double. Three batters later, Cheslor Cuthbert hit a two-run homer over the left-field wall.Tanaka gave up two more home runs, both to Cain. After watching Cain clock a three-run homer into the Royals’ bullpen in left field during the fifth inning, Tanaka took a long pause and stared at where the ball landed before slamming his hand into his glove.“I think if you look back at some of the previous games, I think I got away with some mistakes, but that wasn’t the case today,” Tanaka said through an interpreter, adding that his slider was often left up high in the zone. “Every mistake that I made was capitalized.”Get the big sports news, highlights and analysis from Times journalists, with distinctive takes on games and some behind-the-scenes surprises, delivered to your inbox every week.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.Tanaka lasted seven innings and allowed six runs on seven hits. He had not given up more than two earned runs in any of his first six starts.AdvertisementThe Yankees’ offensive outburst was slightly surprising, given the absence of another bat from the middle of their lineup.Mark Teixeira was out of the starting lineup for the first time this season, sitting due to neck spasms. Girardi guessed that Teixeira might miss “a day or two.”With Teixeira out, Jacoby Ellsbury missing his fourth straight game with a strained right hip and Alex Rodriguez on the disabled list because of a strained right hamstring, Girardi described his team as “the walking wounded.” To compensate, Dustin Ackley batted fifth in the Yankees’ order and started at first base.Girardi said that Teixeira’s neck problem could have been a cause of his slump at the plate. Teixeira has one hit in his last 16 at-bats and has not hit a home run since April 13. For the season, he is batting .202 with three home runs, 11 R.B.I. and one double.Teixeira said after the game that he probably aggravated his neck problem last week in Baltimore. Asked if it contributed to his poor at-bats, Teixeira said, “Probably, but I’m not going to use the excuse.”The accumulation of injuries has allowed Ackley more playing time. After picking up two R.B.I. and scoring two runs, Ackley said that he had felt one swing away from getting on track, and that the regular swings he has been able to take during this homestand have fixed his approach.“I feel really good at the plate right now,” Ackley said.Possibly the only other batter looking more comfortable in the box was Cain, who became the seventh Royal to hit three homers in a game.“Cain had a huge night,” Girardi said, adding: “He’s a really good player. We left some breaking balls up to him and he hit them hard.”AdvertisementAndrew Miller, pitching for the first time this season in a setup role for Chapman, allowed Cain’s third homer of the night in the eighth.While the Yankees’ offense has awaked lately, baseball’s karmic balance swung against Miller, who had not allowed a run all season before Tuesday.“I don’t feel exactly as sharp as I should right now,” Miller said, “but that’s how the season goes.”A version of this article appears in print on May 11, 2016, on Page B9 of the New York edition with the headline: Yankees Finally Give Tanaka Some Support, and He Needs It.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.