By DAVID WALDSTEINMAY 10, 2016
LOS ANGELES — The Mets exacted pitiless revenge against Chase Utley. They did it last October when they beat the Dodgers in Game 5 of their division series.They had another opportunity to send a more pointed message directly to Utley in a lower-stakes setting at Dodger Stadium on Monday. They chose to let the moment pass, and Utley was spared the retribution of a punitive fastball in the ribcage.But he suffered the same result as last October because the Mets beat the Dodgers again, this time by 4-2, in the first meeting between these old rivals since their playoff encounter.If the Mets really are determined to make their archenemy pay in kind for his October transgression against Ruben Tejada, then it will come another day.AdvertisementUtley is reviled in the Mets universe for his rolling takeout slide of Ruben Tejada in Game 2 of last year’s division series between the teams, which resulted in a broken leg for Tejada.Utley came to bat in Game 5 of that series, when no one dared face the risk of ejection or suspension. Perhaps a regular-season game seven months later would provide the platform for the Mets to exact some revenge. But there was apparently no such intent.“That was brought up,” Mets Manager Terry Collins said. “What happened, happened. We won the series. Let’s not get anybody hurt, including our guys.”But Collins, perhaps to plant a seed of uncertainty in Utley’s head, added a cryptic message.“There is only so much control you can have,” he said, “so we’ll see what happens as we get through this.”Utley, a second baseman, was not in the starting lineup against the left-hander Steven Matz, but he stepped in as a pinch-hitter against Hansel Robles in the seventh inning, and he came up again in the ninth inning.AdvertisementMets fans at Dodger Stadium vocalized their disdain with boos and catcalls at the sight of Utley striding to the plate, but if they hoped to see Robles even the score, they were disappointed.Robles pitched Utley straight, and the second baseman merely grounded out to first base. In the ninth inning, Jeurys Familia forced him to ground out to short, and went on to earn the save.Utley’s hard slide into Tejada, who now plays for the St. Louis Cardinals, instigated this year’s rule change restricting takeout slides at second base.Before the game, Collins made clear he still harbored some ill feelings toward Utley for the play, even though Tejada is no longer on the team.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.“Chase plays hard; I get that,” Collins said. “I’ve been watching him for a long time.”Collins acknowledged that over the years, he had instructed his players to take action against an opponent when he felt it was warranted, although he did not specify how that occurred. He added that the Mets had enough veterans on the roster to handle the matter themselves, if they felt it was necessary.“I haven’t said one word about anything going into this series,” he said, “so we’ll leave it at that.”With payback off the agenda, the game instead featured the Mets playing superior baseball.For all the success the Mets have enjoyed over their first 30 games, the one rare detraction was that they had not fared well against left-handed starting pitching.Before Monday’s game, they had scored only three runs against lefty starters, and all of those came on one swing by Yoenis Cespedes.But on Monday, they found the solution against the former Mets draft pick Scott Kazmir.The Mets scored four times against Kazmir, including one unearned run, and Matz had another strong outing, allowing two runs and six hits in six innings while striking out five. He also had a run-scoring double.AdvertisementCurtis Granderson led off the game with a home run on the first pitch by Kazmir, his 37th career leadoff home run. Kevin Plawecki added a solo shot in the second inning, and Asdrubal Cabrera scored on a single by Cespedes in the third.The Dodgers crept to within 3-2 on Trayce Thompson’s two-run home run in the fourth. But a Dodgers error in the sixth helped the Mets pad the lead.Kazmir had worked his way through early difficulties and had retired eight in a row before issuing a walk to Wilmer Flores in the sixth. Plawecki then hit a routine ground ball that should have ended the inning.Howie Kendrick, the Dodgers’ starting second baseman, vacuumed it into his glove, but when he took the ball into his right hand to throw to first base, he simply dropped it, and Flores and Plawecki were safe.Kazmir may have thought he would be, too, with Matz was coming to the plate. But the pitcher ripped a ball down the third-base line and into left field. Flores scored, and Matz settled into second base with a double, and eventually a win.“It’s good to be back,” Matz said. “We’ve got a good team here, and we’re really rolling.”INSIDE PITCHCatcher TRAVIS d’ARNAUD went to New York to see Dr. David Altchek, who gave him a platelet-rich plasma injection in his right shoulder but did not change the diagnosis of a strained rotator cuff. The Mets said d’Arnaud would be shut down from baseball activities for about a week before testing his shoulder again. … WILMER FLORES suffered a cut nose and abrasions on his forehead, face and neck and his batting helmet slid down on his face during a slide into second base. He said it would not force him to miss time. … NEIL WALKER was left out of the starting lineup with a recurring shin bruise and may miss Tuesday’s game, too.We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.