AdvertisementSupported byBy Billy WitzThe recent rash of drug violations in baseball continued Tuesday, but with a twist.Raul A. Mondesi, an infielder who is on the Kansas City Royals’ 40-man roster at Class AA Northwest Arkansas, received a 50-game suspension after testing positive for Clenbuterol, a performance-enhancing drug.The suspension, however, was reduced from the 80 games that are mandated for first-time offenses by an arbitration panel. Mondesi supplied evidence that it came from an over-the-counter cold medicine in the Dominican Republic. The panel also ruled that Mondesi can be eligible for postseason play.Last year, Mondesi, the son of the former outfielder Raul Mondesi, became the first player to make his major league debut in the World Series. He struck out as a pinch-hitter in Game 3 against the Mets. It was his only appearance.Mondesi is the fifth player suspended for performance-enhancing drugs this season. He joins Miami’s Dee Gordon, Toronto’s Chris Colabello, Los Angeles Dodgers pitcher Josh Ravin and Philadelphia pitcher Daniel Stumpf. Gordon tested positive for exogenous testosterone and clostebol; Colabello and Stump for dehydrochlormethyltestosterone; and Ravin for Growth Hormone Releasing Peptide 2.Mondesi said in a statement that he took the medication Subrox-C to treat cold and flu symptoms, failing to read the label or consult with the team trainer. He “did not know it contained a banned substance,” Mondesi said in the statement. “I tested positive for that banned substances, with a minuscule amount of Clenbuterol in my system, which could not have possibly enhanced my performance on the field.”Royals Manager Ned Yost said the case underlined the importance of players checking with team trainers before they take any sort of medicine or supplement, even energy drinks.“It’s not that they ignore it,” Yost said. “I think subconsciously you go into a store and buy something for a cold. How much damage can that do? Well, you find out it can do a lot of damage. It can cost you 50 games.”Clenbuteral, which can be used as a decongestant and aids asthma victims, also increases aerobic capacity. It gained notoriety as one of the substances distributed to dozens of players by the former Mets clubhouse assistant Kirk Radomski.According to the M.L.B. Joint Drug Prevention and Treatment program, the arbitration panel can reduce a suspension for first-time offenders to 40 games if the player “proves by clear and convincing evidence that he bears no significant fault or negligence” for the positive test. If the panel reduces a suspension, the player remains eligible for postseason play.Advertisement