AdvertisementSupported byBy Sam BordenMichel Platini, one of the most high-profile figures entangled in global soccer’s continuing corruption investigations, resigned Monday from his position as head of European soccer after his bid to overturn a long suspension for unethical behavior was rejected.Mr. Platini had been president of the Continent’s governing body, UEFA, since 2007, but he was suspended last October for a conflict of interest after a corruption investigation by Swiss authorities revealed that he had taken a $2 million payment from FIFA, the organization overseeing world soccer, in 2011. Sepp Blatter, the longtime president of FIFA, approved the payment — which was issued shortly before Mr. Blatter won re-election — and was suspended by FIFA’s independent ethics committee as well.Mr. Platini and Mr. Blatter have denied improper conduct, and appealed to the Court of Arbitration for Sport. A three-judge panel hearing Mr. Platini’s case was not convinced but reduced Mr. Platini’s ban to four years, from six. Mr. Blatter’s case is still pending.In a statement, Mr. Platini called the decision a “deep injustice” and said he was stepping away from UEFA so that he could focus on fighting his case in Swiss courts. Mr. Platini also expressed disappointment that the decision effectively ended any chance he had of running for the FIFA presidency in 2019.“This decision is inflicting me a suspension whose length will de facto prevent me — as if by chance — from bidding for the next FIFA presidential election,” Mr. Platini said.Mr. Platini and Mr. Blatter have argued that there was an oral agreement between them that supported the $2 million payment, which they said was for consulting work Mr. Platini did for Mr. Blatter from 1999 to 2002; this payment, the men have said, was simply back pay for work already done.The members of the C.A.S. panel rejected that argument, noting that Mr. Platini had received the money “more than eight years after the end of his work relations.” The amount paid, they added, “was not based on any document established at the time of the contractual relations and did not correlate with the alleged unpaid part of his salary.”The court also said that Mr. Platini’s demeanor and attitude during the case was a factor, citing “the absence of any repentance and the impact that this matter has had on FIFA’s reputation.”The ruling essentially ends Mr. Platini’s career as a high-ranking executive in soccer governance, a sudden tumble for a figure who was often seen as the obvious successor to Mr. Blatter. Mr. Platini was a key leader in bringing the European Championships to his home country of France, and will not be allowed to take an official role in hosting the tournament when it begins near Paris next month. The last time France hosted the tournament, in 1984, Mr. Platini led his national team to the title as captain.Advertisement