AdvertisementSupported byWarriors 132, Trail Blazers 125By Scott CacciolaPORTLAND, Ore. — The big reveal for the Golden State Warriors came in parts.First, there was the sight of Stephen Curry, absent for the first three games of his team’s Western Conference semifinal series with the Portland Trail Blazers, striding onto the court at Moda Center on Monday night so he could dribble two basketballs at once, a staple of his pregame routine.Then, minutes later, Coach Steve Kerr confirmed what everyone already suspected — that Curry would play.What happened next defied reasonable expectations, even for a basketball maestro like Curry, who has assembled a myth-making season. Fifteen days after spraining his right knee in a first-round game against the Houston Rockets, Curry brushed off the dust to carry the Warriors to a 132-125 overtime victory that gave them a 3-1 series lead.“Crazy,” Kerr said.“Remarkable,” Trail Blazers Coach Terry Stotts said.“My confidence never wavered,” said Curry, who set another N.B.A. record in a season full of them by scoring 17 points in overtime.Curry finished with 40 points, 9 rebounds and 8 assists. He shot 6 of 7 from the field in overtime, connecting on all three of his 3-point attempts.“You miss three weeks, it’s really weird walking back on the court,” said Curry, who had missed two games with a right ankle sprain before spraining his knee. “It took 48 minutes, and things finally clicked.”If Curry lacked his usual rhythm through three quarters — he missed his first nine 3-point attempts — he was adept at making layups, and he scored the Warriors’ first 12 points of overtime. His fourth 3-pointer of the game gave Golden State a 5-point lead, and a night full of drama here gave way to desperation, then sadness.The Warriors can close out the series Wednesday night at Oracle Arena.They survived no shortage of adversity in Game 4. They trailed by 16 points in the first quarter. Draymond Green played through foul trouble. Shaun Livingston was ejected late in the first half for arguing a call, leaving Kerr with a short bench when he had hoped to monitor Curry’s playing time.Instead, Curry wound up supplying 36 minutes and clogged the box score by shooting 16 of 32 from the field. Klay Thompson added 23 points in the win.“A lot of it was just the timing issue,” Curry said. “You shoot shots in practice, and you try to simulate game speed and whatnot, but most of the time nobody’s guarding you. So it’s a little different. And then a lot of it is allowing that muscle memory to come back.”Damian Lillard had 36 points and 10 assists for the Trail Blazers, and C. J. McCollum added 24 points.The Warriors surged at the start of the third quarter. Curry darted through the lane for a layup to cut the deficit to 3. He also acted as a facilitator, finding Thompson for a 3-pointer that put the Warriors ahead by 1. Early in the fourth quarter, Curry buried a two-foot jumper and the Warriors were up by 5.But the teams continued to exchange 3-pointers — and the lead — as they fought to the finish of regulation. Lillard, despite struggling with his shot for so much of the game, emerged with a series of jumpers. But the Warriors’ Harrison Barnes sank a 3-pointer to tie the score, 111-111, and the game went to overtime.Coming off the bench was an unfamiliar role for Curry. He had not done it in more than four years. Without him for the first six minutes, the Warriors labored — much as they had in Game 3. Lillard made two 3-pointers as the Blazers ran out to a 16-2 lead. The Warriors, meanwhile, missed 11 of their first 12 shots.Curry soon stripped off his warm-ups as he made the slow walk to the scorer’s table, his first appearance of the series accompanied by enthusiastic boos.The Blazers were determined to make Curry work by running him through an obstacle course of screens. At the other end, he sank a 15-foot jumper that narrowed the Blazers’ lead to 12.Yet the Warriors could not escape adversity. After Livingston’s ejection, the Trail Blazers went into halftime with a 67-57 lead.For the first two games of the series, the Warriors compensated for Curry’s absence. Livingston capably filled in as the team’s starting point guard. Thompson sank shots. Green created havoc. The Warriors won both games, motoring along even as Curry watched from the bench in street clothes.But the Warriors, lacking ball movement and what Kerr described as desperation, finally stumbled Saturday in Game 3. Lillard collected 40 points and 10 assists to lead the Trail Blazers to a lopsided victory, which enlivened Portland’s confidence and ramped up the drama ahead of Game 4.Perhaps the Warriors would have felt less urgency to activate Curry with a 3-0 series lead. But Curry did not need to lobby to play, Kerr said. It was a collective decision made after Kerr had conversations with General Manager Bob Myers, members of the team’s medical staff and Curry himself, who assured everyone that he was fine.As he went through his pregame routine, Curry appeared to be moving well, sinking shots much to the delight of hundreds of early-arriving fans who snapped photographs with their mobile devices. After he physically moved a security guard out of the way for his final shot — a fading 3-pointer from deep in the corner — Curry raised an arm as he ran off the court.Three hours later, he left the court again, this time with victory in hand.Advertisement