By TAL PINCHEVSKYOCT. 20, 2016
ANAHEIM, Calif. — After three years as a consultant overseeing the Anaheim Ducks’ collection of talented young goaltenders, Sudarshan Maharaj was promoted last summer to the team’s goaltending coach.Maharaj, who is known as Sudsie, is now tasked with molding 23-year-old John Gibson into the Ducks’ franchise netminder.As challenges go, the Trinidad-born Maharaj, who is of Indian descent, has faced worse.Like when he worked with gang members in Toronto, his hometown.Or when his car was firebombed in Sweden in what he believes was a racially motivated attack.In the late 1980s, midway through a nomadic six-year tenure playing professionally in Sweden, Maharaj was visiting friends who had been harassed by a gang at a team event at a local community center.Advertisement“I look out the window and they had thrown two Molotov cocktails through the back of the car,” Maharaj, 52, said. “I came running out thinking I could throw water on it and put the fire out. After the fact, I realized they could have been standing there just waiting for me to run out and lay a good whupping on me. That same group would drive through the neighborhood and yell things outside my apartment.”AdvertisementDays after Maharaj’s car was destroyed, the gang’s ringleader, an ex-convict known for terrorizing local residents, showed up at Maharaj’s apartment building in an attempt to deter the goaltender from pursuing charges. Maharaj stood his ground, although the police were unable to collect sufficient evidence for an indictment. The man was arrested weeks later after assaulting a local resident.Maharaj spent three more years playing in Sweden, where he endeared himself to fans and locals alike by learning the language. But the episode stayed with Maharaj.“It was definitely racially motivated,” he said. “There were enough names exchanged and yelled through my window that it wasn’t because I had brown eyes.”Aside from that memory, Maharaj has fond recollections of his time in Sweden. He considered staying there, but ultimately decided to retire, return to Toronto, and start a new career.Maharaj landed at the Toronto District School Board, where he became a behavioral consultant with at-risk youth. But his love for the game, which developed shortly after he moved to Toronto with his family at age 6, never waned. He started coaching at York University, where he had won a national championship as a player, and eventually conducted off-season training with N.H.L. goaltenders like Kevin Weekes, Steve Valiquette and Ray Emery.For Weekes, whose parents came to Toronto from Barbados, it was thrilling to train with someone who shared his Caribbean background.“Culturally there were certain nuances where there was no need for an explanation,” Weekes said. “He can be very direct. I gave him the license to be very forthcoming. That’s how you get better.”Get the big sports news, highlights and analysis from Times journalists, with distinctive takes on games and some behind-the-scenes surprises, delivered to your inbox every week.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.Maharaj earned a roster of loyal N.H.L. clients. Meanwhile, his work with the school district helped him establish a network of social workers and gang members that proved imperative in collecting information about the troubled children he oversaw.Advertisement“Bloods, Crips. They knew everything that was going on in the neighborhood, so I would subtly get information without them snitching out anybody,” Maharaj said. “Once a month, one of them would say, ‘Hey, Mr. M. You still driving that silver Jetta?’ I could park that thing, windows down, in any part of the neighborhood, and it never got jacked.”That ability to patiently reach out to young people from troubled backgrounds also helped in working with goaltenders.“There’s definitely an element of personality management,” Maharaj said. “You have to know when to push and when to back off.”Those skills eventually caught the eye of Islanders goalie Rick DiPietro, who urged the team to hire Maharaj as its goaltending coach in 2003. Under Maharaj’s tutelage, DiPietro, the first pick in the 2000 draft, immediately established himself as a franchise goaltender before his career was derailed by injuries.Maharaj’s Islanders contract was not renewed after the 2012 N.H.L. lockout. A year later, he arrived in Anaheim, where he was assigned to groom a group of young goalies that included Gibson, Frederik Andersen and the third-round pick Igor Bobkov. Andersen and Gibson developed into standout N.H.L. goalies, with Gibson earning the Ducks’ starting nod after Andersen was traded to the Toronto Maple Leafs on June 20.“We clicked right from the start,” Gibson said. “He understood me as a person and my style and didn’t try to change it. He’s become a coach but also a friend.”Maharaj credited numerous former hockey colleagues with contributing to his coaching success. But one person from his time in education sticks out most.Advertisement“Probably the greatest lesson I learned in life was from a girl in the fifth grade who would come to school every day with no homework,” Maharaj said.Using his connections within poor city neighborhoods, including gang members, Maharaj unearthed the root of the girl’s problems.“I discovered that her mom was a prostitute and she would bring the johns to the apartment every night,” Maharaj said. “So this little girl would hide in the closet every night from all these strange men coming into the apartment. She would fall asleep in the closet because she was afraid, and there was no light in the closet to do her homework.”After his discovery, Maharaj allotted time every day after class for the girl to work with teachers. The encounter still shapes his approach to coaching two decades later.“People do things for a reason,” Maharaj said. You can’t judge a book by its cover. So you had to understand what was the source of that hurt. The same applies to hockey. What is the source of that behavior?”A version of this article appears in print on October 21, 2016, on Page B10 of the New York edition with the headline: From Gang Members to Goalies, a Coach Who Wins Trust.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.