AdvertisementSupported byBy Sam BordenZURICH — U.S. Soccer’s president, Sunil Gulati, said Thursday that the federation would vote for Prince Ali bin al-Hussein of Jordan in Friday’s FIFA presidential election, turning away from the two front-runners to back the candidate U.S. Soccer supported last year in the previous election.Gulati made the announcement in a post on his Twitter account.U.S. Soccer had declined to reveal its choice all week, but like several other federations went public with its support on the eve of the election. Most of FIFA’s member federations are believed to be supporting one of the favorites: Gianni Infantino of Switzerland, a top official in European soccer’s governing body, UEFA, or Sheikh Salman bin Ebrahim al-Khalifa of Bahrain, the president of the Asian Football Confederation.To win, a candidate needs to receive two-thirds of the votes (138 of the 207 eligible nations) in the first round of balloting. It is expected that no candidate will reach that number, however, and on subsequent ballots, only a simple majority is required. Federations can switch their support to another candidate in each round.Gulati and U.S. Soccer also backed Prince Ali in the presidential election in May, when he mounted a surprisingly strong challenge to FIFA’s longtime incumbent president, Sepp Blatter. Prince Ali won 73 votes in the first round of balloting to Mr. Blatter’s 133, then withdrew before a second vote took place.Several days later, amid a growing corruption scandal at FIFA, Mr. Blatter announced that he would step down as president. Friday’s special election was called to choose his replacement.Each of the five candidates for president — the soccer administrator Jérôme Champagne and the South African businessman Tokyo Sexwale are also running — spent Thursday making their final pitches to voters. Predictions of the results of FIFA elections are famously unreliable, but many believe Sheikh Salman has emerged as the favorite because he has the backing of most of the countries in the FIFA confederations with the most members, Asia and Africa.Canada’s soccer federation announced that it would back Infantino, as did the 10-member South American confederation, Conmebol.Conmebol’s president, Alejandro Domínguez, confirmed that his organization “will vote as one block for Infantino,” fulfilling a pledge it made to him during the campaign.“Our position has always been firm,” Domínguez told reporters. “Gianni knows it, and the other candidates do, too.”Sheikh Salman received the public backing of the 10-member East Asian Football Federation, which counts Japan, South Korea and China among its members.CONCACAF APPROVES REFORMS Concacaf, the confederation representing North America, Central America and the Caribbean, unanimously passed a slate of reforms to help clean up its scandal-plagued operations. Its 41 member federations passed the changes for their regional body one day before they will take part in the vote for FIFA’s president. Concacaf needed to act after three of its past presidents were indicted.Among the reforms, Concacaf will separate political and commercial decision-making and appoint independent outsiders to key committees. It also instituted term limits for top executives and committee members. (AP)Advertisement