By TIM ROHANFEB. 26, 2016
PORT ST. LUCIE, Fla. — As Matt Harvey threw a routine bullpen session this week, Zack Wheeler stood 10 feet behind him, holding a clipboard. With each pitch Harvey threw, Wheeler marked a box on a sheet of paper, indicating where it was. Coaches typically fill out the form, but Wheeler figured that if he was just standing around, why not help?The Mets’ staff is being described as arguably the best in baseball. Every time a pitcher throws, he draws a crowd. The Mets gush about their five young, hard-throwing starters: Harvey, Jacob deGrom, Noah Syndergaard and Steven Matz — the heroes of the 2015 postseason — but the fifth one often is not named.Wheeler, who continues to recover from Tommy John surgery, is not expected to rejoin the rotation until around July 1. That leaves him in an uncomfortable situation: trying to be patient with his rehab while teammates and friends prepare for the start of the season without him.“I think this is very tough on Zack,” said Dan Warthen, the Mets’ pitching coach. “I mean, very tough. He’s watching all these guys who he’s just as good as, and he sees they’re getting quite a bit of press. He sees the team is winning — we went to the World Series — and he wasn’t part of that. I think that’s motivation for him, and I’m sure somewhere deep down, it hurts.”AdvertisementIn the past, a pitcher who had undergone Tommy John surgery might have been on the mound a year later. If that were the timetable for Wheeler, he might be ramping up for the 2016 season now. But because the Mets waited nearly 18 months before letting Harvey return from his own Tommy John surgery, and because Harvey went on to have a very solid 2015 season, the Mets also want Wheeler to stretch out his rehabilitation. If he rejoins the Mets in July, he will have had 15 months to recover.AdvertisementWhen Wheeler first started to rehabilitate, he signed a one-year lease on a place in Port St. Lucie. Other than a two-month winter break, he has been here, working his way back, one monotonous day after another. To pass the time, he brought his black Labrador, Cabela, from home, played friends in Call of Duty online and tried every good restaurant in the vicinity.At the trade deadline, when Wheeler saw his name included in the failed trade for Carlos Gomez, he called General Manager Sandy Alderson, asking not to be traded at the deadline, and then watched the playoffs from his couch, texting support to his teammates.As camp began and Wheeler’s teammates trickled in, each told reporters how he had spent his winter. Harvey had been on several talk shows, Syndergaard had shot an Under Armour commercial, and deGrom’s face had been in an advertisement for baseball caps. Wheeler spent his session being grilled about his recovery process.“You see all these guys coming back from it doing well,” he said. “You’ve just got to trust it.”The only comforting thing, perhaps, about the experience was that Wheeler had teammates who were recovering from Tommy John surgery or had done so in the past.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.Josh Edgin had the surgery around the same time and rehabbed in Port St. Lucie with Wheeler.Jeff Walters lived with Wheeler for about two months while finishing his own Tommy John rehabilitation. Wheeler often quizzed Walters on how he felt at certain stages of the process.Wheeler also sought advice from Harvey, deGrom and Matz, who have had the surgery, too. DeGrom told Wheeler that during his recovery, he changed his mechanics to lift his elbow sooner during his delivery to take stress off his elbow and, as a bonus, get his hand on top of the ball more.Wheeler tried it and has already noticed that it helps his command. Just watching Wheeler play catch, Warthen could notice the difference.AdvertisementAlderson also indicated that he was excited to see Wheeler pitch without pain. Wheeler has compiled a 3.50 E.R.A. in 49 starts as a Met, but he said he had felt pain in his elbow “for a good few years,” which is why the Mets are going to great lengths to ensure that his elbow is sturdy. And so he waits.On Friday, during the first official full-team workout, Wheeler stood by and watched, with a water bottle in his back pocket, as his teammates practiced pickoff throws to second base. Only when the pitchers practiced sacrifice bunts could he participate.Saturday, though, was expected to be a momentous day for Wheeler. He was scheduled to throw off a mound for the first time, about 10 to 15 pitches, a milestone akin to a racehorse rounding into the stretch. Afterward, he would mix in breaking pitches and, eventually, face batters.When Harvey threw his first bullpen session last spring, cameras followed his every move. His Grapefruit League starts became mini-events, and he was scheduled to be ready for Opening Day. For a team coming off six consecutive losing seasons, he offered hope.A year later, Manager Terry Collins watched Harvey throw live batting practice on Friday and gushed about the tighter spin on his slider, “that last giddy-up” on his fastball, and how much Harvey had improved entering his second season after Tommy John surgery. You could hear the excitement in Collins’s voice about what that would mean for the Mets’ chances this year.Would Collins watch Wheeler’s session on Saturday, too?“He’s a ways away,” Collins said, “so I’m not going to get too amped up yet.”An article on Saturday about Mets pitcher Zack Wheeler’s return from elbow surgery misspelled the name of his black Labrador. It is Cabela, not Cabella.A version of this article appears in print on February 27, 2016, on Page D2 of the New York edition with the headline: Mets’ Wheeler, Recovering From Surgery, Practices Patience.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.