By THE ASSOCIATED PRESSFEB. 25, 2016
Goals by Chris Kreider and Tanner Glass and 35 saves from Henrik Lundqvist helped the Rangers beat the Blues, 2-1, in St. Louis on Thursday night.Lundqvist earned his 30th victory of the season, joining Martin Brodeur and Patrick Roy as the only goaltenders in N.H.L. history to win at least 30 games in a season 10 times.“Growing up, those guys were guys I was watching and now I’m up there with wins,” Lundqvist said. “To me, it’s just a sign of I’ve been given a chance for a lot of years. I’ve been lucky to play with a lot of good players and been able to have a competitive team every year.”Lundqvist also passed Mike Richter as the Rangers’ leader in regular-season saves with a stop on Vladimir Tarasenko’s wrist shot late in the first period.Advertisement“Every game you know that you’re going to get his best effort and you’re going to get great preparation and he’s going to give you a chance to win and that’s what you want from your goaltender,” Rangers Coach Alain Vigneault said.AdvertisementTroy Brouwer scored for the Blues.Fittingly, Lundqvist’s save on a breakaway by Scottie Upshall led to the game-winning goal. Seconds after Lundqvist made a pad save on Upshall, Oscar Lindberg found Kreider in the slot to give the Rangers a 2-1 lead at 4 minutes 18 seconds of the third period.“That’s a big moment and gives us a lot of confidence,” Lundqvist said. “I think they’re a heavy team, they’re a good team and I thought we did a really good job of defending.”Defenseman Ryan McDonagh returned to the Rangers’ lineup after missing two games with a jaw contusion and neck spasms sustained when he was elbowed in the head by Toronto’s Leo Komarov on Feb. 18. Defenseman Marc Staal was also back after missing Tuesday’s game against the Devils.Glass put the Rangers ahead by 1-0 with 6:46 to go in the first after tipping Dan Girardi’s shot from the point over Jake Allen’s right shoulder. It was Glass’s second goal of the season and his first in 29 games.Blues forward Jori Lehtera was hit in the face with the puck with just over a minute left in the first and did not return.Brouwer scored for the Blues on a power play with a little more than five and a half minutes remaining in the second, tying the score at 1-1. The goal came 55 seconds after Girardi received a double minor for high-sticking Tarasenko.Get the big sports news, highlights and analysis from Times journalists, with distinctive takes on games and some behind-the-scenes surprises, delivered to your inbox every week.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.Lundqvist kept the game tied with several impressive saves. He gloved a wrist shot by Colton Parayko in the second period and stopped Dmitrij Jaskin on a point-blank chance early in the third.AdvertisementThe Rangers now have a four-game point streak against the Blues (3-0-1). Fourteen of the last 17 meetings between the teams have been decided by two goals or fewer.PREDATORS 3, BLACKHAWKS 1 Calle Jarnkrok scored with 1:51 remaining, Pekka Rinne made 38 saves, and streaking Nashville won at Chicago.Nashville won for the fourth time in its last five games and extended its point streak to eight games in a row. Viktor Arvidsson scored in the first period, and Miikka Salomaki added an empty-net goal.Brent Seabrook scored for the Blackhawks.Also Thursday, Chicago bolstered its chances for a second straight Stanley Cup title by reacquiring forward Andrew Ladd in a trade with Winnipeg.The Blackhawks sent the prospect Marko Dano and two draft picks to the Jets for Ladd, forward Matt Fraser and defenseman Jay Harrison.Ladd will play on the left side of Chicago’s top line, filling a hole created by the trade of Brandon Saad to Columbus last summer. Ladd, 30, had 17 goals and 17 assists in 59 games for Winnipeg this season. He is eligible for unrestricted free agency this summer, possibly making this a short stay with the Blackhawks so close to the salary cap.Ladd previously played for Chicago for two-plus seasons, helping the Blackhawks win the Stanley Cup in 2010.PANTHERS 3, COYOTES 2 Aleksander Barkov scored two goals in his first game back from an injury, lifting Florida to a win at home over Arizona.AdvertisementVincent Trocheck also scored for the Panthers, and Roberto Luongo made 22 saves. With an assist, 44-year-old Jaromir Jagr became the oldest player to record over 43 points in a season.Oliver Ekman-Larsson and Shane Doan scored for the Coyotes.FLYERS 3, WILD 2 Pierre-Edouard Bellemare gave Philadelphia the lead early in the third period, and Michal Neuvirth made two stellar saves late, helping the Flyers open a six-game homestand with a victory over Minnesota.Mark Streit and Sam Gagner also had goals for Philadelphia, which won for just the fourth time in 11 games.Thomas Vanek had a goal and an assist, and Mikael Granlund also scored for the Wild.A version of this article appears in print on February 26, 2016, on Page B12 of the New York edition with the headline: Lundqvist Reaches 2 Milestones as Rangers Edge Blues.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.