By THE ASSOCIATED PRESSFEB. 26, 2016
INDIANAPOLIS —  Jack Conklin walked to the podium, glanced down at the crowd and shook his head in disbelief.Four years ago, he had only one scholarship offer. Now Conklin, a left tackle from Michigan State who started his college career as an invited walk-on, is one of the most coveted offensive linemen in the nation.“It’s crazy just to see how far I’ve come,” Conklin said at the N.F.L. scouting combine.The book on Conklin was that he was too light and not strong enough to be a college lineman. He played mostly defensive end and tight end in high school.His skill set appeared to translate better to basketball: He averaged 17.1 points and 10.4 rebounds as a senior, and if he had taken Wayne State’s scholarship offer, he might have fallen through the cracks in Division II football. Instead, Conklin bet on himself — like several other big-name players in this year’s draft class.“It was always a dream,” North Dakota State quarterback Carson Wentz said.Wentz was lightly recruited after moving from receiver to quarterback as a high school senior. His only Football Bowl Subdivision offer came from Central Michigan, so he wound up staying in his home state and playing for a college that has won five straight Football Championship Subdivision national titles.Wentz could be the first quarterback taken in April, but he would not be the only one with that kind of story.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.The only scholarship offers fielded by Connor Cook, Conklin’s college teammate, came from Michigan State, Miami of Ohio and Akron. He wound up starting three years and played on two Big Ten championship teams.Paxton Lynch initially drew interest from schools such as Bethune-Cookman, Florida Tech and Florida A&M until he was named M.V.P. of the 2011 Central Florida All-Star game. Then Indiana and Florida jumped on board, but his home-state Gators wanted him only as a walk-on. So Lynch accepted a late scholarship offer from Memphis.All three quarterbacks could be first-round picks in April.Some thought Derrick Henry would move to defense in college. Alabama Coach Nick Saban kept him at running back, and Henry won the Heisman Trophy and led the Crimson Tide to the national championship.Receiver Josh Doctson wanted to play college football in his native Texas but spent his freshman season at Wyoming. He transferred to Texas Christian, going from walk-on to all-American.A version of this article appears in print on February 27, 2016, on Page D2 of the New York edition with the headline: Wallflowers 4 Years Ago, Hot Prospects at Combine.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.