By THE ASSOCIATED PRESSMAY 8, 2016
MADRID —  A decade after their first match, when they were a couple of promising teenagers, Novak Djokovic defeated Andy Murray again in Madrid, this time to win a record 29th career Masters title.The top-ranked Djokovic defeated the second-ranked Murray, 6-2, 3-6, 6-3, in the Madrid Open final on Sunday, 10 years after their rivalry started in the round of 16 of the tournament in Spain.Djokovic, who beat Murray in three sets in that 2006 meeting, said that now, 10 years later, “We are the two best players in the world, which at that time maybe it seemed like something that will be very challenging for us to achieve.”“But we both thrived to be at the top, and we’ve known each other since we were 12,” Djokovic, 28, added. “I think you can see already in those junior days that both of us have serious intentions to conquer the tennis world.”AdvertisementDjokovic saved seven break points in the final game and converted on his third match point of the night on Sunday to secure the win over Murray, the defending champion, moving one victory ahead of Rafael Nadal in Masters tournament victories.AdvertisementThe loss kept Murray from winning his 12th Masters title and will drop him to No. 3 in the rankings on Monday, when he will be surpassed by Roger Federer, third in the list of Masters winners with 24 titles.“I’m very pleased that I have developed a great rivalry with somebody that I’ve known since very long time and somebody that I have a very good and friendly relationship with on and off the court,” Djokovic said.Djokovic has won 12 of the last 13 matches against Murray since 2014 and is 23-9 over all against the 28-year-old British player.It was Djokovic’s second title in Madrid and his fifth of the season. He reached 33 wins, the most on tour in 2016. The win leaves him tied with Bjorn Borg and Pete Sampras for sixth on the Open Era titles list with 64.Get the big sports news, highlights and analysis from Times journalists, with distinctive takes on games and some behind-the-scenes surprises, delivered to your inbox every week.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.“It’s obviously very flattering to be alongside such legends of the sport, tennis players that I was looking up to,” Djokovic said. “It’s an achievement that I’m very proud of.”Djokovic dominated the first set, but it was even from then until the end, with both players faltering at decisive moments. Djokovic hit 25 winners but had just as many unforced errors, while Murray had 10 aces in the match, which lasted 2 hours 6 minutes.The thrilling final game ended when Murray sent a forehand into the net, giving Djokovic his 15th straight win against top-10 opponents, a streak in which he has lost only two of 35 sets.Advertisement“That’s why he’s No. 1 just now,” Murray said. “He fought very hard in that game and served well when he was a bit nervous. At the end he came up with some big serves and got himself some free points and did well.”Djokovic has won five of the last six Masters titles, including three this year. He had already won in Indian Wells and Miami and also clinched the Australian Open in a final against Murray.Djokovic’s next tournament will be the Rome Masters next week, and then he plays at the French Open, where he lost the last two finals.“I had an amazing opening four months of the season,” Djokovic said. “I came here early, got used to the conditions and played a really fantastic tournament that will definitely serve as a great confidence boost before Rome and of course French Open, where I want to arrive in a best possible shape.”Djokovic won in Madrid for the first time in 2011.In addition to beating Nadal in straight sets in last year’s final, Murray also won the Madrid tournament in 2008, when it was not considered a Masters. He defeated Nadal in the semifinals on Saturday.Murray has been impressive this season on clay, the surface on which he has struggled the most in his career. He was coming off a semifinal loss to Nadal in three sets in Monte Carlo.“It’s been positive from where I was a few weeks ago going into Monte Carlo,” Murray said. “I’ve played some really good stuff.”A version of this article appears in print on May 9, 2016, on Page D6 of the New York edition with the headline: Djokovic Upends Familiar Foe in the Madrid Open.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.