By BEN ROTHENBERGMAY 9, 2016
ROME — Behind dark glasses, his face dominated by a Fu Manchu mustache, Ion Tiriac betrays little emotion from his courtside seat at the Madrid Open, a tournament he owns. But when he speaks, he leaves little doubt about his views on tennis.His tournament is one of three outside the Grand Slam events that pay male and female players equally, but in an interview in Madrid last week, he joined the dissent within tennis leadership on the topic of equal prize money.“I like, very much more, women than men,” said Tiriac, a 76-year-old Romanian billionaire. “All my life, I’ve done that. The longer the legs theirs are, the more beautiful I think they are. Even in tennis, they’re gracious and so on. But I don’t see the equal prize money being the status. Maybe they deserve more? Pay more the women if they deserve.“But I think we have to go and calculate how much money are the men putting on the table, and how much the women, with TV rights. Because otherwise we have to compensate, and compensate, and compensate, and you cannot compensate forever. For that reason, it’s a beautiful sport, but I don’t think the women can complain that they don’t earn enough money.”AdvertisementTiriac said that he was “discussing” with the WTA the viability of continuing to offer equal pay, a proposition he considers especially untenable because of the pay increases demanded by the ATP.Advertisement“If I increase the women’s, too, I am broke and I don’t know how to do a tennis event,” Tiriac said. “And I have done a tennis event since the ’60s.Get the big sports news, highlights and analysis from Times journalists, with distinctive takes on games and some behind-the-scenes surprises, delivered to your inbox every week.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.“Saying that they’re equal — they’re not equal. I mean, once again, I prefer a woman on the court, they are beautiful on the court. Even Federer, who is very elegant, I prefer an elegant woman, not Mr. Federer. But they are not bringing to the table the same thing.”Tiriac, a 1970 French Open doubles champion who was inducted into the International Tennis Hall of Fame in 2013 for his off-court business and promotional work, is not the first executive of a major tennis tournament with equal pay to declare men’s and women’s tennis unequal this year. In March, Raymond Moore, the tournament director of the BNP Paribas Open in Indian Wells, Calif., drew the ire of players and tour officials when he said that female players “ride on the coattails” of the men’s success.“If I was a lady player, I’d go down every night on my knees and thank God that Roger Federer and Rafa Nadal were born, because they have carried this sport,” Moore said.Less than 48 hours later, Moore  resigned. Tiriac said that Moore’s error was in trying to use humor instead of math.“Ray Moore made mostly a joke out of it, the way that he put it,” Tiriac said. “I do something different: I put it in numbers. If the men give me 40 dollars from television, and the women give me seven dollars, it’s not the same. Finished.”He conceded that paying women equally once they reached the semifinals would be acceptable.“Maybe you have to pay the top four, from the semifinal and final, as much as the men,” he said. “But maybe the rest are not so interesting, to pay them the same kind of money.“I have in excess of $11 million in prize money for both of them: almost $6 million for men and $6 million for women. And I cannot go like this forever. And everybody would understand this, at least. It’s very simple.”AdvertisementIn an interview Monday at the Italian Open in Rome, which pays the women only 56 percent of the men’s total prize money, Steve Simon, the WTA’s chief executive, responding to Tiriac’s comments, pointed to the Madrid Open as a leader on the equal pay front, historically.“Tennis has done an amazing job, I think, in addressing equal prize money, through the Grand Slams and through these major combined events — and Madrid was one of the leaders in that process, in stepping up,” Simon said. “We have a sanction, an agreement, which reflects equal prize money, and we fully expect that to be honored, and for Madrid to keep showing the leadership they always have.”Simon acknowledged the disparity in revenue generated by the respective television agreements of the ATP and WTA, but said that the disparity represented only one part of the equation for the tournament.“We still have work to do, and we’re going to work at it, but equal prize money goes way beyond just the broadcast revenue situation,” Simon said. “This sanction has brought great value to the Mutua Madrid Open as well. It’s promoted as men and women, all towards that brand and product, and he sells it as one. And so on that basis, equal is certainly right.“I think if he lost the women’s sanction and it wasn’t there, the event wouldn’t have the status it has today.”Simon expressed dismay at Tiriac’s citing the legs of female players as a particular point of attraction.“Anytime you get into beginning to say that you like something because of the look, rather than the talent, I struggle with that,” Simon said. “People are entitled to their opinions there, but it’s certainly not something that we condone. I’m always disappointed when I hear comments such as that, because our athletes stand for themselves and their athletic ability.”AdvertisementSimon, who has also had to cope with Maria Sharapova’s positive doping test and increased scrutiny on match fixing since taking the helm of the women’s tour last fall, said his first year on the job “certainly hasn’t been boring.” But he bemoaned that equal pay continued to be a topic of debate, with tennis leaders repeatedly veering off message.“Anytime the topic is brought up, it’s just disappointing,” Simon said. “This is a topic that has been settled. Equal prize money is a settled matter. Like I said, tennis has had a wonderful job supporting it, and in some ways better than business. I think that should be something that we’re proud of, and that we keep hanging our hat on.”Venus Williams, who led the women’s players in winning their campaign for equal prize money at Wimbledon in 2007, said Monday after her first-round match that continuing to talk about issues of equality was necessary as long as opposition remained.”I think that as long as people think that women aren’t equal to men, then this is a conversation that needs to be had,” Williams said.But she also expressed some fatigue at the frequency with which the topic has been rehashed this year.“There’s always something, seems like,” she said. “I just want a quiet year at this point. Can’t we just play tennis?”A version of this article appears in print on May 10, 2016, on Page B11 of the New York edition with the headline: Tennis Event Owner Speaks on Women’s Pay, and Legs.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.