By THE ASSOCIATED PRESSAPRIL 28, 2017
PHILADELPHIA — The N.F.L. draft, which drew nearly 100,000 for opening-round festivities on Thursday, might be the league’s second-most popular event, after the Super Bowl. And, as with that game, hosting the draft is about to become the objective of nearly every city that has an N.F.L. franchise.And even one that does not.Sixteen cities — half of those with N.F.L. teams — have officials in Philadelphia observing how the city handles the draft, as does the Pro Football Hall of Fame in Canton, Ohio. In all, 22 clubs and the Hall have expressed interest in hosting the draft.“The process is evolving because we have been in New York for 51 years,” said Peter O’Reilly, the league’s senior vice president of events. “We looked to reimagine the draft in Chicago for the last two years, then made the decision to go to another major market in Philadelphia.“Obviously, the Super Bowl process bid is very formal, and the mode we’re in now shows clearly a lot of interest in the draft from markets around the country.”AdvertisementHe added that the league was evaluating the event and wanted to build it up in the right way.So, in contrast to the Super Bowl, bidding to stage the draft is a yearly event for now; every Super Bowl through 2021 has already been awarded. Potential bidders have been told to consider hosting a draft sometime in the next five years.AdvertisementO’Reilly said it took about 10 months to plan and put together the event.Representatives of the cities observing the draft this week said they were definitely interested.“Absolutely,” said Mike Waterman, president of the Greater Houston Convention and Visitors Bureau, who attended this week’s event. “We had a truly amazing experience with the N.F.L. this past February as host city to Super Bowl 51.”The league is seeking cities that can turn the event into a showcase that essentially takes over a city, as it did in Chicago and Philadelphia.Boston, for example, could offer the Common. Nashville has the Grand Ole Opry. The Miami area has South Beach.“Every city is unique,” O’Reilly said. “It does get the creative juices flowing. We’re not looking for cookie-cutter experiences, but for a natural place people gather for free events.”Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.Jacksonville, Fla., another of the potential bidders observing Philadelphia’s draft this week, may have such a place, an amphitheater being constructed outside the Jaguars’ stadium.“What Chicago and Philadelphia have done is blend iconic buildings with the event, bringing together unique and different things,” the Jaguars’ president, Mark Lamping, said, noting that Jacksonville could blend its amphitheater, its bridges and its river for a football setting.“In addition, Radio City Musical Hall was a great draft venue for many years,” Lamping said, “and the seating bowl in our amphitheater was inspired by Radio City.”The N.F.L. abandoned Radio City in part because of scheduling problems, but also because the league wondered how well the draft would travel. Crowds measured in six figures — not to mention the profitability for merchandisers, vendors and the cities themselves — indicated that the show would stay on the road.Advertisement“I believe highlighting important locations iconic to your city is good business,” Houston’s Waterman said.We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.