AdvertisementSupported byBy Karen CrousePHILADELPHIA — Every Thursday, Reece Whitley’s busy life screeches to a halt. The red light built into his 10-grade class schedule at William Penn Charter School, a private Quaker institution founded in 1689, is a 40-minute meditative period known as “Meeting for Worship.” The period of silence, sometimes broken by students or teachers sharing thoughts when the spirit moves them, was the topic of a lively conversation during a recent Quaker Principles class.One student said the 40 minutes would be better spent studying. Another dismissed it as the adolescent version of nap time as sleep-deprived students sometimes nod off.Whitley, wedged into a back-row seat like a Hummer limousine in a parking space for a compact car, raised his hand and said he looked forward to the Meeting for Worship more this year than in the past.“I can kind of get away from thinking about everything,” he said, adding, “It’s nice.”Whitley, 16, is on the fast track in school and swimming. In the classroom, his workload includes Mandarin Chinese and advanced courses in chemistry and algebra. In the water, he posted the seventh-fastest time among American men in the 200-meter breaststroke last year to establish himself as a 2016 Olympic hopeful.Whitley will compete this week at the Atlanta Classic at Georgia Tech, a three-day competition starting Friday that is akin to a midterm. It will give Whitley a better idea of where his swimming stands heading into the United States Olympic trials in late June in Omaha.There is so much more than meets the eye to the 6-foot-8 Whitley, an African-American in a sport that is becoming more diverse. The 2012 United States Olympic swim team included three black swimmers — Anthony Ervin, Cullen Jones and Lia Neal — all of whom will vie for spots on the 2016 squad. Last year, Neal helped make N.C.A.A. history in the 100-yard freestyle at the Division I championships, finishing second behind her Stanford teammate Simone Manuel and ahead of Florida’s Natalie Hinds in the first 1-2-3 finish by black competitors.Whitley escapes pigeonholing. His teachers describe him as quick to smile and laugh, but his teammates see his scowling, fastidious side. He is one of the few national-caliber male swimmers to take instruction from a woman. At senior-level meets, his coach, Crystal Coleman, stands out on the male-dominated pool deck more than the towering Whitley does on the blocks.That is saying something, because the breaststroke events have historically been dominated by athletes almost a foot shorter than Whitley. In the men’s 200-meter breaststroke at the 2012 London Olympics, the average height of the eight finalists was a shade over 6 feet.“I kind of enjoy looking at people giving me weird looks,” Whitley said. “I use it as motivation to get so fast it makes people freak out because I’m challenging their preconceptions.”Whitley was speaking before an afternoon workout, in the office at the indoor 25-yard pool in the Graham Athletics Center on the William Penn Charter campus. In a few minutes he would begin a two-hour workout interrupted only by a quick trip a tapped-out Whitley made to the restroom to throw up.Whitley shared a lane with two other swimmers, and during one set he alternated freestyle and breaststroke while chasing his two male teammates, who were swimming freestyle with fins.When he banged arms with one of his teammates, Whitley stopped long enough to direct an icy stare at him. The expression on his face showed none of the affability that Whitley had radiated that morning in his chemistry lab, his Quaker class and an English lecture on “The Merchant of Venice.”“Did you see him get snippy?” Coleman said with a laugh.Coleman has been working with Whitley since he was 11, long enough to be able to speed read his moods.The story of how Coleman came to coach Whitley is entwined with the story of how she met Paul Coleman, the man who would become her husband. She was at the Middle Atlantic Junior Olympics in 2010, directing her swimmers in sprints in a crowded pool during a warm-up session restricted to participants 10 and younger, when she saw a boy on the blocks who looked like Gulliver among the Lilliputians.“Four of my boys were lined up behind this swimmer and they came up to his kneecaps,” Coleman said.The swimmer was Whitley, then 10 and already 5 feet 8. Coleman, then Crystal Keelan, pointedly asked Whitley’s coach, Paul Coleman, who founded Penn Charter Aquatic Club, if the youngster on the blocks was a teenager crashing the 10-under warm-up. Paul kindly informed Crystal that Whitley did not turn 11 until January, several months away. After that, Crystal paid attention to Whitley’s races and Paul paid attention to Crystal.Whitley’s parents, both doctors, had signed him up for private instruction with Paul, who had a waiting list. He approached Crystal in the fall of 2011 because he liked the way she interacted with her swimmers. He asked her if she would like to work with some of his swimmers who were seeking private lessons. That is how she began working with Whitley.“He was such a sponge,” Crystal recalled. “I couldn’t wait until the next week so we could work on something new.”The next year, Paul hired Crystal as the head age-group coach at the club. In 2013, she was promoted to head coach when Paul took a job with Central Bucks Swim Team. A year later, they were married.Whitley said he did not give a second thought to his coach’s gender. Others find it harder to wrap their heads around.At last summer’s long-course junior national championships in San Antonio, Whitley won the 200-meter breaststroke. It is customary for the coach of the winner to hand out the awards for the event, but Coleman said that when she went to collect the medals, the female volunteer who was in charge asked her, “Is the head coach not available?”At a national junior camp at the Olympic Training Center in Colorado Springs a few months later, Coleman said a female team manager told her, “I don’t think I’ve ever been at a camp with a female coach.”In 2012, Teri McKeever, the women’s coach at California, Berkeley, became the first woman to be appointed the head coach of a United States women’s Olympic swim team. In 2015, no male swimmer on the United States world championships squad had a woman as his primary coach. A few had age-group coaches who were women, including Ryan Lochte, an 11-time Olympic medalist whose early years in the sport were overseen by his mother.“Coaching Reece has given me the opportunity to meet and pick the brains of coaches at the highest level,” said Coleman, who is upfront about her strengths and weaknesses.At the training camp, she said she told a U.S.A. Swimming official, “I know I don’t know as much as everyone on the deck, but I know Reece the best.”The top two finishers in the 100 and 200 breaststrokes at the United States Olympic trials will earn berths to the Rio de Janeiro Games. Whitley is like a beefsteak tomato ripening on the vine. No one expects him to make the Olympic team, but few would be surprised if he does.“The trials may be six months too early for him,” said Rowdy Gaines, a three-time Olympic gold medalist who is part of NBC’s Olympic swimming broadcasting team.Barring injuries or burnout, in four years, Gaines added: “He’s going to be the best breaststroker in the world. I’ve never seen a breaststroker with his talent. It’s not even close.”To finish first or second in Omaha, Whitley will have to shave as much as three seconds off his personal best in the 200. His odds, while formidable, are considerably better than 5,000-to-1 Leicester City winning this year’s Premier League title.In 2012, Scott Weltz lowered his personal best by more than three seconds to win the men’s 200 breaststroke at the United States trials. Weltz was two years out of college and had never won any event in a major competition. Whitley, who is two years shy of college, boasts, in addition to his junior national title, a runner-up finish in the 100-meter breaststroke at last summer’s world junior championships in Singapore.“We’ve talked about getting a best time and seeing what happens,” Coleman said.Whitley recalled a talk that the two-time Olympic medalist Jessica Hardy delivered to members of the United States junior team. She told them about competing in her first Olympic trials, in 2004 at 17. She recorded a best time in the 100 breaststroke and finished fifth, three places shy of an Olympic berth. She said she was thrilled with the result.As Whitley listened, he said, he tried to imagine himself in her place.“I was like, ‘If I do my best time and place fifth, will I be happy?’” he said. “She was super happy to have gone a best time, but I feel like if you have the chance, why not go after it? I had to think to myself and my feeling was I wouldn’t be happy if I got fifth.”Last month, Whitley was invited to throw out the first pitch at a Phillies home game against the Washington Nationals. It was Jackie Robinson Day. Whitley was thrilled because his first love was baseball. He showed promise as a pitcher, developing a breaking ball to complement his fastball before giving up the sport after setting his first national age-group record in swimming in 2012.“I got out of the pool after that first national record and I said, ‘I want to do this again,’” Whitley said. “Knowing nobody had ever swum that fast, it was a feeling I wanted to experience again and again.”Before the game, one of Whitley’s favorite players, Philadelphia first baseman Ryan Howard, introduced himself. Whitley said they spoke for 15 minutes. Howard asked Whitley details about the Olympic trials and Whitley, who attended one of the Phillies’ World Series games in 2009, asked Howard how he stayed composed on the big stage.“He told me you can’t get caught up in the atmosphere,” Whitley said. “He said if you make it to the World Series it’s because you belong there.”During training, Whitley’s thoughts will drift from technique to the trials. When the training gets tough, Whitley tries to picture the atmosphere in Omaha. He gave the example of a recent set he struggled through. It was three rounds of eight 75-yard breaststroke swims.“I was really tired by the last round, and it was hard for me mentally,” he said. “I started to envision the last couple of strokes at the finish at the trials. That’s what drove me.”Some Thursdays during the Meeting for Worship, Whitley’s mind also drifts to the trials. He visualizes striding onto the deck and scanning the crowd of more than 12,000. Then he snaps his attention back to the present. The rest of the picture will be revealed soon enough.Advertisement