By VICTOR MATHERMAY 9, 2016
Tim Duncan is 40 years old. His playing time has gradually been reduced, and he has ceded his starring role on the San Antonio Spurs to Kawhi Leonard.But he was an All-Star as recently as last year and has been so great for so long that the past few games have come as a shock.On Sunday, for the first time in his 249 playoff games, he failed to score. The Spurs lost to the Thunder, 111-97, evening the Western Conference semifinal at two games apiece.Duncan’s 12 minutes of playing time were also his playoff low. The game was the first in which he did not take a shot. He contributed little beyond three rebounds and four fouls.AdvertisementIt was not a fluke event. Duncan’s previous low of 2 points came in Games 2 and 3 of this series. He had 3 points in Game 2 of an opening-round sweep of Memphis.AdvertisementSunday night was the third time in Duncan’s career that he scored no points; the other two times were in the regular season.These latest efforts are a long way from the career-high 53 points he scored against Dallas in 2001. He scored 40 or more in the playoffs four times, the last time in 2008.Though he started 60 of the 61 games he played this season, he hit career lows in just about every category. LaMarcus Aldridge is clearly the team’s top big man now. David West and Boris Diaw have been taking most of Duncan’s minutes.On Sunday, the team was led by Aldridge (20 points), Leonard (21) and another ageless player, 33-year-old Tony Parker (22). Diaw had 11 and West 8. Despite starting, Duncan trailed the reserves Diaw, West, Manu Ginobili and Patrick Mills in playing time.Duncan has been an elite player on an excellent Spurs team for 19 years. The Spurs made the playoffs every year, never with a winning percentage lower than .610, and won five titles, with Duncan the finals’ most valuable player in three of them.Get the big sports news, highlights and analysis from Times journalists, with distinctive takes on games and some behind-the-scenes surprises, delivered to your inbox every week.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.A relative latecomer to basketball growing up in the Virgin Islands, Duncan was initially a swimmer. He was the No. 1 pick in the draft after four years at Wake Forest. The Spurs had that pick as a result of a rare down season largely caused by an injury to David Robinson. The player selected just after him, Keith Van Horn, has been out of the league for 10 years.Careful management of Duncan’s career has certainly contributed to his longevity. That and his impressive talent have powered him up the N.B.A. career leader lists. He stands fifth in blocked shots, sixth in rebounds, seventh in games played and 10th in minutes. The names around his are virtually all those of Hall of Famers.His low-key nature has often kept him out of the spotlight, but the sheer force of his accomplishments has pushed him onto just about every list of the greats.AdvertisementDuncan is signed through next season, and so far he has deflected any talk of retirement. The signs are there that his career is falling into deep twilight, but the Spurs, locked in a struggle with the Thunder, will hope he has a little magic left.A version of this article appears in print on May 10, 2016, on Page B14 of the New York edition with the headline: For a Spurs Pillar, No Points Is a First.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.