AdvertisementSupported byBy The Associated PressATLANTA — Kevin Love scored 27 points, LeBron James hit a huge shot with 39.2 seconds to go, and the Cleveland Cavaliers finished off their second straight playoff sweep Sunday, beating the Hawks, 100-99, to advance to the Eastern Conference finals.The Hawks had one last chance to extend the series after James missed a 3-pointer with the clock winding down. Atlanta got the rebound and put the ball in the hands of Dennis Schroder, a speedy point guard who led the team with 21 points.Schroder drove into the lane but was swarmed by James and Tristan Thompson. Schroder slipped, and James tied up the ball, forcing a huge mismatch of a jump ball with 2.8 seconds left in the game. With a seven-inch height advantage, James flicked the ball toward the sideline.Paul Millsap tried to get off a desperation shot, but it was after the buzzer — and, anyway, it did not go in.The Cavaliers, who opened the playoffs with four consecutive wins over Detroit, also made short work of the Hawks in a series that mirrored last year’s conference finals, in which the Hawks also lost four straight to Cleveland.The Cavaliers will face the winner of the Miami-Toronto series in the conference final. Toronto leads that best-of-seven series, two games to one.Schroder put the Hawks ahead, 97-96, on a drive with 1 minute 31 seconds remaining. But James, after having had one shot blocked and having missed two tip-ins, got another chance when a video review overturned a call that Cleveland had knocked the ball out of bounds. Off the inbounds pass, Matthew Dellavedova found James streaking into the lane, and Millsap was called for goaltending as he went for the block.Schroder’s next shot was blocked by Thompson, and the Cavaliers isolated James on the wing against Millsap. James stepped back and hit the jumper, pushing Cleveland ahead, 100-97. Schroder scored on a drive with 34.4 seconds left, and James missed a potential clinching 3. It did not matter.The Cavaliers buckled down at the defensive end and wrapped up the series.Love carried Cleveland in the early going, hitting one 3-pointer after another as the Hawks continually left him open in the corner. He went cold in the second half but still finished 8 of 15 from beyond the arc, accounting for all but 2 of his points. He was fouled on one long-range shot, knocking down a free throw for a 4-point play, and his only basket that was not a 3-pointer was a jumper with his toe on the line.James and Kyrie Irving finished with 21 points apiece. Millsap had 19 for the Hawks.REBOUNDSMiami’s Hassan Whiteside is day-to-day with a sprained medial collateral ligament in his right knee, and Toronto’s Jonas Valanciunas will miss the rest of the Heat-Raptors Eastern Conference semifinal series with a sprained right ankle. Both starting centers were injured in Game 3 of the series Saturday, and both got the news about their immediate futures in magnetic resonance imaging exams performed Sunday.Advertisement