By THE ASSOCIATED PRESSMAY 7, 2016
Brian Elliott did not let this third-period lead get away, so St. Louis is going home with a chance to close out its second-round playoff series against Dallas.Elliott turned away a strong push from the Stars in the final period, and the Blues beat the Stars, 4-1, on Saturday for a three-games-to-two series lead.Robby Fabbri, the rookie playoff points leader, had a goal and an assist, and Dmitrij Jaskin scored his first career playoff goal to put the Blues ahead for good in the second period. St. Louis then protected a 3-1 lead for a second consecutive road victory.The Blues surrendered a 3-1 lead before winning in overtime in Game 2 in Dallas. Elliott was perfect in the third period this time, getting 12 of his 27 saves to send the Blues home with the series edge. Game 6 is Monday night.Advertisement“I know we’ve done well on the road, but we’ve set ourselves up well to go home and win a game,” Elliott said. “If we can do more of the same, I think we’ll be on the right side of things after Game 6.”The Stars created plenty of chances, but they could not get much past Elliott. Cody Eakin, who scored an overtime winner two days earlier, was stuffed while alone in front of Elliott.“We hit some posts; we hit a crossbar; we missed a couple point-blank,” Stars Coach Lindy Ruff said. “When you get chances to execute and turn the game, it’s your chance to put the game in your favor, and we didn’t.”Get the big sports news, highlights and analysis from Times journalists, with distinctive takes on games and some behind-the-scenes surprises, delivered to your inbox every week.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.Fabbri, who has two goals and eight assists in 12 playoff games, started the scoring when what appeared to be a pass through the slot ricocheted off the skate of Dallas forward Brett Ritchie past goalie Kari Lehtonen.CAPITALS 3, PENGUINS 1 Alex Ovechkin was a force all over the ice with Washington on the brink of elimination, and the Capitals beat Pittsburgh to stay alive in the second-round playoff series, now trailing, three games to two.AdvertisementOvechkin’s blast on the power play set the tone early, and another shot created the rebound for T. J. Oshie’s power-play goal in the second period.The veteran Justin Williams also scored to help Washington force Game 6 on Tuesday night in Pittsburgh.The Penguins got a power-play goal of their own, from Chris Kunitz, but could not overcome the Capitals’ desperation and the brilliance of Braden Holtby, who made 30 saves.WILD HIRE BOUDREAU Bruce Boudreau has agreed to terms to coach the Minnesota Wild.Boudreau was fired by the Anaheim Ducks two days after their first-round exit from the playoffs. He has a career record of 409-192-80, and his .659 winning percentage is the best among active coaches. SHARKS 5, PREDATORS 1 Joe Pavelski scored two goals, and host San Jose bounced back from a triple-overtime loss to beat Nashville and take a three-games-to-two lead in the second-round playoff series.Patrick Marleau and Logan Couture also scored as part of San Jose’s reconfigured second line, and the Sharks moved one win away from advancing to the Western Conference final for the fourth time in franchise history and the first time since 2011. Game 6 is scheduled for Monday night in Nashville.Melker Karlsson added a late goal, and Martin Jones made 24 saves for the Sharks.Mike Fisher, the Game 4 overtime hero, scored, and Pekka Rinne made 23 saves, but Nashville allowed goals in the opening and closing minutes of the second period.M.V.P. FINALISTS ANNOUNCED Patrick Kane of the Chicago Blackhawks, Jamie Benn of the Dallas Stars and Sidney Crosby of the Pittsburgh Penguins are the finalists for the Hart Trophy, given to the N.H.L.’s most valuable player.A version of this article appears in print on May 8, 2016, on Page SP6 of the New York edition with the headline: Blues Hang On to Lead to Take Control of Series.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.