By THE ASSOCIATED PRESSFEB. 26, 2016
DURHAM, N.C. —  The end of an era is coming for No. 15 Duke: The Blue Devils will finally run out of Plumlees.Duke has had at least one Plumlee brother on the team since 2008; for one year, it had all three. During the past eight seasons, they have combined to play in 392 games entering the weekend, and each will have left with an N.C.A.A. championship ring.The run is winding down, with the youngest, Marshall, a fifth-year senior, set to play his final game at Cameron Indoor Stadium next week.He is trying not to think about that for a while.“There’s time after the season to get sentimental,” he said. “I just hope Duke’s enjoyed eight years of Plumlees as much as I have.”AdvertisementThat has meant what Marshall called “a lot of miles on the car” for the family patriarch, Millard Plumlee, a former player at Tennessee Tech. Millard — nicknamed Perky — has spent much of the past decade making the 10 ½-hour drive from the family’s home in Warsaw, Ind., to Durham.AdvertisementIt began when Miles, the oldest son, arrived at Duke in 2008. Miles, a 6-foot-11 center with an impressive vertical leap, was followed a year later by Mason, who is also 6-11 but in the mold of a more traditional post player. The 7-footer Marshall joined them in 2011.Marshall has developed into an indispensable force underneath for Duke. One of three captains for the Blue Devils (21-7, 10-5 Atlantic Coast Conference entering the weekend), Marshall has reached double figures in either points or rebounds in nine of his last 10 games while helping Duke veer out of a midseason tailspin by winning five of six.Marshall’s brothers try to keep an eye on him.“He knows what he’s got to do, and he’s having a good year,” Miles said.Said Mason, “I’m proud of him, and I have a lot of respect for him.”Both Miles and Mason parlayed their success at Duke into N.B.A. careers — Miles plays for the Milwaukee Bucks, while Mason is with the Portland Trail Blazers — and Marshall said he hoped to join them in the pros while also working toward becoming an Army officer.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.He said he was in discussions with military officials aimed at “figuring out what the best route would be for me at this point.” Among his options are the Army Reserve or the National Guard.Marshall said he had time to figure things out. For now, the focus is on capping a career and ending his family’s run at Duke with more victories.The brothers have combined for 2,393 points, 2,147 rebounds and three N.C.A.A. championship rings, with Miles and Mason having won them in 2010 and Marshall having earned his last year.“We didn’t plan it at all,” Miles said. “I thought we were all going to different colleges. It just fell together. It’s crazy, because I don’t think we would have it any other way now.”AdvertisementDuke might owe Louisiana State a thank-you for starting the chain of events that brought all three brothers to the Blue Devils.Mason was the first to commit to Duke, while Miles was set to play at Stanford for Trent Johnson. But when L.S.U. fired its coach in 2008, Johnson took that job, and that led Miles to choose Duke.A few years later, Marshall’s choice came down to Duke and Virginia before he ultimately picked the Blue Devils and spent the 2011-12 season on the roster with his big brothers, although he broke his foot and redshirted that season.“It was pretty crazy how Miles ended up at Duke with the whole Stanford situation,” Marshall said. “Myself, I had to figure out what I wanted in the recruiting process. I really didn’t know where I wanted to go, but now looking back on it, there’s no other way it could have gone down. It was the best decision of my life.”We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.