By TAL PINCHEVSKYFEB. 25, 2016
ANAHEIM, Calif. —  The N.H.L.’s Ducks hosted Orange County’s biggest field trip on Tuesday when they welcomed roughly 16,000 elementary school students to Honda Center. Anaheim players enjoyed the task of using hockey to educate children on some basic tenets of science. But they also admitted that the event, now in its 16th year, is considerably more fun when the team is winning.And after a disastrous start to their season, the Ducks are winning a lot.Anaheim slogged through a 1-7-2 start that appeared to put Coach Bruce Boudreau’s job in peril, but the Ducks have rocketed up the Pacific Division standings in the past two months. That dominance was on full display during a recent make-or-break trip spanning seven games over 12 days in which Anaheim was 5-1-1.“We talked about how a lot of people probably think it is going to be our downfall,” center Ryan Kesler said of the trip. “It’s a long, grueling trip traveling a lot of miles. We just kept winning. That’s been our model since Christmas. Just play.”The road swing was the high-water mark of a remarkable turnaround for Anaheim, but upon their return, Ducks players were mostly preoccupied with maintaining their strong play at home.Advertisement“It’s not always easy; you tend to have a letdown when you get back home after that,” their captain, Ryan Getzlaf, said. “We were able to turn that around and play the right way again against Calgary.”AdvertisementKicking off a five-game homestand against the Flames on Sunday night, the Ducks continued their hot play with a 5-2 victory. With a 1-0 victory against the Buffalo Sabres on Wednesday, Anaheim has gone 20-4-2 since Christmas. The Ducks entered Thursday’s games only 2 points behind the first-place Los Angeles Kings in the Pacific Division. The Ducks play the Kings on Sunday night in Anaheim.“I think since Christmas we’ve been a defense-first hockey team,” Kesler said. “It really got us through that tough time when we weren’t scoring. Now we’re scoring and we’re playing well at both ends of the rink. I think that’s why we’ve been able to continue to roll.”Lack of scoring was at the root of Anaheim’s early-season struggles. The Ducks scored 10 goals and were shut out five times in their 10 October games. That level of futility was unfamiliar to a Ducks club that led the N.H.L. with 263 goals in 2013-14 and had the Western Conference’s best record last season.The Ducks rediscovered their scoring touch during their post-holiday surge. They have 46 goals in 12 February games, rising to 25th in league goal rankings after being last for most of the season.That jump in scoring was sparked by Boudreau’s separating Getzlaf and Corey Perry, the team’s two best offensive players.Linemates for much of their 11 seasons together in Anaheim, Perry and Getzlaf were suddenly split up last month in the hopes of creating a more balanced offensive attack.Boudreau applied the same strategy in February 2015, leading to a 7-1-0 run that helped position Anaheim atop the conference. A lengthy playoff run ended in Game 7 of the Western Conference finals against the Chicago Blackhawks, the eventual champions.Get the big sports news, highlights and analysis from Times journalists, with distinctive takes on games and some behind-the-scenes surprises, delivered to your inbox every week.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.Perhaps no one has benefited more from the Perry-Getzlaf split than Rickard Rakell. Teamed with Perry, Rakell, a 22-year-old Swede, has enjoyed a breakout season. His 15 goals are second on the Ducks behind Perry’s 23, and his four game-winning goals are tied with Perry and Getzlaf for the team lead.Advertisement“I think things are just clicking right now,” Rakell said. “Everybody has bought into the system. It’s a good feeling around the locker room right now. I think the team is just going with it and we’re having fun. It’s a good time to be out there.”Rakell is not the only player to have recently enjoyed a sudden offensive emergence in Anaheim.David Perron was acquired from the Pittsburgh Penguins on Jan. 15 in exchange for forward Carl Hagelin and has since found success skating alongside Getzlaf. Joining his third team in the past 13 months, Perron has appeared right at home in Anaheim. He has six goals and eight assists in 16 games after collecting 16 points in 43 games with the Penguins. More important, the Ducks have gone 13-2-1 with Perron in their lineup.While the Ducks discovered an efficient configuration up front, their defense has also rounded into form. Cam Fowler and Simon Despres returned from lengthy injury absences in the past month. Fowler has been among the Ducks’ leaders in ice time since returning and has invigorated the power play.Sami Vatanen’s game-winning power-play goal Wednesday against the Sabres marked the sixth straight game in which Anaheim has scored with the man advantage. They have gone 9 for 21 in that span, a 42.9 percent success rate.“The power play is working really good and the goaltending has been really good, too,” Rakell said. “We’re scoring goals and just playing.”It is an impressive turnaround for a team that refused to panic after stumbling in October.“We had a lot of expectations coming into training camp, and we didn’t meet any of them,” Getzlaf said. “We had a couple of meetings here and there, but you can only say so much. You have to be able to go out on the ice and do the things you need to do. We put ourselves so far behind the eight ball at the start of the year that every day was just about trying to build something and get better. We’ve been able to do that as of late.”A version of this article appears in print on February 26, 2016, on Page B12 of the New York edition with the headline: Ducks Start Scoring, and Their Troubles Slip Away.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.