AdvertisementSupported byCollege RoundupBy The Associated PressMarcus Georges-Hunt kept his faith as Georgia Tech endured two straight losing seasons, including a particularly dreadful finish in the Atlantic Coast Conference last year. His resolve continued even as the Yellow Jackets lost eight of their first 10 A.C.C. games this season.Led by Georges-Hunt, a senior guard, Georgia Tech has finally found a way to win close games.The Yellow Jackets (16-12, 6-9 A.C.C.) have won three straight regular-season conference games for the first time since the 2007-08 season, and four of their last five.On Tuesday night, with three seconds remaining and the score tied, Georges-Hunt sank two free throws, giving him a game-high 25 points and lifting Georgia Tech to a 75-73 victory over Clemson. Three nights earlier, he hit a last-second shot for a 63-62 upset of Notre Dame, ranked No. 19 at the time.The Yellow Jackets are in position to contend for their first postseason bid in five seasons under Coach Brian Gregory. A spot in the N.I.T. would be a reward for Georges-Hunt and the team’s other upperclassmen.“Men of lesser character wouldn’t have gotten to this point,” Gregory said after Tuesday night’s win. “They just wouldn’t have, and they get credit for that.”Georges-Hunt said even last season’s miserable record — 12-19 over all and 3-15 in the A.C.C. — could not shake his faith. Georgia Tech was 0-10 in games decided by no more than 5 points or in overtime.“I’m a believer,” he said. “People ask me, especially last year losing a lot of close games, if I was down or depressed. I never got down. I just kept thinking of what I could do to make sure we win these close games.”Each of Georgia Tech’s last four wins has been by 6 points or fewer.Georges-Hunt, listed at 6 feet 5 inches and 216 pounds, has been a four-year starter, but his junior season was cut short because of a broken right foot. Watching the end of the season from the bench, he said, gave him a new perspective for his senior year.“I think that injury helped a lot,” he said. “l was sitting back and just watching, I guess like from a coaching standpoint, especially in the A.C.C. tournament.” He added, “I saw we had a lot of potential.”The lineup was improved after last season by veteran transfers like guard Adam Smith, a 3-point specialist who had played at Virginia Tech the last two years, and forwards Nick Jacobs and James White.It took a few months for Gregory to find the right mix. Most recently, he added small forward Quinton Stephens to the starting lineup and moved Georges-Hunt to point guard.Georges-Hunt’s scoring average has climbed each season, reaching his current mark of 16.9 points per game. Smith, who made four 3-pointers and finished with 20 points against Clemson, is averaging 14.3 points a game.Georges-Hunt, Smith and Stephens combined to make eight 3-pointers against Clemson.“When you’re close and you’ve got Adam and Marcus, you’ve got a good chance to win the game,” Gregory said.With only three regular-season games remaining, including Saturday’s contest at Boston College, Georgia Tech suddenly looks like a tough early draw in next month’s A.C.C. tournament.Georges-Hunt said players had developed confidence with the recent wins.“I feel like we’ve been there so many times,” he said of the team’s history of close losses. “You’ve got to get sick and tired of it, and you have to do something about it.”NEW DEAL FOR F.S.U.’S HAMILTON Florida State Coach Leonard Hamilton agreed to a two-year extension, giving him a chance to mesh the young talent on this season’s team with a highly rated recruiting class expected to be on campus next season.“This extension positions him to continue attracting the kind of talent we need to compete in the Atlantic Coast Conference and nationally,” Athletic Director Stan Wilcox said in a statement.Hamilton, 67, is in his 14th season at the university, where he has twice been named the A.C.C. coach of the year. With a 252-184 record, he has the most wins in program history. The new contract will run until the end of the 2018-19 season.Hamilton said he was pleased with the faith that Wilcox and the university’s president, John Thrasher, had shown in him.“We believe we are on the verge of accomplishing something special here, and this will allow us an opportunity to do so,” Hamilton said in a statement.With the freshmen Malik Beasley and Dwayne Bacon leading the way, the Seminoles showed flashes of potential for most of the season and won 10 of their first 12 games. But Florida State (16-11, 6-9) has lost four straight entering Thursday’s game at No. 15 Duke and is likely to miss the N.C.A.A. tournament for the fourth straight season.LADY VOLS NOT GIVING UP Holly Warlick, the Tennessee women’s coach, said that the problems that had caused the team to tumble out of the Associated Press Top 25 for the first time since 1985 could still be corrected.“There has not been a towel thrown in on this court,” Warlick said. “We’re still battling. We’re still trying to correct things. We’re still getting better. That’s all we know to do — just keep working. We’re going to continue to work like we always have.”But the Lady Volunteers are running out of time.Tennessee (16-11, 7-7 Southeastern Conference) has dropped three of its last five games heading into Thursday’s matchup at Alabama (14-13, 3-11), which has lost 42 straight meetings with Tennessee. The Lady Vols, who have matched a single-season program record for losses, will close the regular season Sunday by hosting Georgia (20-7, 8-6). Advertisement