By KAREN CROUSEFEB. 25, 2016
PALM BEACH GARDENS, Fla. —  After four holes at the Honda Classic, Sam Saunders was at even par. Two holes later, he was four over. For Saunders, a player not known for his patience who was battling gusty winds and dark thoughts blown in by five consecutive missed cuts, the bolt into black numbers seemed to forecast a disaster.This was Saunders’s moment of reckoning. In September, he spent two nights in the hospital in the intensive care unit with a “brain bleed” after fainting while riding a hoverboard in the streets of his Colorado neighborhood. Five months later, Saunders’s skull was healed, but his head was not right.“Attitude is by far the most important thing,” Saunders said. “To be honest with you, the first few tournaments of the season, my attitude just wasn’t there. It was bad. I was frustrated. I was impatient.”Saunders had broken through with a sub-70 round at Pebble Beach in his previous competitive round and was determined not to go backward. He kept his composure, playing his final 10 holes Thursday in five under par for a one-under 69, four strokes off the lead shared by Sergio García and Michael Thompson.AdvertisementSaunders was tied for 14th with eight others, including Phil Mickelson. Like Saunders, Mickelson began at No. 10. He played his first nine in 32 to Saunders’s 38, proving it is not how a player starts that is important but how he finishes.Advertisement“I didn’t lose any on the course because of my attitude today,” Saunders said. “In fact, that’s why I was able to come back, and that was nice.”The black holes that Saunders referred to as his “bad stretch” were No. 14, a 465-yard par 4 with a water hazard running down the right side, and No. 15, a 178-yard par 3. On the 14th, Saunders hit his drive out of bounds on the left, incurring a one-stroke penalty. His third shot found the fairway, and his next one landed in the water, resulting in another one-stroke penalty. From the drop area, Saunders found the rough 50 yards from the pin, chipped to 3 feet and made the putt for a triple-bogey 7.“I made as big a mess as you can make on that hole,” Saunders said.On the 15th, his 6-iron tee shot got caught in a gust and landed in a water hazard. Saunders hit his third shot inside 3 feet and drained the bogey putt.“So it’s not like I walked off saying I hit some terrible shots,” he said. “I knew it was really tough out there. I knew if I just hung in there, if I just got it back to a couple over par, that would be a decent score.”Saunders, the grandson of the seven-time major champion Arnold Palmer, exceeded his expectations with the help of a new putter. At the par-5 18th, Saunders made a 23-footer for birdie. He followed it with a 29-foot birdie at No. 1, a 7-foot birdie at No. 3, a 78-foot chip-in for birdie at No. 5 and a 12-foot birdie at No. 7. Saunders also made a clutch 8-footer for par on No. 6 after hitting his approach in a greenside bunker.Get the big sports news, highlights and analysis from Times journalists, with distinctive takes on games and some behind-the-scenes surprises, delivered to your inbox every week.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.“I feel so confident in what I’m doing,” Saunders said. “It’s one of those deals where you seem crazy for continuing to do what you’re doing and working on the same things.”But other than his putter and his attitude, Saunders said he had not changed much. “It’s not like I’ve been in panic mode looking for something because my game’s been so bad,” he said, adding, “I knew if I could just hang in there, good things will happen eventually.”AdvertisementWhen Saunders speaks about his bad fall, he emphasizes his good fortune. He was riding a hoverboard next to his wife, Kelly, and 7-year-old son Cohen, who were on bikes, when he fainted, possibly because of dehydration. Saunders landed hard on his head.“My son thought I was gone because I was just laying on the ground unconscious for a couple minutes,” he said.A week after his release from the hospital, Saunders played in the Web.com finals. He placed third to finish 12th in the final rankings and secure his PGA Tour playing privileges for the 2015-16 season. Saunders said his doctors were dumbstruck.“They told me to stop calling it a concussion,” Saunders said. “It was actually a traumatic brain injury, and they were worried that I had only a week off before I played the finals.”But Saunders felt well enough. And besides, he has a wife and two young sons to support and no guaranteed contract to provide a cushion.“I was a little worried about things,” he said. “The off-season was barely a month, and I had a hard time relaxing, so I went and did more testing with some specialists, and they cleared me that everything is fine.”Saunders’s sense of smell has yet to return, which has made mealtimes less pleasurable. “I’ve lost a bunch of weight just because I don’t eat as much now because I can’t smell,” he said. “It is weird.”But his doctors have assured him it is not unusual for someone who has sustained that kind of injury. “Now that I’m past thinking, ‘O.K., maybe there’s something wrong with me,’ I’m ready to just focus on getting better and playing good golf,” he said.Saunders has another goal this week. He is trying to obtain commitments from the top players for next month’s Bay Hill Invitational, hosted by his grandfather.AdvertisementPalmer, 86, also has experienced some recent health setbacks.“He’s hanging in there,” Saunders said. “I know he’s excited about the tournament in a couple of weeks. I’ve really been trying to get everybody to come play. If there’s one thing that would maybe kick him back into gear, it would be seeing all these big guys.”A version of this article appears in print on February 26, 2016, on Page B14 of the New York edition with the headline: A Player Struggles, Then Vaults Into Contention.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.