AdvertisementSupported byBy Billy WitzTAMPA, Fla. — Since Andrew Miller arrived in New York a year ago, he has been a model employee.He cut his shoulder-length hair and cost the Yankees $10 million less than David Robertson would have — and, because Robertson left in free agency, Miller effectively netted them a first-round draft pick. He also short-circuited any controversy by saying after his arrival last February that it would not bother him if Dellin Betances, the young All-Star setup man, were named the closer.Then Miller delivered a market-crushing early return on his four-year, $36 million contract by pitching so well as the Yankees’ closer that he was named the American League relief pitcher of the year.His reward for all this?An off-season spent listening to reports that the Yankees were dangling him as trade bait for a starting pitcher and then finding out that Aroldis Chapman was acquired to take his closer’s job, sending Miller back to a role as a setup man.But since Miller arrived at spring training last week, there have been no harrumphs about the ingrates in the front office, no complaining to Manager Joe Girardi or the news media about a demotion, nothing at all to betray what might have been a winter of discontent.If there is any lingering disappointment for Miller about his role — or his place in the Yankees’ plans — it is well hidden.“It wouldn’t be very welcoming on my end, or very appreciative on my end, toward a lot of people,” Miller said. “I don’t want to make Joe’s life harder. I don’t want to make Aroldis’s life harder. You know, we all want to win. That’s something that all the veteran guys want, that’s their goal, and then hopefully the young guys see that and hopefully fall into line with that.”Not everyone in a clubhouse takes such a gracious approach. Luke Gregerson is in a spot with the Houston Astros nearly identical to Miller’s with the Yankees: Gregerson performed well enough in his first real shot as a closer to help the Astros surprisingly reach the playoffs last year. Then the Astros acquired Philadelphia Phillies closer Ken Giles in the off-season to replace him.When Gregerson reported to spring training last week, he protested. “I don’t see any reason I should lose my job,” he said.Miller nods when Gregerson’s name is brought up and then shrugs. Miller said it was just his nature not to stir the pot, a quality that has probably been reinforced by his parents’ values and by his becoming a father himself two years ago. Miller also said many veterans he had played with since reaching the major leagues 10 years ago, at age 21, had carried themselves similarly, mentioning the examples set last season by Alex Rodriguez, Mark Teixeira, C. C. Sabathia and Carlos Beltran. It might be easier to conduct yourself in an upright manner if you have a no-trade clause in your contract, as those four players do, with Beltran’s being a partial provision. (And it should be noted that Teixeira was not so collegial last season after he was thrown out at home plate in July, severely criticizing the third-base coach Joe Espada.)Miller asked for a no-trade clause in free agency, but the Yankees said no. “New York property isn’t cheap,” said Miller, who makes his home in Florida and rented an apartment on the Upper East Side last season. “You don’t want to be a guy that buys a place and then gets traded the next year and now you have to sell and you’re taking a loss.”He added: “The no-trade clauses are worth a lot of money to players and teams. I wasn’t able to get one here. When I look at the track record of players here that they’ve signed, there’s very little history of them trading guys. That’s something that was pointed out by them.”So when reports surfaced in November that the Yankees were willing to trade Miller for starting pitching, Miller’s agent, Mark Rodgers, called Yankees General Manager Brian Cashman. Cashman’s ability to sign talent was limited by a number of onerous contracts and the owner Hal Steinbrenner’s unwillingness to significantly increase the payroll, so Miller’s name was in play.“I told him, I doubt if anything happens because he’s such an important piece,” Cashman said. “But it doesn’t preclude us from listening to every opportunity that’s out there because my job is to make us better.”The Yankees may still count on Miller to return to the closer’s role at the start of the season if Chapman is suspended by Major League Baseball, which is investigating domestic-violence allegations against him. Miller would not be a bad fallback: He saved 36 games in 38 chances last year, with a 2.04 E.R.A. and 100 strikeouts in 61 innings.But Miller said it could easily be Betances in that role. “I don’t know,” Miller said, pointing to how Betances, Justin Wilson and Chasen Shreve carried on with no ill effects when Miller missed a month with forearm tightness. “If we can follow that, we’ll be fine.”INSIDE PITCHFirst baseman Mark Teixeira, who is in the final year of an eight-year, $180 million contract, said Wednesday that he wanted to play five more seasons and that his first choice would be to return to the Yankees. Teixeira, who turns 36 in April, was leading the Yankees with 31 home runs, 92 R.B.I. and a .902 on-base plus slugging percentage when he fouled a ball off his shin and missed the rest of the season. His presumed replacement, Greg Bird, is expected to miss this season because of shoulder surgery.Advertisement