By HUW RICHARDSFEB. 26, 2016
LONDON — If Australia’s smiles looked like a million dollars when it reclaimed the No. 1 spot in the International Cricket Council’s rankings for test cricket, there was a good reason.That is the sum it will collect on April 1 when the I.C.C. makes its annual award to the team at the top of the rankings. With the time between now and then dominated by the World Twenty20 championship in India next month, Australia is already guaranteed the top place.The challenge will be staying there longer. In one sense, Australia’s rise, achieved by beating New Zealand in Christchurch on Wednesday to sweep a two-match series of five-day tests, is the return of cricket’s natural order.Australia has the best win-loss record of any team by far, historically. It was at the top of the rankings when they were introduced in 2003, and stayed there until 2009. When the rankings were calculated retrospectively, that spell of dominance, with short breaks, went back to 1995.AdvertisementWhile South Africa, England and India have all had periods at the top since 2009, none of them have really established themselves. The longest spell any of them managed as No.1 was 21 months, accomplished by both South Africa and India.AdvertisementWith only six ranking points — calculated on the basis of each team’s results over the past four years — separating Australia, India, South Africa and Pakistan at the top of the ratings, it would be no surprise to see more change.Australia also faces a tough program over the next year. It has two trips to Asia — Sri Lanka and India — scheduled on either side of visits from South Africa and Pakistan. If it emerges from those still at No. 1, it will have proved its staying power.Yet Australia has already achieved plenty, and it is perhaps fortunate that South Africa, more than a year ago, went into sudden decline. But Australia has managed to rise while undergoing change on a scale that usually signals decline, rather than revival.Six established players, the core of Australia’s team so far this decade, quit in 2015. Michael Clarke, the captain, left, along with veteran pace bowlers Ryan Harris and Mitchell Johnson, wicketkeeper Brad Haddin, opening batsman Chris Rogers and all-rounder Shane Watson.“A lot of credit has to be given to the guys who have recently retired,” Steve Smith, Clarke’s successor as captain, said on Wednesday, pointing out that their performances counted toward the ranking points. “Having said that, the boys that have stepped up to the plate since those big retirements have been outstanding, and I’m proud of the way the boys have been performing.”Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.Smith, the most productive test batsman in the world with an average of 80 and 12 scores of 100 or more since the start of 2014, has found some formidable allies. Usman Khawaja, getting a second chance at test cricket after being dropped in 2013, made scores of 100 or more in four consecutive matches.Adam Voges caused huge excitement among statisticians when his career average in tests briefly topped 100 during the first match against New Zealand, in Wellington. It now rests at 95.50. Since Voges is 36, his final career average could rank second only to the prodigious 99.94 attained by Australia’s most famous cricketer, Donald Bradman.While none of the bowlers have made quite such an impact, New Zealand’s retiring captain Brendon McCullum sees them as the main reason Australia could stay at the top. His team has lost both home and away series to Australia in the last few months, despite several injuries to Australian bowlers.Advertisement“The bowling lineup is quite different, and they’ve all stepped up,” he said Wednesday at a postgame news conference. “They’ve got so much depth that if they can get everyone heading in the right direction and keep the game plans simple then they’re going to be dangerous, no matter what.”Smith, at only 26, looks to be next in Australia’s succession of long-lasting captains. He has won nine of his first 11 tests as leader, drawing the other two. Australia’s only setback in the last year, the 3-2 Ashes away loss to England, was under Clarke’s leadership.Smith can show the abrasiveness of the archetypal Australian leader. He was fined — along with paceman Josh Hazlewood — for aggressive appealing against New Zealand batsman Kane Williamson at Christchurch.But McCullum, Smith’s counterpart, still holds him in high regard.“He plays the game for the right reasons,” McCullum said. “He plays with his heart on his sleeve, but he’s a very respectful guy and a wonderful cricketer.”New Zealanders do not usually go out of their way to praise Australians, and McCullum is widely regarded as the smartest and most effective captain of any team in recent years. Cricketing endorsements don’t come much better than that.A version of this article appears in print on February 27, 2016, in The International New York Times.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.