By THE ASSOCIATED PRESSFEB. 24, 2016
KNOXVILLE, Tenn. —  A former Tennessee football player has confirmed that he assisted a woman who said she had been raped by two other players and that he was later attacked by teammates and told by Coach Butch Jones that he had “betrayed the team.”An amended complaint filed Wednesday in a Title IX federal lawsuit against Tennessee said the woman called 911 from the car of Drae Bowles, who was a Volunteers receiver at the time, to report a rape in the early morning on Nov. 16, 2014.The complaint also said that Bowles sustained a bloody lip when he was punched by a teammate, Curt Maggitt, later that day and that he was confronted by two other teammates, Geraldo Orta and Marlin Lane, the following day.Bowles called Jones to tell him about being punched, and Jones said that he was disappointed in Bowles and that Bowles had “betrayed the team,” leading Bowles to break down and cry, according to the complaint. Several hours later, the complaint said, Jones called Bowles to apologize for his comments.AdvertisementThe woman’s report of the attack led to the arrests of two Tennessee players, linebacker A. J. Johnson and defensive back Michael Williams, who were indicted on aggravated-rape charges in February 2015.AdvertisementThe university issued a statement Wednesday night through its lawyer, saying that after reviewing the amended complaint, “we continue to stand by our actions.”Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.The lawyer, Bill Ramsey, added, “The facts, as opposed to allegations in a complaint, will demonstrate that the university acted properly in the matters at issue.”Two more plaintiffs were added to the lawsuit in the amended complaint. The lawsuit alleges that Tennessee has violated Title IX regulations and created a “hostile sexual environment” through a policy of indifference toward assaults by student-athletes. The suit now includes eight unidentified women as plaintiffs.Bowles transferred to Tennessee-Chattanooga after the 2014 season.Tennessee’s 16 head coaches held a news conference Tuesday to defend the university’s athletic department, saying it had been portrayed unfairly.The university also filed a motion on Tuesday to strike a reference to Peyton Manning from the lawsuit.One paragraph in the document mentions a sexual-harassment complaint made by a Tennessee trainer in 1996 that included an incident involving Manning, then the Volunteers’ quarterback.A version of this article appears in print on February 25, 2016, on Page B14 of the New York edition with the headline: Ex-Tennessee Player Says He Helped Woman Report Rape.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.