AdvertisementSupported byBlue Jackets 6, Devils 1By The Associated PressCOLUMBUS, Ohio — There was no stopping the Columbus Blue Jackets’ third line of Nick Foligno, Matt Calvert and William Karlsson on Thursday night.Foligno recorded his second career hat trick and added an assist to lead the Blue Jackets to a 6-1 victory over the Devils.“It’s nice to contribute and help the guys in that department,” said Foligno, who set a career high with four points. “It’s something I pride myself on, but I was more proud of the way we played.”Brandon Saad, Brandon Dubinsky — playing his 600th career game — and Rene Bourque also scored, and Calvert and Karlsson each had three assists as the Blue Jackets improved to 8-2-3 in their last 13 games. The steady rookie Joonas Korpisalo made 25 saves.Reid Boucher scored for the Devils, who lost for the fourth time in five games. Cory Schneider, who entered with an N.H.L.-low 2.06 goals against average and was seeking a career-high 27th win, gave up three goals on 11 shots in the first period. He was replaced by Keith Kinkaid to start the second period, and Kinkaid allowed three more goals on the 13 shots he faced.Columbus jumped ahead by 3-0 in the first period and never looked back. Foligno scored two goals three minutes apart early on, benefiting from the tenacious play of his linemate Calvert.“It was just one of those nights where we had some chances and we score,” Columbus Coach John Tortorella said.Boucher put the Devils on the board 1 minute 38 seconds into the second period, converting a saucer pass from Travis Zajac at the back post and giving his team some life. The Devils carried the momentum for a long stretch of play, but they could not beat Korpisalo, who was stout in making a variety of difficult saves.Tortorella said, “I thought the key part of the game, quite honestly, even though it ends up being a 6-1 game, was the beginning of the second period when Korpisalo makes some great saves.”He continued: “We were just sound asleep. They score another goal there, 3-2, it’s a different game.”Joseph Blandisi almost put the Devils one goal behind with a little under eight minutes to go, but the play was ruled dead before he poked the puck from under Korpisalo into the net.“It was a factor in the game just in the sense that it would have been nice to have a goal at that point,” Devils Coach John Hynes said.He continued, “If we have an honest assessment of it, we weren’t ready to play in the first period, and that was the biggest difference in the game.”SLAP SHOTSBlue Jackets center William Karlsson’s three assists set a personal high. ... Columbus has a five-game winning streak against the Devils. ... It was the first time the Devils had allowed three goals in the first period this season. ... Blue Jackets defenseman Jack Johnson sustained an upper-body injury in the second period and did not return. ... The Devils will host Tampa Bay on Friday.Advertisement