AdvertisementSupported byBy Andrew DasMidfielder Frank Lampard, who has yet to play for New York City F.C. this season, will be a part of the BBC’s coverage of this summer’s European championships in France.The BBC named Lampard when it announced its team on Monday for the monthlong tournament, but its release said only that Lampard’s role would include “multiplatform contributions.” A New York City F.C. spokesman said Monday afternoon that Lampard, a former England captain, would not travel to France or do prolonged studio work as part of his as-yet-unspecified duties. The team said unequivocally that Lampard would not miss any games or practice sessions because of his BBC commitments.The BBC team for Euro 2016 includes more than a dozen former international players and coaches, and Lampard’s inclusion was mentioned in the same sentence as that of the United States national team coach Jurgen Klinsmann. Klinsmann, though, will be coaching his team in the Copa América Centenario in June, and consequently most likely would be unavailable to the BBC for anything more than brief interviews. (A spokesman for United States Soccer confirmed as much on Monday, writing on Twitter: “Jurgen has no deal with BBC. If he does participate, it will be from LA and only after he’s done” with the Copa America.)The Euros will be held from June 10 to July 10, roughly concurrent with the Copa América in the United States (June 3 to 26). M.L.S. will take a two-week break (June 3 to 14) during the Copa’s group stage.Lampard has a complicated relationship with New York City F.C. fans, who cheered his signing by the expansion team in 2014 but reacted angrily when he missed the start of the team’s inaugural season in 2015 to finish out his contract with Manchester City of the Premier League. Lampard is N.Y.C.F.C.’s highest-paid player at $6 million a year, but he played sporadically, and not always well, when he joined N.Y.C.F.C. last summer. He has yet to appear in a game this season because of a nagging calf injury.In fact, Lampard, who will turn 38 during the Euros, has appeared in only 10 of the 44 games in the team’s history to date. Coach Patrick Vieira has regularly described Lampard’s struggle to return to the lineup as “day to day,” and the current hope is that he will return to full training as soon as next week.“We don’t want to put any date because it would not be fair to him,” Vieira told reporters after a tie against Montreal two weeks ago. “He’s working hard, he’s working well. When he will be fit, he will be in the squad.”Advertisement