By TYLER KEPNER and ELENA GUSTINESMAY 8, 2016
The home run that the Mets’ Bartolo Colon hit on Saturday night — the first of his career, at age 42 — was startling, hilarious, mind-boggling, take your pick.But it also continued a tradition of pitchers occasionally weighing in (no pun intended, Bartolo) with a home run from out of nowhere, sometimes in pretty big moments. Consider this list.Rick Wise, PhiladelphiaJUNE 23, 1971, AT CINCINNATIWise not only no-hit the Reds in this game, he also hit two home runs. He hit a two-run homer off Ross Grimsley in the fifth and led off the eighth with a homer off Clay Carroll.Rick Camp, AtlantaJULY 4-5, 1985, VS. METSIn a game won by the Mets that went 19 innings and ended at 3:55 a.m., Camp, the last of seven Atlanta pitchers, and entering with a .060 career batting average, tied the game with two outs in the 18th inning on an 0-2 forkball from Mets reliever Tom Gorman. Somehow, the Mets survived. The game had actually begun as a fireworks night promotion and, sure enough, the rockets went off at 4 a.m.AdvertisementCraig Lefferts, San DiegoAPRIL 25, 1986, VS. SAN FRANCISCONo pitcher has hit a game-ending home run since Lefferts, a Padres reliever, connected off Greg Minton in the 12th inning. Before Lefferts, the previous time it was done was by Jim Hardin of the Orioles in a game against Kansas City on May 10, 1969. Lefferts had come into the game in relief in the 11th inning and allowed a run in the 12th. But San Diego tied it in their half of the inning and Lefferts came to bat. Game over.AdvertisementBobby Witt, TexasJUNE 30, 1997, AT LOS ANGELES DODGERSWitt became the first American League pitcher to hit a home run in nearly 25 years. Roric Harrison of the Orioles had been the last A.L. pitcher to do so in the regular season, back on Oct. 3, 1972. The designated hitter rule took effect the next season in the American League, and pitchers no longer hit. But Witt did on that day in June, and he connected.Get the big sports news, highlights and analysis from Times journalists, with distinctive takes on games and some behind-the-scenes surprises, delivered to your inbox every week.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.Esteban Yan, Tampa BayJUNE 4, 2000, AT METSEverything pointed to Yan being an easy out when he came to bat against Mets starter Bobby J. Jones in the second inning. The Devil Rays’ starting pitcher had never had an at-bat in a professional game. Not even in the minors, and certainly not in his previous 132 games in the majors. Up stepped Yan, oblivious to the fact that only 11 pitchers in the history of baseball had homered in their first at-bat, and none had done it in eight years.“I said to myself, ‘I got a chance,’ ” Yan said. “I feel comfortable. I feel I want to swing at the first pitch. He try to throw a strike. He figures I’m an easy out.” He wasn’t.Shawn Estes, MetsJUNE 15, 2002, VS. YANKEESThe whole world was expecting Estes to hit Roger Clemens with a pitch in delayed retaliation for Mike Piazza getting beaned by Clemens two years before. But Estes’s first pitch to Clemens whizzed behind Clemens’s upper thigh. In other words, he missed. And he didn’t make a second attempt to plunk him. But Estes did connect with a Clemens pitch in the fifth inning, driving one over the left-field wall for a two-run homer. Still, Mets fans would have preferred he hit Clemens.Randy Johnson, ArizonaSEPT. 19, 2003, AT MILWAUKEEJohnson homered over the left-field wall against Doug Davis for the first home run of his career. At that point, Johnson had come to the plate 480 times.Felix Hernandez, SeattleJUNE 23, 2008, AT METSJohan Santana’s strategy was to throw Hernandez a high fastball, a pitch that was purposely out of the strike zone and one that an inexperienced hitter would chase. It was Hernandez’s first at-bat of the season and he had one career hit. But Hernandez swung at Santana’s 93-mile-per-hour fastball and hammered it over the right-field fence. No A.L. pitcher had hit a grand slam since interleague play began in 1997 and now one had.Joe Blanton, PhiladelphiaOCTOBER 26, 2008, VS. TAMPA BAYBlanton’s solo shot off Edwin Jackson in Game 4 of the World Series against Tampa Bay was the first by a pitcher in the last 33 World Series. It was a presidential election year, and the Republican candidate, John McCain, was publicizing a supporter known as Joe the Plumber. After Blanton connected, a Philadelphia headline proclaimed: Joe the Lumber.Sources: Baseball-Reference.com and MLB.comA version of this article appears in print on May 9, 2016, on Page D2 of the New York edition with the headline: For Pitchers, All Homers Aren’t Equal.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.