By ROB HUGHESMAY 8, 2016
LONDON — The Leicester we have known and not always loved pulled off an entire season of tenacious victories as it blew away the established order of English soccer. After clinching the title last week, the club arranged a homecoming celebration to be remembered.There was sunshine in Leicester on Saturday, then a downpour. King Power Stadium was packed, and outside, thousands of ticketless fans simply got as close as they could.Inside, the Italian opera singer Andrea Bocelli was serenading the team and its Italian coach, Claudio Ranieri with “Nessun Dorma,” the Puccini aria sung before the World Cup final in Rome in 1990 by the Three Tenors — Plácido Domingo, José Carreras and Luciano Pavarotti.After that, Bocelli entertained the crowd with “Time to Say Goodbye” but with his own spin, changing it to “Time to Win Again.”AdvertisementThe smile on the singer’s face gave the surprise away before the words came out. Grown men celebrated by wearing flat hats in the shape of pizzas, while kids on the shoulders of their dads wore the same shirt declaring “Leicester City, Champions!” that Bocelli wore underneath his gray jacket.AdvertisementWhen play finally started Saturday, Leicester ran Everton into the ground. The final score was 3-1. Jamie Vardy, the rags-to-riches star, scored twice and mis-hit a penalty kick so high that he joked he must have been aiming for the club chairman’s helicopter in the sky.Andy King, 27, scored the other goal for Leicester. A player who is not often in the starting lineup, King moved to Leicester at 15 after he was released by Chelsea’s youth academy. In over 300 games since, King has scored in three different leagues as Leicester rose from the third tier to the top of English soccer.Watching over all this was Vichai Srivaddhanaprabha, the Thai billionaire who saved Leicester from insolvency and whose son chose Ranieri as coach a year ago. Vichai stood with his arms folded, impassive as a statue.There really are elements to this story that no fiction writer could make up. Ranieri, the 64-year-old coach, was summoned from unemployment to win a league title for the first time in his life. At 29, Vardy is fighting to be the top scorer in the Premier League this season, four years after he was a part-time player, eking out a living as a factory worker.The essence of this past year has come down to team effort for Leicester. On Tuesday, the morning after the league title was secured, a notice was pinned to the trainer’s room at the club: Closed due to unforeseen circumstances.After an all-night party at Vardy’s home, the players were feted all week long. Yet at game time on Saturday, they knuckled down to the hard-running and hard-tackling style that Everton, sadly, had no appetite to resist.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.The energy of Leicester — the hunger of men who for one reason or another had been bypassed by the bigger clubs — washed over Everton, as it has most opponents. Ranieri, the deceptively avuncular Italian who had flown home to Rome last Monday to have lunch with his mother, explained on the field Saturday what he said when he first met the team last July.“I watched them,” Ranieri said. “They were real friends and hard workers. I said, eh, ‘Believe me, you are better than you think. Trust me, I can make you play good Italian football, hard, clever football in England.’ ”AdvertisementWhat we learned most from the past week came from Ranieri’s mother, Renata. She might be 96, but in her own engaging interview she told La Repubblica newspaper, “We talked a bit about Leicester, but he wanted to feel comfortable.”Over steak and chicory, the mother and son talked tactics. “Claudio told me he found a group of players who trained like true professionals,” Mrs. Ranieri said. “And finally everything has fallen into place. My son has found himself.”On Saturday, the ground was festooned in ticker tape, the players and the owner cradled the trophy, and Ranieri was doing the endless rounds of interviews. “We know very well that next season will be different,” he conceded. “The fans are dreaming. I say to them, ‘Hey, don’t wake up, keep dreaming, keep pushing us.’ ”Next season, Leicester will be stretched, as everyone tries to shoot it down off its unlikely perch, and playing in the Champions League will tax its resources, too. The owners will spend, but not extravagantly, and both they and Coach Ranieri have already acknowledged that holding on to the players who emerged as stars this season will come down to negotiations.“I tell the players to stay with me one year more,” Ranieri said. “But if somebody comes to me and says he wants to go, I say go! I want only happy players.”He, the club and countless fans around the globe who have seen this group of men grow together have witnessed that it is their unity, the sum of their parts, that brought the unlikely and shocking triumph.Together, they are champions. Apart, they might not be. The temptation of higher salaries in more exalted places will come. But Leicester’s message is never give up, never sell yourself short.Unforeseen circumstances, indeed.A version of this article appears in print on May 9, 2016, in The International New York Times.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.