
On Soccer By                     
 SAM BORDEN
 
MAY 7, 2016
BIRMINGHAM, England — At the end of each season’s final home game, the tradition goes, the players and staff at Aston Villa walk around the entire field in a slow processional. The so-called lap of appreciation, which is done by other clubs, too, is a way for the team and fans to applaud each other one more time before summer.The circuit is often emotional (such as in 2013, when Stiliyan Petrov led the team after announcing his retirement because of leukemia treatment), and it is almost always warm: Last spring, Fabian Delph, the team captain, carried his infant daughter, who wore a claret-and-blue jersey with “Daddy” written on her back and giggled for much of the ride.This season, however, there was more concern about the lap than excitement. Would the reception be nasty? Violent? Just plain sad? While Leicester City’s fans partied in an endless — if somewhat surreal — championship celebration just up the road on Saturday, the mood at Villa Park, with fellow bottom-scrapers Newcastle United in town, was grim.A bloc of fans marched in protest before the match. Spectators in the stadium batted around hundreds of beach balls (and other, more anatomically graphic, inflatables) during the game in another show of discontent. Several home players were booed whenever they touched the ball. When rain arrived in the second half, many spectators simply gave up and left early. If Leicester is the small club that improbably hit it big in this season of seasons, Aston Villa, in last place and suffering a wretched campaign, is the big club that has somehow plummeted to unthinkable depths.AdvertisementIn some ways, the numbers are as staggering as Leicester’s. The Villans have won three games all year, equal to the number of managers they have had. They have a goal differential of minus-45. They have scored just 27 times, which is the same number of goals that the Tottenham star Harry Kane has scored by himself.All of that would be bad enough at any club, but Aston Villa — and Newcastle, frankly, which did not exactly cover itself in glory during a hide-your-eyes 0-0 draw and will very likely be relegated as well — is one of England’s most storied organizations.AdvertisementSo, no, this has not been Derby County recording 11 points and getting torched throughout the 2007-8 season; Aston Villa has won the country’s top division seven times, claimed the European Cup in 1982, competed for a Champions League spot as recently as 2009 and plays in a grand stadium that seats nearly 43,000. It has not been relegated in nearly three decades. Its performance this season ranks among the most disappointing in English soccer history.Adding to the sting is the juxtaposition of Leicester’s rise. The Foxes had a jubilee Saturday, with fans roaming outside King Power Stadium for hours, drinking and chanting and singing and smiling, before going inside and hearing the tenor Andrea Bocelli deliver a stirring prematch performance that was followed by the players’ walking through an honor guard as they entered the field. Oversize banners rolled through the crowd. After the match, the Premier League trophy was raised for the first time in team history, and a mostly middling club with a Thai owner and little history of success had the cap on a season in which it beat just about everyone, big and small.Only 45 miles, 20 wins and about 40 goals away was Aston Villa. While Leicester’s ascent was relatively sudden — it was nearly relegated last year and shot up to first place from 14th — the Villans tumble from near the treetops has been slow, steady and brutal, with this year’s showing being the rough equivalent to smacking square into one final branch on the way down.Theories abound regarding what, exactly, was the tipping point, but many Villa observers point to the actions of the American owner, Randy Lerner, who poured money into the club shortly after buying it in 2006 only to switch to constant cost-cutting a few years later.Yet money is only part of it. Aston Villa has had plenty of pricey player failures, with the French international Charles N’Zogbia, who is earning is about $91,000 a week but is mostly training with the club’s reserves, among the most notable. It has had internal battles, such as when a former manager, Martin O’Neill, resigned because he felt Lerner was not supporting him. It has had bad luck, like when Gérard Houllier had to step down as coach because of medical issues. And it has had, some fans believe, cosmic comeuppance for disrupting the natural order of things when, in 2011, Lerner inexplicably asked Alex McLeish, who had just finished coaching the bitter rivals Birmingham City, to come lead Villa. (McLeish lasted a year.)Get the big sports news, highlights and analysis from Times journalists, with distinctive takes on games and some behind-the-scenes surprises, delivered to your inbox every week.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.All of it led to this season’s nightmare, which began, somewhat bizarrely, with a victory. Aston Villa beat Bournemouth in its opener last August, a result that made the following nine-game winless streak (and subsequent firing of the first manager) all the more jarring.AdvertisementLeicester won on opening day too, of course, and the clubs diverged ever since. Leicester’s quirks were novel and fun: pizza parties for shutouts, fan noisemakers that were weird but charming, a former nonleague player (Jamie Vardy) who suddenly morphed into the country’s most dangerous scorer. Aston Villa’s moves, meanwhile, were toxic: a strange managerial hire in Remi Garde, who lasted 20 games; a series of protests from befuddled fans; a scandal involving the veteran captain Gabriel Agbonlahor, who was, among other things, photographed out partying on the night the Villans were officially relegated last month.Next season, they will play in the second division for the first time since 1987. Scarves were on sale outside Villa Park on Saturday that read, “This club is our love whatever the division,” and there is no doubt the fans here are committed. Attendance will very likely remain strong.But the Villa fans are also unyielding, and that is why the players did little more than the typical quick clap toward the stands before vacating the field at the final whistle. There was no lingering, no celebration. After the last home game of the season, there was no lap of honor here on Saturday.It made sense, really. After consulting with fan groups during the week, the club made its best decisions in some time.It canceled it.The On Soccer column in some editions last Sunday, about Aston Villa’s last-place season in the Premier League, misspelled the surname of an Aston Villa coach who had to step down because of medical issues. He is Gérard Houllier, not Houlier.A version of this article appears in print on May 8, 2016, on Page SP5 of the New York edition with the headline: In England, the Premier League Is Turned Upside Down.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.See More »