By WALLACE MATTHEWSAPRIL 29, 2017
It was a day at Yankee Stadium when anything seemed possible.On Saturday, less than 48 hours after returning from a two-game sweep of the Red Sox in Boston, the Yankees took their second consecutive win over the Baltimore Orioles, the team they had been chasing in the American League East.They also scored in double digits for the second straight game — 14 runs on Friday, 12 on Saturday — and followed their five-home-run performance on Friday with four more. Brett Gardner, who had not homered in what he said felt like “two or three years” (actually nine months), went deep twice.And at the close of business, the Yankees — whose 2016 season essentially died in April, when they won just eight of 22 games — found themselves not only atop their division by a game but also, at 15-7, with the best record in Major League Baseball.So, naturally, the question came up: Since Aaron Judge, the 6-foot-7 rookie outfielder who can hit a baseball from the Bronx to Westchester County, already has 10 home runs, how many might he hit for the full season?Advertisement“You kind of wonder what he’s going to do,” Manager Joe Girardi said Saturday after the Yankees’ 12-4 victory, in which Judge delivered a two-run bomb to go along with the two home runs he hit the night before. “I’m not sure you really expect 10 home runs from anybody in a month. I mean, that would be 60 in a year.”AdvertisementSixty, of course, remains a magic number in the realm of home runs. Girardi stopped short of saying it could not be done, as did Gardner when he was answering the same question.“I hate to put a number on him,” Gardner said. “But we all know how physically gifted he is and how big and strong he is. So nothing would surprise me, really.”Even Judge, who is so modest he refuses to acknowledge the majesty of his home runs, could not bring himself to shrug off the question.“Anything’s possible,” he said with a sheepish smile.That was how things felt on a day when a player like Gardner, who had not hit a baseball out of any park since last July 30, belted home runs in each of his first two at-bats and when a player like Austin Romine, who was considered a stopgap when catcher Gary Sanchez went down three weeks ago with a biceps strain, showed himself once again to be almost impossible to remove from the lineup.Get the big sports news, highlights and analysis from Times journalists, with distinctive takes on games and some behind-the-scenes surprises, delivered to your inbox every week.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.And that is how things feel when a player like Judge becomes a player like Judge. After striking out in precisely half of his first 84 major-league at-bats, Judge became one of the game’s most feared hitters over his next 73.“We’ve got a really deep lineup,” Gardner said. “There’s no easy at-bats here.”April is showering baseballs in the Bronx, and an inordinate number of them are landing over the outfield fences after leaving the bats of the home team, which has not truly deserved the nickname Bronx Bombers for a couple of years.But this is a different Yankees team from the one that has taken the field over the past five seasons, and a much better team than anyone could have expected, even after a surprising 24-9 record in spring training games.Advertisement“You think about where we were a year ago in April, we were really struggling,” Girardi said. “And you think about where we were the first five games, we were really struggling. So it’s good to see we’re playing a lot better, and we need to continue to do it.”After the drama of Friday night, when the Yankees fought back from deficits of 9-1 and 11-4 to tie the score in the bottom of the ninth on a home run by Starlin Castro and then win in the 10th on a home run by Matt Holliday, Saturday’s game was almost an anticlimax.Gardner’s two home runs and a sacrifice fly by Romine — who ended the day with five R.B.I., the most by a Yankees No. 9 hitter since a catcher named Joe Girardi drove in seven runs against the Texas Rangers in 1999 — gave the Yankees a 5-0 lead after two innings. The lead grew to 7-0 on a two-run double by Romine in the fourth, and pitcher Michael Pineda kept the Orioles in check despite struggling with his command.Romine hit a home run in the sixth, and Judge closed the scoring with his two-run shot in the seventh, leaving little question about the game’s eventual outcome, other than what the final margin would be. Two unearned runs off Pineda in the sixth and two more runs off reliever Tommy Layne in the ninth lengthened the game somewhat but never put the Yankees in jeopardy.The real question was this: Can Judge possibly be as good as he seems right now?“I’m not amazed by him at all,” Gardner said. “I see the way he goes about his business and how hard he works. He’s a special player who’s capable of just about anything.”Asked if what he had shown so far was the real Aaron Judge, or merely a glimpse at a young player who is extraordinarily locked in, Judge said: “It’s just baseball. Sometimes you go up to the plate, and the ball looks like a golf ball up there. And you’ll have times when it looks gigantic and like it’s right down the middle.”He left little doubt that for him these days, the baseball looks like a beach ball floating in from the pitcher’s mound.At times like that, anything really does seem possible. Even talking about magic numbers in the first month of a baseball season.A version of this article appears in print on April 30, 2017, on Page SP5 of the New York edition with the headline: Judge Leads Return of Bronx Bombers.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.