By SETH BERKMANMAY 8, 2016
For long stretches on Sunday night, Yankees starter Luis Severino befuddled the Red Sox lineup. Whisking along with machine-like efficiency, Severino set an unusually brisk pace for a Yankees-Red Sox game at Yankee Stadium, affairs known to play out like Leo Tolstoy novels, especially when broadcast on national television.But Severino made three bad pitches whose effects overshadowed the rest of his craftsmanship. The Yankee tormentors Dustin Pedroia and David Ortiz were to blame for the blemishes, smashing three homers that accounted for all but one of the Boston runs in a 5-1 victory.“I think he’s on the right track,” Manager Joe Girardi said of Severino. “We’re not scoring runs for him, and he gave up a few, and we weren’t able to overcome it.”In Severino’s six starts this season, the Yankees have supported him with a total of only four runs.AdvertisementSeverino opened the game wildly, walking Mookie Betts on four pitches. Pedroia then worked a full count before punching a high fly ball over the right-field fence, just beyond Carlos Beltran’s glove.AdvertisementAfter a visit to the mound by the pitching coach Larry Rothschild, Severino found his footing. He struck out five of the next six batters and retired 10 straight after Pedroia’s homer.“After the first inning, he really settled down and pitched great,” catcher Brian McCann said.With seven strikeouts under his belt, Severino then ran into Ortiz, who quickly erased all the positives with one vicious swing that sent the ball deep over the right-field fence.The fourth-inning home run by Ortiz was his 453rd with the Red Sox, surpassing Carl Yastrzemski for the second most in franchise history.Unfazed, Severino went back to work and allowed only one more hit before Ortiz came calling again to lead off the seventh inning. Ortiz bashed another pitch into the heart of the right-field stands for his first multihomer game of the season and the 51st of his career.Severino (0-5) left after six and two-thirds innings, allowing five hits and four runs. He also registered nine strikeouts, tying his career best. Severino had totaled nine strikeouts in his previous three starts combined.“I think Sevy’s got a lot of fight in him,” Girardi said. “I believe he’s really close. When he gets us to the other side here, to me, this is going to make him better in the long run.”While the Red Sox veterans were clubbing pitches over the short porch in right, the Yankees had difficulty getting the ball past the infield.AdvertisementRed Sox starter Steven Wright, a knuckleballer who struck out a career-high nine batters in his last start at Yankee Stadium on Aug. 5, was almost unhittable, which helped speed the pace. The game finished in 2 hours 27 minutes.After a blooping single by McCann in the first inning, Wright was dominant, pitching a complete game and allowing three hits.Get the big sports news, highlights and analysis from Times journalists, with distinctive takes on games and some behind-the-scenes surprises, delivered to your inbox every week.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.“I almost felt like he was putting it wherever he wanted,” McCann said.Before the game, Girardi suggested that the proper way to prepare for a knuckleball pitcher was to unleash butterflies in the batting cage. “But they’re not allowed to swing and hit them, that’s the problem,” Girardi said.To the pleasure of animal rights activists and to the chagrin of Girardi, the Yankees were ill-prepared for Wright, who struck out seven.He did not give up his second hit until the seventh inning, when Starlin Castro led off with a double. McCann followed with a deep flyout to right field, moving Castro to third base, and it appeared that the Yankees were finally catching up to Wright’s fluttering pitches.Trailing by 1-0 in the count to Mark Teixeira, Wright threw a knuckleball that bobbled out of catcher Ryan Hanigan’s mitt. Seeing the ball on the ground, Castro broke prematurely for home. Hanigan quickly recovered and threw Castro out as he retreated to third. “That completely confused me,” said Castro.The Yankees finally scored in the ninth inning, when Brett Gardner hit a two-out solo home run. But by then, they had all but conceded the game.Castro was due up next but was replaced by pinch-hitter Ronald Torreyes after experiencing tightness in his left oblique while running back to third base in the seventh. Castro said he believed he would play Monday.“We were down four runs with two outs,” Girardi said. “So I just said: You know what? I’m not going to take a chance.”AdvertisementINSIDE PITCHIVAN NOVA, who began the season pitching out of the bullpen, will start Monday’s series opener against the Kansas City Royals, replacing the injured C. C. Sabathia in the rotation. Manager Joe Girardi said Nova would probably be limited to about 75 pitches. ... Aroldis Chapman will become the Yankees’ closer, having completed a 30-game suspension under Major League Baseball’s new domestic-violence policy. ANDREW MILLER, who held the role in Chapman’s absence, said he wanted to do what was best for the team and become a setup reliever. “What do you want me to do?” Miller said. “You want me to throw a fit? I think the goal here is to win.” ... JACOBY ELLSBURY did not start for the second straight game after straining a hip muscle on Friday.A version of this article appears in print on May 9, 2016, on Page D3 of the New York edition with the headline: Ortiz and Red Sox Jump on Mistakes in Win .  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.