AdvertisementSupported byRoundupBy Ken BelsonIn their 55-year history, the Mets have been known more for their pitchers than for their power hitters.But this season, the Mets are enjoying one of their rare power surges, and the power parade continued in the most extraordinary fashion on Saturday. The Mets hit four homers, which accounted for all of their runs in a 6-3 victory over the San Diego Padres at Petco Park, and they now lead the majors with 46. But the most impressive feat on Saturday was the home run by Mets starter Bartolo Colon.Colon’s two-run blast was the first of his career, and it not only gave the Mets a 4-0 lead but also launched Colon into the record books.Colon, 17 days shy of his 43rd birthday, became the oldest player to hit his first major league home run, passing the Hall of Fame pitcher Randy Johnson, who hit the only home run of his career nine days after he turned 40. Colon is the second-oldest Met to hit a home run, after Julio Franco, who became the oldest player in major league history to hit a home run, something he did as a Met in 2007 at 48.“I don’t even know how to explain it,” Colon told a group of reporters after the game. “Once I hit it, I knew it was gone.”He added: “I think right now, this is the biggest moment of my career.”Colon’s home run, which was instantly celebrated on social media, came in the top of the second inning. After catcher Kevin Plawecki had hit a double to center field, Colon came up with two outs. Padres starter James Shields threw a fastball for a ball, then another fastball for a called strike.Then the lightning struck. Colon launched a 90-mile-an-hour four-seam fastball a few rows beyond the fence in the left field corner.Colon seemed to know he had hit a home run almost from the moment the ball left his bat. As he jogged down the first-base line with the bat in his hand, Colon admired the arc of the ball before it landed in the seats.The home run came in Colon’s 226th career at-bat and touched off a raucous celebration in the Mets’ dugout, where his teammates waited 31 seconds as Colon rounded the bases. They hid in the tunnel so that Colon returned to an empty dugout — then mobbed him a few seconds later.Colon struck out in his other two at-bats, and he is hitting .083 for the season. More important, Colon picked up his third victory of the season, giving up three runs and six hits in six and two-thirds innings. Yoenis Cespedes, David Wright and Michael Conforto hit the other homers for the Mets.In his three seasons in Flushing, Colon has become something of a folk hero, partly because of his antics at the plate. Having played nearly all of his 19 seasons in the American League, Colon had just 10 hits in 96 at-bats before he joined the Mets.At 285 pounds, Colon has been an adventure at the plate and on the basepaths. Often, he swings so wildly that his helmet flies off. Sometimes, he takes three strikes and returns to the dugout. Fans, who have named him Big Sexy, cheer every time he makes contact.But Colon has worked on his batting, and last season he had a career-high eight hits, including one of his two career doubles. Before Saturday, Colon had been hitless in nine at-bats.Colon now has more homers this season than highly paid hitters like Carlos Gomez, Jason Heyward and Yadier Molina.CARDINALS 6, PIRATES 4 Matt Carpenter hit a two-run homer in the bottom of the ninth inning, and St. Louis beat visiting Pittsburgh. (AP)GIANTS 2, ROCKIES 1 Matt Duffy hit a game-ending double with two out in the 13th inning, sending host San Francisco to a win over Colorado. (AP)RANGERS 10, TIGERS 5 Texas slugged five homers in a win at Detroit. The Texas leadoff hitter Rougned Odor and Nomar Mazara went back-to-back in the first inning. (AP)DODGERS 6, BLUE JAYS 2 Clayton Kershaw struck out 10 and visiting Los Angeles ended Toronto’s winning streak at four. (AP)ORIOLES AND A’S SPLIT Chris Davis homered as host Baltimore salvaged a doubleheader split with Oakland, 5-2. In the early game, the Athletics pounded out 15 hits in an 8-4 win. (AP)WHITE SOX 7, TWINS 2 Chris Sale struck out nine to become the first seven-game winner in the majors as Chicago rallied past visiting Minnesota. (AP)Advertisement