AdvertisementSupported byBy Ken BelsonSAN DIEGO — Several things become clear within minutes of meeting Kevin Mitchell, the former National League most valuable player and jack-of-all-trades on the 1986 championship Mets: He loves baseball; he loves teaching it to youngsters; and he can tell stories, lots of them.The tales large and small, and often unvarnished, pop out of Mitchell like baseballs being swatted to the outfield. Nothing seems off limits: his tough upbringing in San Diego, the grandmother who raised him, his accidental discovery by the Mets, his roller-coaster ride through professional baseball and the friends and enemies he made along the way.For someone who played into his 30s, Mitchell had an atypical career. He was traded away by the Mets after helping them win a title in his rookie year, turned into one of the best players in the game in San Francisco, then bounced around for half a decade with stops in Boston, Cincinnati, Cleveland, Oakland and Japan.“I think people were intimidated by me; they stereotyped me,” Mitchell said over lunch this past week at a T.G.I. Fridays in the Mission Valley neighborhood of San Diego, five miles from downtown. “I’m not scared to speak what’s on my mind.”Mitchell, over the years, had a knack for generating news, not all of it good — even if some of it was untrue, as he contends. The cat he supposedly killed to settle a domestic dispute is fantasy, he said. So is the tooth he reportedly broke eating a doughnut. His supposed bad influence on his teammates Darryl Strawberry and Dwight Gooden, which might have been in a factor in the Mets’ trading him to the San Diego Padres, is also hogwash, he says.“I thought I had made a home in New York,” Mitchell said of his unceremonious departure from a city he still calls his second home. “I thought they made me a scapegoat for Doc and Straw.”But scapegoat or not, in the years after he left the Mets he occasionally found himself involved in incidents that ended in arrests. And set against that were his assorted, and sometimes unlikely, feats — playing a bunch of games for the Mets as a barrel-chested shortstop and doing just fine, hitting 47 home runs for the Giants in 1989 and helping lead them to a World Series, making a barehanded catch of a fly ball in left field. Now he is 54, and wistful. He is recovering from a health scare — a bulging disc in his neck that pressed against his spinal cord and left him largely unable to move. After surgery, he said, he was in bed for months and spent more than a year going from a wheelchair to a walker to a cane as he regained his ability to walk. For a gifted athlete, the whole experience was a shock that left him depressed and anxious.“I’ve never been afraid of nothing my whole life, but this scared me,” said Mitchell, who also lost a good deal of weight that he has since gained back. “I appreciate life. I didn’t know anything like this could happen to me.”Mitchell has recently been easing back into his old routines. Although no longer using a cane, he walks slowly and with a limp and goes to physical therapy several times a week. He is a long way from returning to the golf course.But he is strong enough to revisit the batting cage in San Diego where he has taught youngsters to hit. He is also going to fly to New York to meet up with his old teammates from the 1986 Mets as they gather for a May 28 reunion at Citi Field.The 1986 Mets club was stocked with big names and outsize personalities. Mitchell, in contrast, was something of an unknown who was discovered by the Mets while playing in a pickup game in San Diego. He ended up being used at six positions in New York, where he hit a dozen home runs and, as every Mets (and Red Sox) fan knows, was in the middle of the team’s improbable comeback in Game 6 of the World Series, when, with two outs and no one on base in the bottom of the 10th, the Mets rallied for three runs to win the game, 6-5, and force a Game 7.Like any number of elements of Mitchell’s career, even his pinch-hit single during that rally had a curious twist. As the bottom of the 10th played out, Mitchell was in the Mets’ clubhouse. Legend has it that he had concluded the Mets were about to lose the Series and was on the phone making plans to fly home to San Diego. And that when he was summoned to pinch-hit after Gary Carter kept the game alive with a single, he had to scramble to put his uniform back on.At the recent lunch, Mitchell maintained that had not been the case. He was in the clubhouse, he said, but was still in his uniform. And because the team made flight arrangements for players, there would have been no reason for him to be booking a ticket.Still, he said, he was surprised when Mookie Wilson told him he was being summoned to bat for pitcher Rick Aguilera. During the regular season he had pinch-hit mainly against left-handed pitchers, and Calvin Schiraldi, Boston’s right-handed closer, was on the mound.“I felt they were trying to make me the goat, because if I didn’t get on, I would have made the last out of the World Series,” he said. (A more likely explanation is that Mets Manager Davey Johnson was out of other options. Danny Heep, Howard Johnson and Lee Mazzilli had already been used.)And who knows? Maybe Johnson was even aware that Mitchell had roomed with Schiraldi when they were both climbing the ladder in the Mets’ organization, and that Schiraldi, according to Mitchell, used to tell him what pitches he would throw if the two were to meet in a game. So, Mitchell said, when Schiraldi threw a first-pitch fastball, just as he had said he would years before, he knew a curveball would come next. He hit that pitch for a single to center that extended the rally.After Mitchell advanced to third base on a single by Ray Knight that also scored Carter, the Mets’ third-base coach, Bud Harrelson, told Mitchell to be alert for an errant pitch. Sure enough, Bob Stanley, who had come in to replace Schiraldi, threw the ball past catcher Rich Gedman, allowing Mitchell to score the tying run. A few moments later, Mookie Wilson’s slow roller up the line got past first baseman Bill Buckner, and, well, everyone knows the rest.The Mets went on to rally again in Game 7, and Mitchell was now part of a championship team. A little more than a month later, though, he said, he was stunned to see television trucks outside his grandmother’s house in San Diego. Initially, he thought she had won the lottery. Instead, reporters told him he had been traded to the hometown Padres.He said the Mets had never called to explain why he was being sent away, but he also maintained that he did not hold a grudge. In fact, he said he speaks often with many of his ex-teammates, including Strawberry, who, he said, has embellished some stories about him.While Mitchell said he had never sought trouble, it did seem to find him. In late 1991, he was the subject of a rape investigation stemming from an episode involving an acquaintance in his Chula Vista, Calif., home. No charges were filed. In early 1992, he found himself in the middle of a barroom brawl in San Diego. In 1999, he was arrested after an altercation with his father. A year later, after he had started a comeback, he punched an opposing team’s owner in the dugout during an independent league game. And after a fight with another golfer on a course in San Diego in 2010, he was ordered to do community service and attend anger-management classes.There is no trace of these rough edges when he is around young baseball players. Before his neck surgery, he coached Little League teams and gave batting lessons. On the mend now, Mitchell has started to return to Brickyard Cages, a batting facility in San Diego that he calls his sanctuary. Youngsters stream up to him for autographs, including Zeke Summers, 10, who gave Mitchell his bat to sign because he was in a hitting slump.“I don’t believe in slumps,” Mitchell told the boy, whose mouth was agape. Pointing to his head and then his hands, Mitchell added, “If you’re O.K. up here, you’ll be fine here.”Advertisement