
On Baseball By                     
 TYLER KEPNER
 
SEPT. 27, 2016
MIAMI — The news was so routine for these Mets that it barely registered. Steven Matz, the fragile rookie who made three starts on last fall’s postseason joy ride, was officially shut down for the season Tuesday because of his sore left shoulder. As long as he is not pitching, the Mets said, Matz will finally get those bone spurs removed from his elbow next week.Another day, another surgery announcement for a budding ace. Yet the Mets continue to lead the National League wild-card race after thumping the Miami Marlins here, 12-1, behind Noah Syndergaard and an offensive barrage that included homers by Jay Bruce and Yoenis Cespedes. The Mets have won 24 of their last 36 and are on track to host the N.L. wild-card game at Citi Field next Wednesday.This is a minor miracle, owing to resourcefulness, fortitude, a soft schedule and the inescapable conclusion that the N.L. does not really have five good teams. But the rules say the two non-division winners with the best records must meet in a wild-card game next Wednesday. The Mets are relishing the chance to be there, and hope to give Syndergaard the ball.On Tuesday he worked six innings, commanding his angry sinker to both sides of the plate, allowing five hits and a run with no walks and eight strikeouts. He is lined up to pitch the wild-card game unless the Mets need him to clinch a spot on Sunday in Philadelphia. Either way, the season will be riding on Syndergaard’s next start.Advertisement“I’m always looking forward to the big games,” said Syndergaard, the Mets’ only winning pitcher in the World Series last fall. “Great atmosphere, lots of pressure. I thrive in those kinds of situations.”AdvertisementHis only blemish Tuesday came when the leadoff hitter, Dee Gordon, bunted for a single, stole second and scored on another single. Holding runners is a chronic problem for Syndergaard, but one of the teams he might face next week, the St. Louis Cardinals, ranks last in the N.L. in steals.Syndergaard, who is 14-9 with a 2.60 E.R.A., is the Mets’ best hope for wild-card survival, like Madison Bumgarner for the 2014 San Francisco Giants and Jake Arrieta for the Chicago Cubs last fall.“We like the prospect of having Noah on the mound, no matter who we’re facing,” said Neil Walker, the injured second baseman, who played in the last three N.L. wild-card games for Pittsburgh. “We faced an almost unhittable Arrieta and an almost unhittable Bumgarner, and there’s not much you can do when the guy goes eight or nine. But those are special players that can do it, and I think he’s right up there.”Get the big sports news, highlights and analysis from Times journalists, with distinctive takes on games and some behind-the-scenes surprises, delivered to your inbox every week.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.Walker’s Pirates hosted the wild-card game each time. In an earlier playoff format (used from 1995 to 2011), they would have advanced directly to a division series. Instead they faced the one-game elimination round, beating Cincinnati’s Johnny Cueto in 2013 before the two losses, both by shutout.“The hardest thing to do is not get yourself caught up in the enormity of a one-game baseball system,” Walker said. “Because the more you think about it, you’re going: ‘This just doesn’t make sense. You’re gonna put what we’ve worked for the entire season on one game?’ So as strange as it sounds, in a way, sometimes you put more pressure on yourself with every pitch, with every at-bat.”The Mets faced a winner-take-all game in the division series last October, eliminating the Los Angeles Dodgers behind Jacob deGrom, Syndergaard and Jeurys Familia. But that game still had a more familiar feeling, coming at the end of a series, after four other games. The teams knew each other and had recent data points to use.The immediacy of the wild-card game is different: exciting, but contrary to the way the rest of the season is played. Expanding to a best-of-three format would be foolish, though, because division winners would be waiting too long to start their playoffs. Besides, there is a simple way to avoid one-and-done: Win your division.AdvertisementA defending pennant winner should strive for more than a wild card, but for the Mets, it would be an extraordinary achievement. Losing Walker and David Wright for the season would have been challenging enough, but losing deGrom, Matz and Matt Harvey — with no outside reinforcements — seemed a sure sign of doom. Who knew Seth Lugo and Robert Gsellman would save the season?Neither had ever pitched in the majors through June. Through mid-August, neither had made a start. Yet the Mets have won nine of their 13 starts, and the two have combined to go 6-3 with a 2.70 E.R.A. as starters. They would most likely form half of the Mets’ rotation in a playoff series.Both came to the Mets in the 2011 draft, the first under General Manager Sandy Alderson. Gsellman was taken in the 13th round, Lugo in the 34th. Maybe they will falter with time, or maybe the Mets have more depth than we knew. The rookies have handled big-city, pennant-race pressure with ease.“That’s one of the things you kind of train yourself for in the minor leagues,” Lugo said. “You talk about that for years, guys in the minor leagues or the major leagues — the biggest difference is mentality. There’s guys in the minor leagues with tons of skills, some as good or better than major leaguers. But it’s the mentality that separates people.”However this season ends for the Mets, their mentality seems just fine. They have done more with less, and deserve the chance for this final playoff push.A version of this article appears in print on September 28, 2016, on Page B9 of the New York edition with the headline: Even a Back Road to the Playoffs Would Delight the Mets.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.See More »