By ANDREW KEHFEB. 25, 2016
The Nets requested waivers Thursday on Joe Johnson, a seven-time All-Star shooting guard whose likeness still dominates team promotional materials.Johnson, 34, will be able to join a new team — a playoff contender, presumably — if he clears waivers Saturday afternoon. He averaged 11.8 points, 4.1 assists and 3.9 rebounds a game this season for the Nets (16-42), who are among the N.B.A.’s most dismal teams, despite a 116-106 win at lowly Phoenix (14-44) on Thursday night.Against the Suns, Bojan Bogdanovic scored a career-high 24 points to lead the Nets, and Thaddeus Young added 18 points, 8 rebounds and 7 steals.The former Net Mirza Teletovic led Phoenix with a season-high 30 points. The Suns lost their 13th straight game, tying a single-season franchise record.AdvertisementESPN reported Thursday morning that Johnson and the Nets had begun negotiating a buyout agreement. Some teams headed to the postseason, including Boston and Cleveland, have shown interest in him, according to news media reports.Sean Marks, the Nets’ new general manager, released a statement thanking Johnson for his contributions.Advertisement“Joe has been a quality professional since joining the Nets four years ago, was a valued member of three playoff teams, and provided many thrilling moments for his teammates and Nets fans,” Marks said. “We wish him much success in the future.”On Thursday, before the move was announced, Marks said in an interview on WFAN radio that Johnson “deserved the right” to play on a postseason contender this year if he desired. Johnson, according to league rules, needed to be waived before March 1 to be eligible for the playoffs.Johnson has been one of the highest-paid players in the N.B.A. since signing a six-year, $124 million contract with the Atlanta Hawks on July 10, 2010. In 2012 he was traded to the Nets for a package that included five players and a first-round draft pick.For the Nets, he displayed a cool demeanor on the court and a knack for late-game scoring. He was a quiet presence in the locker room — though noted for his deadpan humor — and a steady professional. Despite battling nagging injuries throughout his tenure, he rarely missed games.Two seasons ago, Kevin Garnett revealed that he and his Nets teammates had coined the nickname Joe Jesus to reflect Johnson’s heroic play. “He might not be there when you call on him, but he’s there when you need him,” Garnett said at the time.Get the big sports news, highlights and analysis from Times journalists, with distinctive takes on games and some behind-the-scenes surprises, delivered to your inbox every week.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.Yet Johnson never produced the sustained brilliance the team had sought. In 288 games for the Nets, he averaged 14.7 points, 3.8 rebounds and 3.4 assists.AdvertisementWARRIORS 130, MAGIC 114 Stephen Curry scored 51 points and set an N.B.A. record by hitting a 3-point shot in his 128th straight game, and Golden State won handily at Orlando.Curry, the league’s reigning most valuable player, made 20 of 27 shots from the field, including 10 of 15 3-point attempts. He had tied the 127-game record of Kyle Korver on Wednesday at Miami.In the win against the Magic, Curry raised his league-leading total of 3-pointers to 276. He is on a pace to easily break the mark of 286 he set last season. (AP)PELICANS 123, THUNDER 119 Anthony Davis scored 30 points as New Orleans edged visiting Oklahoma City, despite Russell Westbrook’s 44 points for the Thunder. (AP)CELTICS 130, BUCKS 107 Isaiah Thomas had 27 points as Boston picked up its ninth straight home win, routing Milwaukee. (AP) A version of this article appears in print on February 26, 2016, on Page B10 of the New York edition with the headline: Nets Waive Johnson; Curry’s 51 Lift Warriors .  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.