

      By SAM BORDEN

FEB. 25, 2016

Sam Borden, a reporter for The New York Times, has a special relationship with the five-star Baur au Lac hotel in Zurich, which has become synonymous with the arrests in the continuing FIFA corruption scandal. He was back there reporting this week, making soccer officials and other reporters nervous.
The Baur Au Lac hotel in Zurich is one of Europe’s ritziest places to stay, a five-star property with a gorgeous location, a fastidious staff and rooms that can cost thousands of dollars a night. But the Baur au Lac is also known as the place where I watched Swiss police officers, acting on behalf of the United States Department of Justice, conduct a predawn raid to arrest some of world soccer’s most powerful men in their pajamas … twice.At 5 a.m. May 27, my colleague Michael Schmidt and I walked into the Baur au Lac and told the front desk clerk that we had “a breakfast meeting” scheduled for 6. The clerk nodded, and we settled into a pair of comfortable leather chairs in the lobby. An hour later, the first police officers arrived. During the initial commotion, I slipped up a nearby staircase into the main part of the hotel. From a landing, I followed the officers by watching the elevator screen to see which floors they were on. At one point, I saw Jeffrey Webb, a FIFA vice president, being led away; at another, I witnessed Eduardo Li, a Costa Rican official, being arrested. Mr. Li carried FIFA-branded luggage with him as he left.  In the lobby, my colleague tracked the tumult as officers came and went. Outside, Pascal Mora, a photographer working with us, captured the indelible image of the raid: hotel staff members holding up white bedsheets as the police led the soccer officials into waiting cars. Shortly before 9 a.m., with the police gone, Mike and I finally had that “breakfast meeting” at the Baur au Lac restaurant. (I recommend the oatmeal.) It had been a surreal morning, we agreed, a once-in-a-career experience. Or so I thought.Seven months later, I found myself back in the lobby of the hotel at a little before 6 a.m. Dec. 3. Another round of arrests, only this time no bedsheets were involved: When the officers exited, they used a bridge at the side of the hotel. Fortunately, I was able to determine which exit they were using and position myself on a narrow walkway beneath the bridge where I could see, and take a low-grade video of, one arrest. The police led the soccer officials into a parking garage filled with mostly high-end cars like Porsches and Ferraris. Moments later, the men were taken away in a Volvo. The second raid was less frantic than the first, and featured fewer arrests, but it provided one of my favorite scenes from either experience: Just minutes after the police entered the hotel to begin their arrests, a hotel maintenance worker poked his head out the front door, took a look at the carpets the officers had just crossed and – lest anyone think the Baur au Lac is anything but spotless – immediately began to tidy up. The team working to cover both FIFA raids was robust, with talented journalists like Matt Apuzzo, Willie Rashbaum, Mike Schmidt and Rebecca Ruiz doing remarkable reporting. As the only reporter on the scene for both rounds of early-morning arrests, though, I found that I had quickly become linked with the Baur au Lac. It proved alternately humorous and serious. On the morning after the first raid, for example, when I returned to the hotel lobby to see some soccer officials, one pulled me aside. “When are the police coming?” he said, his eyes wide with excitement. In the months since, the connection has become more of a dark punch line or a bizarre euphemism, as fans, journalists and soccer executives wonder – or even ask outright – if I have “plans for breakfast” at the Baur au Lac on any given day. Usually I just smile and shrug.  This week has been particularly unusual. On Tuesday night, with some soccer officials speculating that Wednesday seemed a “natural” day for the police to make another splash, I began to receive texts and Twitter messages asking if I had arrived in Zurich. When I began tweeting from the Arsenal-Barcelona Champions League match in London, others joked that that clearly meant no alarm clocks were necessary. Could more arrests happen? It’s certainly on the minds of many in town, particularly those staying at the Baur au Lac. And while I am not staying at the property myself – the smallest rooms rarely fall below $650 per night there – I am, of course, spending a good bit of time there reporting for articles related to Friday’s FIFA presidential election. Unfortunately, that has made for some awkward interactions. As I tried to make plans to meet with one influential FIFA executive, he stopped me when I suggested we have coffee at the Baur au Lac. “Wait, wait – what time will you be there?” he said with what seemed to be a nervous laugh. “During the day? Or in the middle of the night?” Advertisement