By THE ASSOCIATED PRESSJULY 18, 2017
ROMANS-SUR-ISÈRE, France — Ahead of two grueling Alpine stages that will probably decide the outcome of the 104th Tour de France, Chris Froome and his teammates sent a clear message to their rivals on Tuesday with another impressive display of collective strength.Amid heavy crosswinds that played havoc in the finale of the 102.5-mile Stage 16 from Le Puy-en-Velay to Romans-sur-Isère, Froome’s fellow Team Sky riders tried to unsettle their opponents by setting a frenetic tempo that split the pack like a jigsaw puzzle.After relentless work from Vasil Kiryienka and Michal Kwiatkowski, only 22 riders, including Froome and another teammate, Mikel Landa, managed to stay in the reduced bunch at the front.Also among them were Fabio Aru, Romain Bardet and Rigoberto Urán, who avoided the trap. But Dan Martin lost 51 seconds after being caught in a split in the finale. He dropped to seventh place over all, 2 minutes 3 seconds off the pace.AdvertisementAt one point, it appeared that Bardet was going to be left behind, but he was helped back in the lead group by Oliver Naesen. Michael Matthews of Australia won the stage in a sprint to the line.AdvertisementWith the race now entering the stages that decide the final podium, Froome, of Britain, went straight to the point with his aggressive racing. He appears in great shape and has what is considered the best team surrounding him in his bid to win a fourth Tour title.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.“Everyone knew it was going to split at some point,” Froome said. “For us, it was more about just being on the right side of it. Knowing it was going to kick off on that open section in the last 20 kilometers to go, the guys committed to that, and we saw the gaps opening out straight away.”Froome, the defending champion, has an 18-second overall lead over Aru, of Italy, with Bardet, of France, 23 seconds back in third place. Urán, a Colombian completes the leading quartet, 29 seconds off the pace.Landa, a Spaniard who has been impressive since the start of the Tour despite dedicating himself to Froome, moved back to fifth over all, 1:17 back.Froome said the goal of his preparation for the Tour had been “to head into the third week feeling the way I’m feeling now.”The battle for the yellow jersey was scheduled to resume Wednesday in the first of two Alpine stages in high altitude, a grueling 113.7-mile trek.A version of this article appears in print on July 19, 2017, on Page B11 of the New York edition with the headline: Teammates Help Froome Maintain Overall Lead Before the Decisive Stages.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.