By THE ASSOCIATED PRESSFEB. 24, 2016
Sepp Blatter and Michel Platini had their suspensions from soccer reduced to six years, from eight, by FIFA’s appeals body on Wednesday, two days before the sport’s ruling body was set to try to turn the page on years of scandals by electing a new president.Blatter and Platini were initially found guilty of wrongdoing by FIFA’s independent ethics committee, which is led by a German judge, over a previously secret financial transaction in 2011.But after hearings last week, an in-house appeals committee made up of members of federations voting in Friday’s presidential election decided to relax the suspensions.TWO NATIONS DENIED The FIFA presidential election is expected to have two fewer voters, because Kuwait and Indonesia are banned.AdvertisementFIFA’s executive committee decided to refer suspensions imposed last year on the two countries to the election meeting with a recommendation “that both these cases be dealt with at the next ordinary Congress,” which is May 13 in Mexico City.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.The suspensions, for allowing government interference in how federations are run, block the countries from voting.  AdvertisementTRANSPARENT BOOTHS REJECTED The Court of Arbitration for Sport rejected a protest from the FIFA presidential candidate Prince Ali bin al-Hussein of Jordan, who was seeking to force FIFA to use transparent voting booths in its election. Prince Ali said he had gone to the court in Switzerland to guarantee FIFA members the freedom to vote for their preferred candidate.The prince has said that transparent voting booths would ensure that delegates did not take pictures of their ballots, a move required by certain regional confederations as proof of loyalty to a specific candidate. (AGENCE FRANCE-PRESSE)CITY WINS IN KIEV Sergio Agüero scored one goal and helped create another as Manchester City powered to a 3-1 first-leg win at Dynamo Kiev in the Champions League. P.S.V. Eindhoven battled to a 0-0 draw with visiting Atlético Madrid, comfortably surviving more than 20 minutes after a red card for striker Gastón Pereiro. (AP)A version of this article appears in print on February 25, 2016, on Page B10 of the New York edition with the headline: FIFA Reduces Top Officials’ Suspensions.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.