By ROB HUGHESFEB. 25, 2016
LONDON —  Manuel Pellegrini is a man with bloodshot eyes, but a clear vision of what he would like his team to be.He knows that his time as coach at Manchester City is almost over, because City has already hired Pep Guardiola to replace him after the season. If anything, that has increased Pellegrini’s desire to take Manchester City further than it has ever gone in the Champions League, and a 3-1 win in Ukraine against Dynamo Kiev on Wednesday has put it firmly down that path.Barring a most unlikely reverse in the second leg in Manchester on March 15, the club will reach the Champions League quarterfinals for the first time. But while Pellegrini seldom exudes joy, he must have felt some when he saw his game plan being executed perfectly in Kiev, with three of his favorite players — Sergio Agüero, David Silva and Yaya Touré — scoring sublime goals.“We are very happy,” the coach said on television immediately after the final whistle in Kiev. “It is not finished, we pressed well, we recovered the ball in their side of the pitch, and we created at least three more chances.”AdvertisementPellegrini always aims for his team to play attractive soccer, and beneath his doleful exterior Wednesday was a hint of satisfaction.AdvertisementPellegrini, 62, was pilloried last weekend for leaving out most of his key players in a 5-1 thrashing at Chelsea as City effectively sacrificed its chances in the F.A. Cup. The coach, with regret, said he had little choice; he could not ask his top talents to play Sunday and then fly to Ukraine less than 24 hours later and play again in a hostile climate on Wednesday.After the win, City immediately flew back to Manchester. The club has another pressing engagement, the League Cup final against Liverpool on Sunday, followed by a Premier League encounter against the same opponent next Wednesday.Such is the scheduling of England’s national game, which expects top quality at unremitting speed by all its clubs — in City’s case, in four different competitions. On top of that, Pellegrini seeks a playing style as close to “The Beautiful Game” as he can coach it.Pellegrini understands beauty as much as he accepts the win-or-you’re-fired attitude that comes at the mercenary end of soccer. A defender in his youth in Chile, Pellegrini studied civil engineering in college and worked in construction after graduation, but soccer soon took priority as a career. As a coach, Pellegrini has won league titles in Ecuador, Argentina and England. He has worked with some truly blessed individuals, most notably Cristiano Ronaldo during his spell at Real Madrid from 2009 to 2010.Now, thanks to the substantial fortunes of City’s Abu Dhabi owners, Pellegrini can afford nearly any player he desires — or at least, those he can lure to rainy old Manchester. Agüero, Silva and Touré are high on Pellegrini’s wish list whenever he names his lineup.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.Agüero has scored 16 times in his last 17 Champions League appearances, and he got the ball rolling on Tuesday with the first goal. It followed a high swinging corner kick that Touré reached at the far post and headed back to Agüero. Kiev’s defenders were awfully lax, and by the time their minds woke up to the danger, Agüero had knocked the ball down with his chest and scored from six yards out.City then played a waiting game, pressing Kiev in its own half of the field and hitting it on the counterattack via the lightning speed of Raheem Sterling on the left wing. After a back-heel pass from Agüero to Sterling and then an overlap and cross, Kiev could get nowhere near the ball. Silva swooped to score the second goal at the far post.Manchester slacked off in the second half, allowing Kiev to rally and score when a shot from 20 yards out by Vitaliy Buyalskiy ricocheted off the leg of City defender Nicolás Otamendi and fooled goalkeeper Joe Hart. The deflection was not what either Otamendi or Hart deserved, because the defender was having perhaps his finest game alongside Vincent Kompany since Otamendi joined City in August. And Hart, as he does most games, later made a wonderful save when he stretched low to his right to push aside another shot from Buyalskiy.AdvertisementThose, however, were rare incidents by Kiev in the City end. Had Agüero been at his best, he would have scored twice more Wednesday. And Touré was just as wasteful when he headed a shot wide from five yards out.Touré can bewitch one moment, and bother the next. His critics think he should work harder and score more, or make more interceptions with his long legs.People ask, why does Pellegrini trust in Touré? Well, the towering Ivorian can, with unimaginable dexterity, confound opponents, and he did so before the final whistle.He indulged in four or five passing exchanges before he slipped away from a defender and finessed the ball into the farthest corner of the net to make it the final score, 3-1.“We made a lot of mistakes, and against a team like Manchester City it’s not acceptable,” said Kiev Coach Serhiy Rebrov, once a beguiling player with Tottenham Hotspur.With Ukraine deep into winter, Kiev had not played in 11 weeks. Rebrov didn’t blame the long winter or lack of preparation, but rather the nervousness that he saw in his players before the game. While City is aiming to go further in European competition than ever before, Kiev has already exceeded expectations  by just being in the knockout stage for the first time in 16 years.A version of this article appears in print on February 26, 2016, in The International New York Times.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.