By THE ASSOCIATED PRESSFEB. 25, 2016
The Dallas police said Thursday that they had referred their domestic violence case against Cleveland Browns quarterback Johnny Manziel to a grand jury, which will consider whether to charge him on allegations that he attacked his ex-girlfriend.The police said in a statement that they had asked the Dallas County district attorney’s office to present a misdemeanor assault case to the local grand jury. Such a charge carries a maximum punishment of one year in jail and a $4,000 fine.Manziel’s lawyer, Bradley Beckworth, did not immediately return an email seeking comment. Manziel’s agent and marketing agency have both dropped him, and the Browns have indicated they will release Manziel as early as March 9, when the N.F.L. begins its new calendar year.Colleen Crowley, Manziel’s ex-girlfriend, accused him of hitting her and threatening to kill her during a night out on Jan. 30. Crowley said Manziel accosted her at a Dallas hotel and later struck her when they drove back to her apartment in Fort Worth.AdvertisementCrowley said in court documents that he hit her so hard, she temporarily lost hearing in one ear.The N.F.L. did not immediately respond to a message seeking comment.Get the big sports news, highlights and analysis from Times journalists, with distinctive takes on games and some behind-the-scenes surprises, delivered to your inbox every week.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.PIERRE-PAUL SUES SCHEFTER Jason Pierre-Paul is suing ESPN and one of its reporters, Adam Schefter, for invasion of privacy because Schefter posted a picture of Pierre-Paul’s medical chart on Twitter.AdvertisementCiting state privacy laws, Pierre-Paul, a Giants defensive end, asked a Miami-Dade County Circuit Court to award him at least $15,000 in damages over the post, which followed a Fourth of July fireworks accident that badly injured Pierre-Paul right hand. The lawsuit, filed on Wednesday, also left open the possibility of punitive damages.To win, Pierre-Paul will have to prove he was damaged by the release of the medical chart and not just by the injury itself.JAGUARS PLAY DOWN INQUIRY Jacksonville General Manager Dave Caldwell said he does not “expect much” to come of the N.F.L.’s investigation into defensive end Dante Fowler.The league said earlier this week that video of Fowler apparently refereeing a fight between his girlfriend and the mother of his child included “disturbing images.”Caldwell said he knew the league was looking into it, but “from the information that we have, I don’t expect much to come of it. We stand by our statement we released that there’s no place for violence in the N.F.L. or in society.”A version of this article appears in print on February 26, 2016, on Page B14 of the New York edition with the headline: Police Refer Manziel Case to Grand Jury in Dallas.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.