AdvertisementSupported by12 PhotosView Slide Show ›Richard Perry/The New York TimesBy Chris MuselerPeter Burling spent the weekend driving a high-performance catamaran at 30 miles per hour toward a concrete wall lined with thousands of spectators. He had to take into account a three- to five-knot current that ran along the Hudson River as he picked precise trajectories past competitors and floating marks while judging distances and counting the seconds to each maneuver.Burling, 25, with Emirates Team New Zealand, had arrived in New York leading the America’s Cup World Series, which ends in France in November. On Sunday, his team won. For most of his competitors, these new Cup boats present a steep learning curve. But for the calm, soft-spoken Burling, the youngest helmsman in the fleet, this is pretty normal stuff, and with professional sailing having turned nearly entirely over to catamarans since the 2013 Cup, young sailors like Burling will very likely become the norm at the top of the professional heap.In 2013, only one professional sailing series was held in catamarans: the Extreme Sailing Series, with 40-footers. This year, five pro series are being contested in catamarans, and half are using hydrofoils, almost doubling the speed of the boats, to averages of 25 to 30 m.p.h.Sailors in their 20s, and young designers focused on foil development, are beginning to dominate this new order of the sport.“Quite a few guys my age have spent a lot of hours sailing hydrofoil boats, like the Flying Phantom and the International Moth,” Burling said last week. “Before the Cup was foiling, I was already sailing a Moth.”The foiling Moth, a single-person, single-hulled dinghy, represents the proving ground for top Cup talent. In 2011, Burling was fourth at the world championship; the winner, Nathan Outteridge, now the helmsman for Artemis Racing, was 24. The next year, Burling finished second, behind Outteridge, at the London Olympics in the two-person 49er class. Since then, Burling and his crew member, Blair Tuke, have won 25 consecutive 49er events and are favorites to win the gold medal at this summer’s Olympics in Rio de Janeiro. Burling and Tuke are set to fly to Rio this week to get back into their 49er Olympic training. Glenn Ashby keeps their Cup team advancing. At 38, Ashby, a catamaran specialist in his third multihull Cup campaign, is the team’s leader and is straddling the old and new generations of Cup sailors. He said sailors like Burling were essential to a successful Cup campaign.“The best mix these days is to have some older heads who know how a large campaign works,” said Ashby, an Olympic medalist for Australia and a multiple-time world champion in multihulls, “but you need the young guys who have the skill set to push the boat hard and drive the boat accurately. If you had just old guys, you’d miss out on the abilities of the foiling generation.”If the position professional foiling helmsman did not exist before the 2013 Cup, neither did Nat Shaver’s title of appendage designer. Designing dagger boards for an AC 50, the design being used for the 2017 Cup finals in Bermuda, is as normal for Shaver, of Groupama Team France, as racing foilers is for Burling.Today, foil designers are the most important part of the design team, with the AC 50’s hulls and wings virtually the same and the foil design more open.When Shaver, 30, started with Emirates Team New Zealand’s design team in 2012, there were four hull designers.“Traditionally the person who designs the hull shape claims the design,” said Shaver, an American who studied aeronautical engineering at the University of California, Irvine, while also building a Moth in his garage. “I didn’t want to deal with that, so I was designing foil stuff on the side.”Once the design team figured out it could design foils that would lift the boat out of the water, Shaver recalled, the project manager Grant Dalton came into a meeting, looked at the hull designers and said, “Now that we’re foiling, what are you guys going to do for the rest of the campaign?”For some event managers, this foiling evolution to multihulls was no surprise.“Professional sailing today is less about monohull versus multihull,” said Mark Turner, who created the Extreme Sailing Series in 2007. “This is a technology-assisted move. Most people want to go faster. For commercially funded events, they need to entertain the brands, the clients, the fans in the cities. In the Extreme Series, my decision to use catamarans was right. Visually it’s just better.”The Extreme Sailing Series shoehorns colorful, high-speed racing into far tighter venues than the Hudson River. The tight confines of St. Petersburg, Russia, will feel even more cramped this year with the presence of foiling catamarans in the series for the first time.The tactician Chris Draper of SoftBank Team Japan and other sailors from the weekend’s World Series races are graduates of Turner’s series. And now that foiling is part of that series and others, the single-hulled Moth will no longer be the only way for up-and-comers to display their talent.“Guys like Draper took a leap early on,” said Turner, now the chief executive of the Volvo Ocean Race. “Those are the guys at the front of the sport now.”With the Olympic Nacra 17 catamaran class now testing out hydrofoils for possible racing at the 2020 Games, Turner sees a dramatic change not only in the marketability of the sport but also the career opportunities for young sailors.“The professional sailing world is becoming way more homogeneous,” he said. “The dynamic is now the same between events and the sailors more polyvalent. Burling can jump from the Olympics to the Cup and even a Volvo Ocean Race. It wasn’t like that in the old days.”Still, Turner said, the sport is too complex at the moment to unify its fan base.“If you go to motorsport, there are 100 events going on around the world, but there’s a certain order to it,” he said. “It’s easy for the media to follow. For sailing, last year, this year and next year are part of a new phase.”slide showAdvertisement