By KEN BELSONMAY 9, 2016
HOUSTON —  The offers seem too good to pass up: Loans worth tens of thousands of dollars with no money down and no time limit for paying it back. The main catch, sometimes buried in the fine print, is the interest rate of 40 percent or higher.“We take the weight off your shoulders,” reads one pitch, while another urges borrowers to “accelerate your award.”Yet the recipients are a very specific and, some worry, vulnerable group: short-of-cash former N.F.L. players with cognitive impairment from years of collisions on the field.The lenders are targeting this group because the former players stand to receive as much as $5 million each in a landmark legal settlement with the N.F.L. that an appeals court affirmed last month.AdvertisementAlready, a handful of players have borrowed thousands of dollars from these lenders, according to industry officials and players, against the payouts they hope to receive once the deal is completed after a second appeal is heard and lawyers for the league and for the players work out the logistics.AdvertisementThis type of lending against a settlement payout is part of a legal — albeit largely unregulated — business focused mostly on victims in personal injury cases.But the loans have potentially devastating trap doors, most notably the high interest rates that kick in immediately after money is advanced, and can cut deeply into the sum a player might ultimately receive in a settlement.Some financial watchdogs find it unconscionable that lenders are wooing players who have memory problems and other cognitive ailments that could mean they cannot fully grasp what they are borrowing or the fine print behind the loans.“It’s predatory, it’s one-sided and it preys on people with brain injuries,” said Richard H. Adler, a lawyer in Seattle who is not affiliated with the players but specializes in representing clients with traumatic brain injuries. “You’re lending to someone who may not have the full legal capacity to understand what they are signing.”Despite the risks, word is spreading in the retired player community, where former stars and journeymen who are down on their luck see the loans as a potential lifeline to paying bills and repaying debts. Industry experts say that more than a half-dozen lenders, including companies like Thrivest, Atlas Legal Fund and RD Legal Funding, are aiming to loan millions of dollars to players in five- and six-figure increments.LaCurtis Jones, 43, a linebacker who played parts of two seasons in the N.F.L. in the mid-1990s and two more years in Canada, is typical of the former players interested in a loan.He wants to borrow $100,000 to pay money he owes in child support, to help his family and to start a mentoring program for ex-convicts. His savings were depleted and work has been hard to find after he recently served time in jail because of a domestic dispute conviction. Jones also said he has struggled with depression, memory and anger issues, all of which he believes are related to his having played football.AdvertisementThough Jones is wary of the high interest rates, he is confident he can pay back what he owes with the six-figure settlement he hopes to receive in the settlement.“I don’t have none of my money left from the N.F.L.,” said Jones, who lives in Houston. “I don’t want to get into a lot of debt, but I’m looking for someone to give me some advance money. I don’t need much.”To secure a loan, Jones has visited several neurologists to get a diagnosis that will assure his potential lender that he has a strong chance of getting a settlement once the deal is completed, something that could take many months.Most players are expected to get far less than millions. A sliding scale reduces the payouts for players who were in the league fewer than five years and players who are older than 45, and the players could spend months trying to get approved, all while the interest on their loans is piling up.Players who fail to qualify for cash settlements, however, do not have to repay what they borrow, a substantial risk for the lenders.“If the case doesn’t get won, the money doesn’t get paid back,” said Kelly Gilroy, the executive director of the American Legal Finance Association, which represents about 40 lenders. She estimated that about 25 percent of presettlement loans result in a loss to the lender because the settlement did not come through.Lenders take the chance that some loans will not be repaid because they make sizable profits from their other clients. Most presettlement loans are for small amounts, like when a person in a car accident needs $5,000 to pay hospital bills while awaiting an insurance payout. As a rule of thumb, companies lend about 10 percent of what they expect the plaintiff to be awarded.Lenders are raising that threshold to 25 percent or higher for N.F.L. players, not just because they could receive six- and seven-figure settlements, but because the N.F.L. has published a grid detailing the range of potential awards, something normally unavailable or confidential in other cases.AdvertisementRon Sinai, who works for Nova Legal Funding, a company in Los Angeles that finds clients for presettlement lenders, said this information gives companies more assurance when lending to players. “The N.F.L. is very careful about its image and wants to get this headache over with and pay out as soon as possible,” he said.Get the big sports news, highlights and analysis from Times journalists, with distinctive takes on games and some behind-the-scenes surprises, delivered to your inbox every week.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.Sinai said lenders charged higher interest rates than banks because making nonrecourse loans, as they are known, was riskier. Unlike a traditional loan, the collateral is the settlement itself.“If we give a guy $100,000 and the N.F.L. doesn’t believe the player has dementia, we’re out of luck,” Sinai said.Representatives of lenders dismiss claims that they take advantage of people who may not understand what they are getting into.Many companies require that a family member or lawyer represent clients with cognitive issues to ensure there is a valid contract. Their representatives add that the severity of a client’s cognitive problems can vary widely.The bottom line, said Jeremy Fink, the chief operating officer of Atlas Legal Funding, is that “anyone, anywhere who doesn’t have the mental capacity to do it shouldn’t be doing it.”To be doubly sure, Sinai requires that his clients also go before a judge and testify that they understand the terms of their agreement. He also helps the players navigate the serpentine paperwork.“He’s been very transparent in helping us understand and making sure the documentation from the doctors is valid, and communicating with the lawyers,” said Tony George, 40, who played two years in the N.F.L. and is seeking a six-figure loan to pay for his depression and diabetes medicine and to jump-start his mentoring business.Advertisement“You have to ask yourself whether it is worth continuing to struggle. Usually, when we get to this type of situation, we’ve waited as long as we could.”Some players with cognitive issues, though, are unsure of what they are borrowing. The wife of one former 45-year-old player with mild dementia said that she had stopped her husband from taking out a loan not just because of the high interest rates, but because it might take months or even years to get a settlement.“If it looks good and looks pretty, you think it’s O.K.,” said the wife, who asked not to be named because of fears that talking publicly would jeopardize her husband’s pending litigation with the N.F.L. “But there’s nothing positive about it because you’re going to lose your whole settlement. Players are better off going bankrupt than taking out one of these loans.”Still, for former players who need money now, not later, the loans look like risks worth taking.“I’m just trying to borrow enough so when the settlement comes through I can pay it back,” Jones said. “We sacrificed ourselves so we can make millions of dollars for the owners, but we also sacrificed our health.”A version of this article appears in print on May 9, 2016, on Page D1 of the New York edition with the headline: Concussion Payouts Have Lenders Circling .  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.