

 Scott Cacciola
 

ON PRO BASKETBALL
MAY 8, 2016
PORTLAND, Ore. — Another game on the bench for Stephen Curry meant another finely tailored jacket from his collection. A hapless spectator for the Golden State Warriors on Saturday night, Curry could only watch as another point guard filleted his teammates, instantly turning a humdrum series into appointment viewing.The Warriors are suddenly in some trouble against Damian Lillard and the Portland Trail Blazers in the Western Conference semifinals. The Warriors still have a two-games-to-one lead in the best-of-seven series entering Game 4 on Monday night, but their lopsided loss to the Trail Blazers on Saturday exposed some vulnerabilities — “We got outplayed,” Coach Steve Kerr said — and created a potential dilemma.The big question, of course, is whether Curry will play. It will have been 15 days since he sprained his right knee in a first-round game against the Houston Rockets. Had the Warriors taken a 3-0 series lead against the Trail Blazers, there would most likely be less urgency for them to break the emergency glass and throw him back on the floor.But Game 4 has shaped up as high drama, with Portland sensing an opportunity, and the Warriors must weigh the risks and rewards.Advertisement“A lot of times, the team will go as I go,” said Lillard, who was sensational in Saturday’s 120-108 win, collecting 40 points and 10 assists while exploiting the void left by Curry. “And that goes for more than just scoring the ball. That means how focused I am, and how accountable I’m holding myself.”AdvertisementOn Sunday, Curry returned to the practice court at Moda Center and participated in a game of three-on-three. The Warriors listed him as doubtful for Monday’s game, but Kerr said that Curry looked good and that he would be re-evaluated on Monday morning. The final decision on his availability, Kerr said, will require some delicate calculus.“The trainers would have to tell me that he’s good to go, Steph would have to say he’s good to go, and then we would have to figure out a plan from there,” Kerr said.He added: “You trust the medical staff in terms of whether there’s potential for more damage. And you trust the player with how he’s feeling.”Kerr said he trusted Curry to be honest with him, in part because Curry leveled with Kerr after he had sprained his right ankle against the Rockets. During that series, their conversations took on a familiar rhythm — Curry lobbying to play, Kerr asking him to be honest, and then Curry admitting that he probably needed additional rest.“So I know we would get a truthful answer out of Steph,” Kerr said.Curry did not address reporters after Sunday’s practice, but it might be more difficult than ever for him to digest the prospect of missing another playoff game — especially against an upstart opponent led by one of the league’s most dynamic guards in Lillard. The Warriors’ Klay Thompson said that Curry was probably getting antsy.“It’s never fun to watch,” Thompson said.Curry and Lillard are different players, to be sure, but comparisons are unavoidable. Earlier this season, Andre Iguodala of the Warriors described both as “new-age point guards,” capable of dominating games in all kinds of different ways — by launching 3-pointers, by zigzagging past defenders and launching themselves at the rim, by penetrating and finding teammates.Kerr, too, has made a habit of citing their similarities, even if that has occasionally gotten him into trouble. In February, after Lillard guided the Trail Blazers to a 32-point win over the Warriors by scoring 51 points, Kerr said that Lillard “looked like Steph Curry out there.”AdvertisementLillard let those comments marinate for about a month until the teams played again, and he revealed that he did not like being compared to anyone, let alone Curry.Get the big sports news, highlights and analysis from Times journalists, with distinctive takes on games and some behind-the-scenes surprises, delivered to your inbox every week.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.“I’m not impersonating anyone, you know what I mean?” Lillard said at the time, before emphasizing, “I’m my own person.”Kerr quickly clarified that he had only meant to praise Lillard, and he even apologized to him in person. But Kerr was at it again after Saturday’s game. He could not help himself.“He’s a lot like Steph,” Kerr said. “He’s got unlimited range, and he can shoot off the dribble and come off screens and shoot step-backs. So we know he’s going to be a handful.”Lillard has the unique ability to turn compliments into criticisms, to manufacture motivational fuel out of innocuous postgame comments.It has always been that way for Lillard, who could justifiably consider himself perpetually overlooked: by college recruiters, by the five teams that passed on him in the 2012 N.B.A. draft, by the coaches who did not vote for him to play in the 2016 All-Star Game. (After that particular snub, Lillard went on a scorched-earth crusade, averaging 33.5 points in the first 11 games after the All-Star break.)Lillard, who grew up in Oakland, Calif., has saved some of his finest work for the Warriors. In his last three home games against Golden State, dating to the regular season, Lillard averaged 43.7 points while shooting 53.7 percent from the field and 57.5 percent from 3-point range.On Saturday, Lillard became the first player in N.B.A. history to have at least 40 points, 10 assists, 5 rebounds and 5 3-pointers in a playoff game. He also became the first player for the Trail Blazers to finish with 40 points and 10 assists in a playoff game since Clyde Drexler in 1992. It was history — the sort of history that Curry usually makes.“Our season is on the line,” Lillard said.It would not be a total stretch to suggest that the same is true for the Warriors — not ahead of Game 4 necessarily, but as this series drags on. They would welcome some high-profile help.A version of this article appears in print on May 9, 2016, on Page D5 of the New York edition with the headline: Lillard’s 40 Points Complicate the Math on Curry.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.See More »