By VICTOR MATHERJULY 18, 2017
The Las Vegas Summer League wrapped up Monday night after some unusually noisy buzz. Lonzo Ball was the unquestioned star, leading the Los Angeles Lakers to the title and dazzling fans with his passing. His stock, already high, shot through the roof based on his performance.He led the league with nine assists per game, and despite sitting out the final, was named the league’s most valuable player. At times his passes were so good that some of his teammates couldn’t handle them.But it was only summer league. How much faith can be put in games involving soon-to-be free agents and minor leaguers that are played far away, geographically and temporally, from the high-pressure atmosphere of the N.B.A.?Jayson Tatum of the Boston Celtics, the No. 3 overall pick, also played well, averaging 17 points a game. The 13th pick, Donovan Mitchell of the Utah Jazz, led all scorers, averaging 28 points in his two games.AdvertisementBut Bryn Forbes, who wasn’t drafted at all in 2016, scored 26 a game. Wayne Selden Jr., another undrafted player who got in just 14 games with two teams last season, averaged 22 for the Memphis Grizzlies. Nobody is heralding either of them as a future superstar, except perhaps if they play in Europe.AdvertisementAnd not every N.B.A. great burned up the summer league. Coming out of high school in 2003, LeBron James averaged 15 points a game in the Boston summer league, but he shot poorly from the line and was 2 for 14 from the field in his final game. On the other hand, John Wall and Blake Griffin each went from summer league M.V.P. to stardom.The roster of recent M.V.P.s of the Vegas summer league is a decidedly mixed bag. Of the last six, only two could really be called unqualified N.B.A. successes so far. Two are established bench players, and two would have to be called busts.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.Damian Lillard, the 2012 M.V.P., regularly scores 20 points a game as one of the Portland Trail Blazers’ stars. Jonas Valanciunas, the 2013 M.V.P., is a solid player for the Toronto Raptors.Kyle Anderson, the 2015 M.V.P., gets about 10 minutes a game with the San Antonio Spurs, and Tyus Jones, last year’s M.V.P., is on the bench with the Minnesota Timberwolves.But Josh Selby, Lillard’s co-M.V.P., was out of the N.B.A. after two seasons with the Grizzlies and played in Israel last season. He had ranked third in scoring in the summer league with 24 points and shot .557. And Glen Rice Jr., the 2014 M.V.P., washed out after two seasons with the Washington Wizards and went to the N.B.A. Development League.There is something else that separates these players: their draft position. The stars, Lillard and Valanciunas, were selected sixth and fifth. The bench players, Anderson and Jones, went late in the first round. And the washouts, Selby and Rice, were second-rounders.That would seem to indicate that a great performance in the summer league doesn’t really change a player’s fortunes that much. Top picks, like Ball, a No. 2 over all, can be projected to be stars regardless. Lower picks will ride the bench. And second-rounders, with rare exceptions, won’t last too long.So enjoy the summer league, and dream about your team’s future. But remember that good players tend to remain good players. And marginal ones don’t suddenly become great because of some high scoring in July.A version of this article appears in print on July 19, 2017, on Page B13 of the New York edition with the headline: Summertime Sizzle Can Fizzle in the Fall.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.