By ANDREW KEHMAY 9, 2016
OKLAHOMA CITY — Behind one basket at Chesapeake Energy Arena, on the home bench side, a fan held up two white, block letters for the entirety of the game Sunday night: a K and a D.The letters stood for Kevin Durant, who has meant so much to the Oklahoma City Thunder over the last nine seasons, and with a 17-point fourth-quarter performance to ignite a 111-97 victory over the San Antonio Spurs, Durant, a free agent this summer, ensured he would play at least one more game in this city.The best-of-seven Western Conference semifinal series, tied now at two games apiece, will continue on Tuesday in San Antonio, before heading back to Oklahoma City on Thursday.Durant led the Thunder with 41 points, but until the fourth quarter, it seemed as if San Antonio were on its way to victory. The Spurs led by as many as 11 points, and anytime Oklahoma City threatened to steal the game’s momentum, anytime the fans seemed poised to truly lose their minds, San Antonio was there with a cool response.AdvertisementThat changed in the fourth. With just under nine minutes left in the game, Durant shed Manu Ginobili with a crossover and drained a deep 3-pointer, giving the Thunder a 91-87 lead. After a Spurs miss, Durant came back down and nailed a step back jumper over Kawhi Leonard.AdvertisementWith 2 minutes 26 seconds left, Durant flipped in a floater from the baseline, giving the Thunder a 6-point lead. Russell Westbrook (14 points, 15 assists) then stole the ball and flung a pass ahead to Durant for another bucket, putting the Thunder ahead, 105-97. With 1:30 left, Durant hit a 3-pointer from the corner, pushing the lead to 11 and sending the capacity crowd into hysterics.“It was on me to figure out the best way to be aggressive and score and also make plays,” said Durant, who praised the Spurs’ defense. “I was able to make some shots tonight.”Get the big sports news, highlights and analysis from Times journalists, with distinctive takes on games and some behind-the-scenes surprises, delivered to your inbox every week.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.Spurs Coach Gregg Popovich had no choice but to concede as much. “You’ve got to give him credit,” he said of Durant. “He was great. He was great. I don’t know how else to say it. He was fantastic.”Durant, who also had five rebounds and four assists, had spent much of the night frustrated. Leonard (21 points, 6 rebounds, 4 steals) was indomitable on both ends. He made the hoop sway with a dunk. He swiped offensive rebounds over the heads of defenders. He intercepted a bullet pass cleanly with his left hand, his arm outstretched like a first baseman’s.Tony Parker (22 points) was excellent, too, even drawing appreciative coos from the home crowd with a stylish pirouette-dribble-jumper combination in the second half.The Spurs finished the first half up, 53-45. Durant and Westbrook shot a combined 6 of 21 from the field through the first two quarters. Their frustration was plain throughout.With 2:22 left in the first quarter, Westbrook picked up a defensive foul after bumping Parker, and immediately stalked over to the referee Danny Crawford, swiped at the air near his shoulder and yelled at him angrily. The Thunder assistant coach Maurice Cheeks pushed Westbrook away, but Westbrook was charged with a technical foul.AdvertisementThe Spurs’ offense stalled briefly in the second against a suddenly staunch Thunder defense. Their passing turned laborious, and they had back-to-back 24-second violations.The Thunder’s tight defending, meanwhile, freed them up to run on offense. With 3:55 left in the half, Westbrook fired a sharp alley-oop pass to Durant, who slashed along the baseline for a two-handed dunk, tying the game at 40-40 and sparking about 30 seconds of continuous cheers from the sellout crowd. But the Spurs took control again, going on a 13-5 run to end the half.The arena swelled with noise again with 3:47 left in the third when Westbrook slashed to the rim for a tough layup, tying the game at 69-69. But again, the Spurs finished strong — hitting their first 3-pointer of the game with 32.5 left in the quarter and their second shortly after — and entered the final period up, 81-77.It continued like that — big Thunder moment, cool Spurs reply — until midway through the fourth, when Durant became too overpowering to be answered.A version of this article appears in print on May 9, 2016, on Page D5 of the New York edition with the headline: Durant Leads Thunder With 17-Point 4th Quarter .  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.