
Extra Bases By                     
 TYLER KEPNER
 
MAY 7, 2016
Robin Ventura has lived this before: a celebrated franchise chasing history across town; a swirl of clubhouse controversy; a close group of veterans who know how to focus. Ventura sees it now as the manager of the Chicago White Sox. He experienced it years ago as the third baseman for the Mets.“For me, it’s fun,” Ventura said the other day, on the phone from U.S. Cellular Field. “It’s kind of like a blast from the past, or a flashback, in a way, of how they operate. Inside the clubhouse, when they win, it’s very similar.”The White Sox have won a lot so far. At 20-10 after Friday’s game against Minnesota, the White Sox had the most victories in the American League. Of course, their North Side rivals, the Cubs, had the most in baseball as they pursue their first World Series title since 1908.This, too, is familiar to Ventura. In 2000, he helped lead the Mets to the World Series, a feat dimmed somewhat by the presence of the Yankees, who beat them in five games for their third consecutive title. Those Mets, though, had been expected to contend. These White Sox were not — at least not by most outside their clubhouse.AdvertisementThe White Sox — who face the Yankees in the Bronx next weekend — went 76-86 last season for their third losing record in a row. They considered a roster teardown, but that would have been inconsistent with the franchise’s aggressiveness since winning the 2005 World Series. The players told General Manager Rick Hahn to believe in them.Advertisement“At the end of the season,” Hahn said, “almost to a man, the veteran players were like, ‘Bring back this same group; there’s reason to believe in bounce-backs.’ ”Hahn did, but he added to the core with third baseman Todd Frazier, shortstop Jimmy Rollins, second baseman Brett Lawrie, center fielder Austin Jackson, starter Mat Latos and catchers Alex Avila and Dioner Navarro. Only Frazier was coming off an especially strong season, but the group bonded quickly in spring training.“It’s hard to pinpoint the chemistry thing — winning does that — but it was there right when they showed up,” Ventura said. “It was there before the LaRoche thing, and that made it easier for them to handle all that. It seemed like that was a really big story outside of baseball, but here, everybody handled it and went on their way.”The LaRoche story, of course, was the abrupt March retirement of Adam LaRoche, the designated hitter and a team leader. LaRoche’s son Drake had been a daily presence at White Sox camp and, like his father, was popular with the players. When Kenny Williams, the executive vice president, told LaRoche to scale back Drake’s presence, LaRoche quit and forfeited his $13 million salary.Get the big sports news, highlights and analysis from Times journalists, with distinctive takes on games and some behind-the-scenes surprises, delivered to your inbox every week.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.The players, especially the ace starter Chris Sale, reacted angrily, vehemently criticizing Williams in public. But Ventura sensed that the players had a certainty of purpose, regardless of the LaRoche issue, that would serve them well. His Mets teams never seemed distracted by off-field matters, either.“Where guys are in their careers, the kinds of players they are and what they care about — it’s very similar to this team,” Ventura said. “There could be a lot of stuff going on outside, and they still only cared about stuff on the inside.”The White Sox parted ways on Thursday with another well-liked player, starter John Danks, who was designated for assignment after four winless starts. Ventura said Danks’s influence would still be felt in the lessons he had imparted to the younger left-handers Sale and Jose Quintana, who entered the weekend a combined 10-1 with a 1.54 E.R.A.AdvertisementVentura said that Sale and Quintana, especially, had benefited from the team’s opportunistic offense and vastly improved defense. Jackson’s arrival shifted Adam Eaton to right field, where he has been extraordinary. A team that ranked last in the majors in overall defense in 2015, according to Fangraphs, is now in the top 10.“If you don’t score — and when there’s the feeling that you’re not really going to score — the pitchers try to do more,” Ventura said. “Sale and Quintana tried to do more.“And defensively, we had some holes last year and weren’t quite as good we could have been. They were trying to strike everybody out to take it away from the defense and do it themselves. Now, you get a great play here and there, but you really get the routine plays. They’re confident pitching here now because of that.”Some elements of the White Sox’ success may be hard to sustain — the nearly unhittable bullpen, perhaps, or the suddenly reliable Latos. But the offense may get even better as the weather warms up, Ventura believes, and he can always count on the team’s mind-set.“They just have a handle on what they need to get done,” he said. “It doesn’t always happen every night, but the belief is there.” Angels’ Woes Mount The injury news for the Los Angeles Angels on Friday underscored the precarious nature of the team’s plight. The Angels’ ace, Garrett Richards, has a torn ulnar collateral ligament and needs Tommy John surgery. Another young starter, Tyler Skaggs, is still recovering from the operation, and yet another, Andrew Heaney, may also need it. Heaney has a strained flexor muscle in his elbow.The Angels’ veterans have also been afflicted. C. J. Wilson is on the disabled list with shoulder trouble, closer Huston Street is out with an oblique strain, and Jered Weaver’s velocity just keeps falling. His fastball now averages 81.9 miles an hour, according to Fangraphs; only one starter in the majors — the Toronto knuckleballer R. A. Dickey — throws his slower.Weaver and Wilson combine to make more than $40 million this season, in the last year of their contracts, so the Angels conceivably could reinvest in a high-impact arm for their rotation. But the free-agent market will be quite thin this off-season, with Washington’s Stephen Strasburg the only clear top-level starter available.AdvertisementThe Angels — who entered this season with the game’s lowest-ranked farm system, according to Baseball America — are also still paying for their desperate moves years ago to add offense. They owe the departed Josh Hamilton $24 million this year and next, and Albert Pujols’s salary rises by $1 million each season through 2021, when it reaches $30 million. Pujols, 36, was hitting .202 through Friday, with a .672 on-base-plus-slugging percentage.The team’s centerpiece, the 24-year-old Mike Trout, is signed through 2020 and is having another standout season. But the Angels still have not won a playoff game since Trout arrived almost five years ago, and their immediate future does not look promising. Trust in the Plan The Atlanta Braves guaranteed a 2016 contract for Fredi Gonzalez last July, shortly after the team’s surprisingly competitive first half. After trading several veterans, the Braves stood at 42-42 through last July 7.Since then, though, they had gone 32-74 through Friday, raising serious doubts about Gonzalez’s standing. Even considering the other veterans the team has shed in that time, the Braves’ front office — fairly or not — expected a better product in the majors. Gonzalez acknowledged the team’s treacherous path last week before a game at Citi Field, when conceding that the Braves’ best sources of hope were still in the minors.“It’s a trust that the fans got to give our front office,” Gonzalez said. “I’ve got to trust our front office. We did it to ourselves. It wasn’t like we woke up; we had a plan. We kept the plan and continued doing the plan. And you’ll see the fruits here shortly.”The Braves have not said whether Gonzalez will be around for the harvest. Some Pitching Oddities Every year, pitchers find new and creative ways to fill up box-score lines. Already this season, two starters — the Dodgers’ Ross Stripling and Miami’s Adam Conley — have been lifted for relievers during the eighth inning despite having allowed no hits. Others have been pulled from no-hitters earlier or later, but through the magic of the play index at Baseball-Reference.com — with data back to 1913 — we can tell that only Stripling and Conley have worked into the eighth, allowed no hits, and been replaced before finishing the inning.Last Sunday, two days after Conley nearly no-hit the Brewers, Milwaukee’s Wily Peralta allowed 13 hits to the Marlins in five and two-thirds innings, with zero strikeouts — and he still won the game. To find another winning starter who got so few outs, allowed so many hits and recorded no strikeouts, we have to go back almost 85 years.On May 24, 1931, Pittsburgh’s Erv Brame had a very lucky day at Wrigley Field. The Cubs’ player-manager, Rogers Hornsby, homered off Brame in the first inning, and the fellow future Hall of Famers Kiki Cuyler and Gabby Hartnett later doubled off him. But Brame — supported well by his own Cooperstown-bound teammates Lloyd Waner, Paul Waner and Pie Traynor — survived with a 10-7 victory.A version of this article appears in print on May 8, 2016, on Page SP2 of the New York edition with the headline: Ventura Enjoying Some Déjà Vu.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.See More »