AdvertisementSupported byCanada 3, Europe 1By Curtis RushTORONTO — Mike Babcock, the coach of the Canadian team at the World Cup of Hockey, runs a tight ship. He knows where he is going and how to get there.Coach Ralph Krueger of Team Europe, on the other hand, is freer at the helm, allowing for course corrections.Babcock is the cold technician. Krueger is the soothing force.“Ralph should be Ralph, and I should be me,” said Babcock, who is also the coach of the Toronto Maple Leafs.Passionate and intelligent, Babcock, 53, and Krueger, 57, have found success through their contrasting styles. Some of the differences will play out in the best-of-three World Cup finals, which started Tuesday night with Canada defeating Europe, 3-1.The Canadians followed up on their 4-1 victory over Europe’s scrappy underdogs in the preliminary round.“We are very angry right now, which is a good thing,” Krueger said after the game. “A little bit too much risk at the wrong times. What we can take out of this is a lot of courage.”He added, referring to Canada goaltender Carey Price: “We could have tested Price a lot more. Again, the effort was there. We made it a game.”Canada got goals from Brad Marchand, Steven Stamkos and Patrice Bergeron. Tomas Tatar scored for Europe.“It wasn’t our best,” Stamkos said. “I think we realize that. But at this time of the tournament, a win is a win. So it’s a good thing. But I thought in the third period we played better, with some purpose.”Europe took the play to the Canadians in the first minute on a power play, but Canada got a break 2 minutes 33 seconds in when Marchand jumped out of the penalty box and broke down the ice, trailing Bergeron. Marchand took a goal-mouth feed from Bergeron, his Boston Bruins teammate, and lifted a shot over Europe goaltender Jaroslav Halak. It was Canada’s first shot on goal.Stamkos scored his first goal of the tournament off a cross-ice pass from Ryan Getzlaf later in the period. Tatar, the overtime hero against Sweden in a semifinal Sunday, beat Price on a rebound in the second period for his third goal of the tournament.Later in the period, Getzlaf stripped the puck from Europe defenseman Zdeno Chara at center ice, peeled back into Europe’s zone and sent a cross-ice pass to Stamkos, who redirected the puck behind Halak for his first goal of the tournament.“We shot ourselves in the foot and gave them a couple of freebies,” Europe’s Anze Kopitar said. “Certainly, it’s disappointment right now, but at the same time, this arguably could be our best game so far in the tournament. We can’t hang our heads. There’s no time for it. We’ll come back here tomorrow, regroup and get ready for Thursday.”The Europeans were without the Slovakian scorer Marian Gaborik, who has a foot injury and had shared the Team Europe goal-scoring lead with two going into the finals.Gaborik returned to the Los Angeles Kings, who expect him to be out of action for eight weeks. Mikkel Bodker took Gaborik’s place in the lineup.Few expect Europe to beat a powerhouse like Canada, but all tournament long, Krueger has been a picture of calm, explaining how his players were upending the odds.Before Sunday’s semifinal win, Krueger was in the locker room watching Southampton, the English soccer team for which he serves as chairman, beat West Ham, 3-0.In 2013, after Krueger was fired as coach of the Edmonton Oilers, Babcock — Krueger’s friend since 2004 — invited him to work as a consultant with Team Canada at the 2014 Olympics in Sochi, Russia.Krueger accepted, and his wife laughed. It had been only 12 hours since his dismissal, and he was taking another job without even thinking about it.“My instincts took me there,” Krueger said. “It’s the way life is. If you take things positively, it seems that opportunity will present itself quicker. I think if I would have complained for 12 hours to all the media in Canada, Mike might not have picked up the phone.”With Babcock, players need thick skins.“He tells it like it is, and ultimately, that’s what everyone wants, to know where they stand,” Team Canada’s general manager, Doug Armstrong, said. “No one wants mind games, and he doesn’t play mind games; that’s for sure.”Price called Babcock “black and white.”When Canada fell behind against Russia in the semifinals, Babcock did not change course.His message to the players was to “keep steady on the rudder” and wear down the Russians.They did, with a 5-3 victory.Krueger, however, was not afraid to throw out his team’s entire style after Europe was outscored, 9-1, through four periods of pretournament action against Team North America.“We came in and tried to play a European kind of hockey,” forward Frans Nielsen said. “We were turning the puck over. You don’t have the room on the smaller ice. The pace is faster. Everybody could see it wasn’t working.”Krueger turned his squad into a patient, defensive team that stifled opponents’ scoring opportunities while seizing its own rare chances.That approach meant that Europe would be outshot in most games, but the overhaul was validated by the team’s 2-1 record in group play — with a 3-0 win over the United States — and the semifinal victory over Sweden.Krueger has a blended team of overachievers from eight small countries. Slowly, over team meals and postpractice soccer games, they bonded, never worrying about losing.“He’s so positive every day,” Nielsen said. “It doesn’t matter what happens; he tries to see it in a positive way.”Nielsen tries to “pick his brain” about everything, including Southampton F.C., he said. After Southampton’s victory over West Ham, Krueger “made all the other coaches and trainers walk around in Southampton golf shirts,” Nielsen said.Asked how he would prepare for Krueger’s Cinderella team, Babcock said brusquely, “I don’t spend much time thinking about Cinderella, so it’s not a big issue for me.”As the coach of players who have a combined 14 Stanley Cup rings (compared with eight for Team Europe), Babcock does not allow for egos. He works hard to give everyone a role, whether on the power play or the penalty-killing unit, so no one gets lost in the shuffle.“Egos will destroy a team like this,” Armstrong, the general manager, said.Babcock, who has won a Stanley Cup and two Olympic titles as a coach, lets everyone know that the team is bigger than any individual.“He’s just no-nonsense about it,” Armstrong said. “It’s nonnegotiable.”When Babcock has to bench a star player like forward Claude Giroux or goaltender Braden Holtby, he does it in a direct way.“He doesn’t beat around the bush and have other people tell them that information,” Armstrong said. “He calls these guys and tells them: ‘This is how I envision your role. Things could change.’ And he’s very upfront about it. Good coaches can deliver bad news and not worry about it.”After this tournament, win or lose, this European team will cease to exist.This is a team with no past or future, which works in its favor because the players do not feel the weight of a country’s hopes. Krueger understands that.“I learned he lives for the moment,” defenseman Andrej Sekera said. “And that’s the approach he wants for us.”Advertisement