By THE ASSOCIATED PRESSOCT. 20, 2016
MINNEAPOLIS — Nneka Ogwumike’s short jumper with 3.1 seconds left gave the Sparks a 77-76 victory over the Minnesota Lynx, the defending champions, in the deciding game of the W.N.B.A. finals Thursday night. It was Los Angeles’s first title in 14 years.As a stunned home crowd slowly filed out of Target Center, Ogwumike, the league’s most valuable player, joined her teammates in celebration on the court after finishing with 12 points and 12 rebounds.Candace Parker had 28 points and 12 rebounds to lead the Sparks and was named the most valuable player of the finals. It was her first W.N.B.A. title.“She’s been through so much,” Ogwumike said of Parker. “She’s probably the most misunderstood person in the league. I told her I wanted her to get one. She had an awesome game tonight. She’s been our leader.”AdvertisementParker said that she listened to one of Pat Summitt’s speeches before the game and that that motivated her. Summitt, Parker’s coach at Tennessee, died in late June.Advertisement“She would have been proud of our rebounding,” Parker said of Summitt. “It came down to rebounding and defense. I could hear her voice telling me to keep going. She was definitely present tonight.”Rebekkah Brunson made one of two free throws with 23 seconds left to give the Lynx a 74-73 lead. Parker answered with a layup on the other end that the Lynx’s Maya Moore countered with a jumper with 15 seconds remaining.Get the big sports news, highlights and analysis from Times journalists, with distinctive takes on games and some behind-the-scenes surprises, delivered to your inbox every week.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.Ogwumike’s first shot attempt for the win was off the mark, but she worked her way over to the loose ball for another attempt, which she coolly swished.Lindsay Whalen’s final shot from just inside halfcourt was not close, setting off the Sparks’ celebration.Moore had 23 points and 11 assists for the Lynx, who fell short of matching the W.N.B.A. record of four championships. The Houston Comets won four straight titles from 1997 to 2000.The Lynx played in the finals for the fifth time in the last six years. They have won three.Parker finally had help with the scoring when the reserve Chelsea Gray reeled off 11 consecutive points for the Sparks. Gray capped that run with a smooth up-and-under layup to put them in front by 60-59 early in the fourth quarter. Parker’s putback with 3 minutes 6 seconds left gave Los Angeles a 71-63 lead, putting the Lynx in trouble.But Moore seized the moment with a 3-pointer, and Parker forced an off-balance 3-pointer on the other end.AdvertisementWhalen stole the ball from Kristi Toliver and finished the fast break with a layup to tie the game at 71-71, setting up the final flurry.On the next play, Ogwumike hit a jumper that appeared to come after the shot clock expired. The officials signaled for a review, but never looked at the basket and Los Angeles led by 73-71 with just over a minute left.The game was remarkably close, with 11 lead changes and six ties in the first half alone. Moore gave Minnesota its biggest lead of the first 20 minutes with two free throws in the closing seconds of the second quarter to make it 34-28.A version of this article appears in print on October 21, 2016, on Page B14 of the New York edition with the headline: With 3.1 Seconds Left, Sparks Seize Title.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.