By WALLACE MATTHEWSJULY 16, 2017
By Manager Terry Collins’s reckoning, the Mets needed to win 51 of their final 76 games after the All-Star break in order to claw their way back into postseason contention after a disappointing first half of the 2017 season.And because the Mets won their first two games of the second half in emphatic fashion against the Colorado Rockies, Collins’s math seemed not only sound but also achievable.“That’s our goal — let’s get to 90 wins and see where we’re at,” Collins said before Sunday’s series finale against the Rockies at Citi Field. “I don’t think by any stretch of the imagination that this is over yet.”One problem, though, is that the Mets were scheduled to play 12 games on Sundays in the second half of the season. But the Mets’ record on Sundays, especially Sundays in the daytime, does not inspire confidence, as the contest against the Rockies made all too clear.AdvertisementHeading out on a glorious Sunday afternoon with a chance to sweep a team that was 11 games over .500 and to maintain the momentum they had built with resounding wins in the first two games, the Mets lost, 13-4, in a game that was over well before it was over.AdvertisementFor the Mets, it was just one more Sunday, bloody Sunday.The Mets’ record on Sundays this year is now 5-10, including some of their most lopsided losses of the season, such as the 23-5 blowout at the hands of the Nationals in Washington on April 30.Sundays at home have been even worse: 2-6. Those six losses had a cumulative score of 56-14. Their overall record in day games is now 10-18.“We just have not played well in day games or on Sundays,” Collins said before the game. “I can’t defend it. We just got to get after it today and hope we play as well as we did the last two games.”That turned out to be wishful thinking. Steven Matz, whose season did not begin until June 10 because of off-season surgery to remove a bone spur from his elbow, was raked for nine hits and seven earned runs in just over one inning, the shortest outing of his career and the shortest for a Mets starter this season.The Mets’ offense, which outscored the Rockies by 23-5 in the first two games, did not get on the board until Lucas Duda hit a solo home run in the fourth, by which time the Mets were already trailing, 9-0. Asdrubal Cabrera hit a two-run homer two batters later to cut the Rockies’ lead to 9-3, but the Mets were never really in the game.Matz allowed five hits in the first inning, including a two-run single by Ian Desmond and a two-run double by Trevor Story. He retired no one in the second, allowing a leadoff double to Charlie Blackmon, a single to D. J. LeMahieu (who had four hits, including two doubles, in his first four at-bats) and a three-run home run by Nolan Arenado. Collins stayed with Matz for one more batter, Mark Reynolds, who singled.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.“I feel like I just wasn’t really sharp today,” Matz said. “It’s frustrating, but I got to flush it.”Matz, whose record dropped to 2-3 with a 4.58 E.R.A., was followed by four relievers, all of whom added to the damage, with the exception of Erik Goeddel, who pitched two scoreless innings.AdvertisementFernando Salas allowed two runs in the fourth. A two-run shot that Chasen Bradford gave up in the seventh inning was officially ruled an inside-the-park homer even though it clearly hit above the orange home run line in left-center field. Mets center fielder Curtis Granderson saw it for what it was, but the umpires never gave the signal for a home run.“They made a mistake, and they need to challenge it,” Granderson said. “I had the best view in the house. It was over the fence.”The home run made it 11-4, and Neil Ramirez surrendered a long two-run homer to Gerardo Parra in the eighth to complete the Rockies’ day.“It’s always good when you win a series,” Cabrera said. “That’s what we need to do the rest of the way.”The Mets have seven games remaining on this homestand, against two teams with sub-.500 records — the St. Louis Cardinals, who come in for four games beginning on Monday, and the Oakland Athletics, against whom they play three next weekend.But two of those will be day games, and one of them will be a Sunday game. Presumably, Collins has factored those games into his formula for getting his team into the postseason.And perhaps a new team motto should take its place alongside “Ya gotta believe!” and “Baseball like it oughta be.”How about “Never on Sunday”?INSIDE PITCHTerry Collins said he expected Yoenis Cespedes to play in Monday’s game against the Cardinals. Cespedes sat out Sunday’s game with soreness in his left hip, which he sustained while diving for a ball in the sixth inning of Saturday night’s 9-3 victory. … After the game, the Mets optioned Chasen Bradford to Class AAA Las Vegas and recalled the right-handed pitcher Hansel Robles.A version of this article appears in print on July 17, 2017, on Page D3 of the New York edition with the headline: Mets Return to Sunday Doldrums With Loss to Rockies.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.