By VICTOR MATHERFEB. 25, 2016
Remember when a No. 1 team being upset was a cause for storming the court, television bulletins and front-page headlines? This season, a loss by the top team in men’s basketball seems to bring little more than a shrug.On Wednesday night, No. 5 Xavier beat No. 1 Villanova. Xavier had been 0-6 against Villanova since joining the Big East, but J. P. Macura and Edmond Sumner each scored 19 points as the Musketeers won at home, 90-83.It was the seventh time this season that a No. 1 team had fallen. Three Big 12 teams have knocked off top-ranked programs. So has Iowa. And Northern Iowa.Six teams have sat at the top of the Associated Press poll this season: North Carolina, Kentucky, Michigan State, Kansas, Oklahoma and Villanova. Kentucky has since sunk all the way to No. 16. No team has stayed on top for more than four weeks.AdvertisementIt has been the type of season in which any team can lose at almost any time. Xavier has lost three times this season, but every other team in the top 10 has at least four losses. No. 3 Virginia has six, and No. 8 Iowa has seven.AdvertisementBy contrast, Kentucky ended the 2014-15 regular season unbeaten, and six other ranked teams had three or fewer losses.Get the big sports news, highlights and analysis from Times journalists, with distinctive takes on games and some behind-the-scenes surprises, delivered to your inbox every week.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.Just since Monday, No. 3 Virginia has lost to Miami, No. 8 Iowa has lost to Wisconsin, and No. 9 Arizona has lost to Colorado.With the loss by Villanova, No. 2 Kansas looks poised to return to the top, assuming it beats Texas Tech on Saturday. But the Jayhawks then have games at No. 25 Texas and at home against No. 17 Iowa State, both potential trip wires. Given the way the season has been going, they could easily lose one of those games, opening the door for a final regular-season No. 1 of ... Xavier? Oklahoma? Michigan State? At this point, who knows?Even coldblooded computers are having trouble settling on which team is best. Ken Pomeroy’s and Jeff Sagarin’s respected rankings have Michigan State on top, though the Spartans are just No. 6 in the A.P. poll.Others point to Kansas, Villanova, North Carolina or even Louisville, which is ineligible for the N.C.A.A. tournament.Theories for the parity abound. The decline of top programs like Kentucky and Duke has left a void at the top. The increasing attraction of 3-pointers has led to streakiness. Many top players are leaving for the N.B.A. after one season, resulting in poor continuity on teams.Upsets are also happening down the charts. Wisconsin, conqueror of Iowa this week, has lost to Western Illinois and Milwaukee. Columbia, which is in the hunt for the Ivy League title, lost to Longwood, which was 8-21 entering Thursday and ranked No. 300 by Pomeroy.The lack of a dominant team has certainly increased excitement this season. But it will not make N.C.A.A. tournament brackets easy to fill out.We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.