AdvertisementSupported byOn GolfBy Karen CrousePALM BEACH GARDENS, Fla. — Shushing down a mountain run of fresh snow never gets old for Phil Mickelson, but it is not his favorite part of skiing trips with his three children. What he likes best are the chairlift rides to the top, which facilitate conversations that can take wide and wondrous turns.During a family vacation last week in Montana, where Mickelson was taking time off after finishing second at the Pebble Beach National Pro-Am, his elder daughter, Amanda, a high school junior, mentioned a book she had recently finished, “Go Set a Watchman” by Harper Lee. The sequel takes place nearly two decades after the events in “To Kill a Mockingbird,” Lee’s beloved first novel about a young girl and her family in the Depression era who are swept up in a trial of a black man accused of raping a white woman.Diverging sharply from most critics, Amanda preferred the second book, Mickelson said.“My daughter was huge on the second book because she said it portrays the characters maybe in a different light, how good people can do bad things and bad people can do good things and so forth,” Mickelson said between shots during his Wednesday morning pro-am round at the Honda Classic in Palm Beach Gardens.He said the discussion of the novels had ended with an appeal from Amanda, 16, and her siblings, Sophia, 14, and Evan, 12, for Mickelson to try to meet Lee, known for being guarded.“Gosh, you really need to go out and see her,” Mickelson recalled his children telling him.The discussion about Lee took place Friday morning.“Three hours later, the news came across the wire that she had died,” Mickelson said.His children’s suggestion was not preposterous. The journalist Marja Mills — who got to know Lee while writing a newspaper profile on her and became close to her and her older sister Alice when Mills moved to Alabama for roughly a year and became their neighbor — wrote about the sisters in “The Mockingbird Next Door: Life With Harper Lee.” In the book, Mills described Alabama football games and the Masters as part of Lee’s spare television diet.Mills said that while researching the book, she talked to people who remembered the sisters’ father, Amasa Coleman Lee, a lawyer, playing golf in a three-piece suit. He was the one who introduced Lee to the sport, which became a treasured hobby. In a phone interview, Mills quoted from a 1963 newspaper article she had found, from The Lakeland Ledger, in which Lee said: “Playing golf is the best way I know to be alone and still be doing something. You hit a ball, think and take a walk.”Lee’s sister was a lawyer who told Mills she watched the Masters as a reward for finishing tax preparations for her clients. Mills said Lee’s sister had told her that the sisters usually rooted for underdogs at the Masters. In 2004, she wrote, “the Lees got a thrill cheering for Phil Mickelson at Augusta, where he won his first major at long last.” It was a reference to Mickelson’s one-stroke victory over Ernie Els for the first of his five major titles.Two months after the July 2014 publication of Mills’s book, I showed Mickelson a copy of the page on which he was mentioned. He was on the driving range at the BMW Championship in Colorado, and his eyes lit up.Like most American schoolchildren, Mickelson read “To Kill a Mockingbird” in an English class. And the reach of the book — which was published in 1960, won a Pulitzer Prize and still sells roughly 750,000 copies annually — extends far beyond the United States. Rory McIlroy, who grew up in Northern Ireland, said he was assigned the book during his first year of secondary school.Years later, passages from the book remained vivid in Mickelson’s mind. He was thrilled to find out his fans included the woman who breathed life into the character of Atticus Finch, modeled after Lee’s father.What if they could meet? I placed a phone call to the Rev. Thomas Lane Butts, a Methodist minister in Lee’s hometown, Monroeville, Ala. Butts served as one of the conduits to Lee, who was in an assisted-living center in the town.“The good Lord himself couldn’t get to her,” Butts said of the octogenarian Lee, who largely eschewed cellphones, social media and uninvited social calls at the assisted living facility where she lived.He suggested that Mickelson write Lee a letter of introduction, which he said he would deliver.Lee, who attended Oxford’s International Graduates’ Summer School in 1948, was an Anglophile whose regular reading list included the periodicals The Spectator, The Times Literary Supplement and The Weekly Telegraph. Mickelson said he would sign a pin flag from Muirfield, site of his 2013 British Open victory, to include with the letter to Lee. Mickelson’s wife, Amy, was planning to travel to Denver to join him for the weekend, and he asked her to pack a Muirfield pin flag.With a high finish at the BMW Championship, Mickelson would qualify for the Tour Championship in Atlanta. If Lee was amenable to meeting, Mickelson was willing to fly to Mobile and drive to Monroeville on his way to the Tour Championship with his wife and children in tow. He mused about what an unforgettable experience it would be for his younger two children, in particular, to be introduced to the author of one of the great American classic novels before being introduced to the novel in school.But a signed pin flag from Mickelson never made it to Monroeville. After posting rounds of 70 and 76 at Cherry Hills Country Club, Mickelson withdrew. His wife never made it to Denver, and Mickelson did not make the 29-man field in Atlanta. The letter to Lee was temporarily shelved as Mickelson prepared for the Ryder Cup in Scotland.Around the same time, Tonja Carter, Lee’s friend and lawyer, discovered the manuscript that became “Go Set a Watchman.” A few months later, the announcement of its existence created a furor, with some wondering how much input Lee, who had a stroke in 2007, had in the decision to publish the novel. The controversy had the effect of sweeping the letter to Lee deeper into the recesses of Mickelson’s mind. There it stayed until retrieved by Mickelson’s children.As much as Mickelson would have loved the chance to meet Lee, perhaps it is for the best that she remains in his mind the perfect prose and not the imperfect person. “I had multiple chances to meet Hogan,” Mickelson said, referring to the nine-time major winner Ben Hogan. “I never did because I didn’t want to have that mythology taken away, have him humanized.” Advertisement