By SCOTT CACCIOLAFEB. 24, 2016
INDIANAPOLIS —  A cold rain was falling outside Bankers Life Fieldhouse on Wednesday morning when the Knicks arrived for their shootaround. Carmelo Anthony opened a door, ducked his head inside the arena and then shuffled across the court in socks. Some teammates were quietly warming up. Anthony eventually retrieved his sneakers.It was a muted scene on a raw day, and one that seemed fitting for a team in decline. The Knicks are desperate these days — desperate for chemistry, desperate for positive feelings, desperate for some wins at the end of a dismal month.“We have to want this,” Anthony said.About 11 hours later, as if to punctuate one of his worst games of the season, Anthony launched an air ball as time ran out on the Knicks’ 108-105 loss to the Indiana Pacers.With their season beginning to spiral down the drain, the Knicks revealed some toughness, some chemistry and even some competence. But another opportunity slipped away, and Anthony — after shooting 5 of 20 from the field, after being whistled for a late technical foul, after failing in his attempt to send the game to overtime — took the blame.Advertisement“Everybody fought out there tonight,” Anthony said. “Me, on the other hand — it was just a tough night for me. I don’t think I have any excuses for that.”Moral victories mean little to the Knicks (24-35) at this late stage of the season, and they could not compensate for a poor effort by Anthony, who finished with 14 points. Others tried to provide help. Kristaps Porzingis scored 22 points, Jose Calderon had 20, and Kyle O’Quinn added 19 off the bench.“It’s always easier when everybody’s involved,” Calderon said.But amid so much chatter about the playoffs and so many pledges about improving their communication, the Knicks, losers of 13 of their last 15 games, are quickly emptying their supply of time and hope.Paul George scored 25 of his 27 points in the second half to lead the Pacers (31-26), who outscored the Knicks by 48-22 in the paint — a growing trend for the Knicks. Kurt Rambis, the Knicks’ interim coach, was more concerned with his team’s 14 turnovers.“If we could have taken care of the ball, despite everything else that happened in the ballgame, we would’ve given ourselves a much better chance,” he said.AdvertisementRambis said he had tried to find favorable matchups for Anthony by playing him more at power forward rather than have him deal with George — a quicker, more athletic forward. But there was a physical cost, Rambis said, as Anthony spent much of the evening grappling with the 6-foot-11 Myles Turner.“You end up wrestling a much bigger guy,” Rambis said, “and sometimes that can wear you out.”Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.The Knicks moved the ball against the Pacers. They went up by 5 points early in the fourth quarter before George went to work, hitting midrange jumpers and earning trips to the foul line. His 3-pointer gave the Pacers a 102-99 lead.Anthony was whistled for a technical foul with less than two minutes remaining after he threw an elbow at Turner. George made the free throw and then sank a baseline jumper to push the lead to 6.“We got tangled up a little bit,” Anthony said when asked about the play that resulted in the technical.The Knicks responded with back-to-back baskets from Calderon and Anthony, cutting the lead to 2 with 29.6 seconds left. The Knicks had an opportunity after the Pacers’ Monta Ellis misfired on a 16-foot jumper, but Porzingis launched a 3-point attempt that bounded off the back of the rim with 3.9 seconds remaining.“It felt good when I released it,” Porzingis said. “It feels terrible knowing how hard we worked to get to that spot.”After Turner went 1 of 2 from the free-throw line, Anthony got one final look — but his heave sailed long.It has been a tough stretch for Anthony. On Monday, he showed his frustration by leaving Madison Square Garden just minutes after a blowout loss to the Toronto Raptors. (He is usually among the last players to leave.) On Tuesday, he declined to speak with reporters after practice. Before Wednesday’s game, he addressed his recent behavior.Advertisement“It hits you sometimes, and you don’t know how to react to it,” Anthony said. “The best thing to do is get yourself away from it for a little bit, step out of it and relax, decompress and remove yourself and look at it from the outside looking in sometimes.”As for his relationship with Phil Jackson, the team president, and the strategy for the future, Anthony said: “I’ll have my opportunity to talk to him. I don’t think that’s the way to go at this point. It’s about winning games at this point. But I’ll have my opportunity to talk to Phil about that.”REBOUNDSJimmer Fredette, the 6-foot-2 guard who signed a 10-day contract with the Knicks on Monday, did not play. Kurt Rambis, the team’s interim coach, indicated that Fredette had not done enough at Tuesday’s practice — which Rambis described as a “rough, aggressive, defensive practice” — to distinguish himself and potentially work himself into the rotation.A version of this article appears in print on February 25, 2016, on Page B14 of the New York edition with the headline: Anthony’s Shot Hits Air, and Knicks’ Chances Evaporate.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.