AdvertisementSupported byOn SoccerBy Sam BordenZURICH — Every candidate, in every election, tries to picture a path to victory. The  FIFA presidential election here on Friday is no different.While most observers see the ballot as largely a two-horse race between Sheikh Salman bin Ebrahim al-Khalifa of Bahrain and Gianni Infantino of Switzerland, Prince Ali bin al-Hussein of Jordan and his supporters envision a different outcome: a multiballot voting process that ends with Prince Ali leapfrogging to victory.According to several high-ranking soccer officials who have discussed the situation with the campaigns, the crucial confederation in such a chain of events would be Europe.Is such a development likely? Maybe, maybe not. But here is how those backing Prince Ali, who lost to the former FIFA president Sepp Blatter in May, imagine things playing out:On the first ballot, in which a candidate needs two-thirds of the 207 votes to win, assume that the voting totals are roughly equal to the popular estimates. That would give Sheikh Salman around 85 votes, Mr. Infantino around 75 votes, and Prince Ali around 35 to 40 votes, with the other two candidates taking the small fraction remaining.Many supporters of Mr. Infantino have pushed the notion that, at this point, Prince Ali should ask his supporters to give their backing to Mr. Infantino on the second ballot; the reasoning is that Mr. Infantino and Prince Ali are seen as the more progressive candidates, while Sheikh Salman — who has been accused of having links to human rights violations in his home country — is viewed as less committed to changing the culture at FIFA that has allowed corruption scandals to flourish.Since Mr. Infantino will probably have more support than Prince Ali after one ballot, the thinking follows, the Jordanian ought to help him beat Sheikh Salman.But in recent days, another line of thinking has emerged: Mr. Infantino’s largest bloc of support is from UEFA, the confederation that governs European soccer. UEFA is the confederation that has the strongest opposition toward a Sheikh Salman presidency because of concerns that he will erode Europe’s position atop the world game (some voters have even coined the term A.B.S., or Anyone But Salman, to describe their feelings on the election).Five candidates are on the ballot this week for the election to replace Sepp Blatter as FIFA president. Who will win the vote at the special FIFA Congress on Friday in Zurich?Since many of Prince Ali’s votes will probably come from Africa and Asia, areas where Sheikh Salman has very strong support, it is more likely that his supporters would switch to Sheikh Salman, not Mr. Infantino, on a second ballot. The thinking of African and Asian voters would probably be that they would prefer a candidate from Asia rather than one from Europe, which many federations believe has too much influence already.In other words, if their first-choice Asian confederation candidate can’t win, they will go with the second candidate from the Asian confederation to ensure that FIFA’s next president is from their region.That would almost surely push Sheikh Salman over the required 104 votes needed to win on the second ballot.Given that line of thinking, several federation officials say, it is possible that European voters might abandon Mr. Infantino on the second ballot in order to thwart Sheikh Salman.Prince Ali has close ties to Europe: much of UEFA supported him against Mr. Blatter in May, and he spends significant time in Britain. Those close to his campaign like to push the idea that he is the only truly global candidate, a leader from Asia who knows the plight of the smaller federations but has strong connections to the power bases in Europe and elsewhere.Faced with the possibility that Prince Ali’s support in Asia might shift to Sheikh Salman, European leaders, and reform-minded voters from elsewhere, could back Prince Ali on the second ballot rather than risk Sheikh Salman getting over the threshold.According to one soccer official with close ties to several campaigns, such a possibility has been discussed by UEFA leaders, including those in the Football Association, England’s federation. If they back Prince Ali, it would likely give the Jordanian just enough votes to get over the line.Will it happen? With time dwindling, there are countless theories and potential situations being floated by every campaign, and every candidate is projecting confidence about the sturdiness of his support.The closest thing to a certainty is that, barring a last-minute deal between candidates, multiple ballots are inevitable. That means the period between the first and second ballot, when everyone is trying to figure out which way the wind is blowing, will most likely be when this election is truly decided.Advertisement