By EMMA STONEYFEB. 25, 2016
WELLINGTON, New Zealand —  With new teams, a new format and new bonus point rules, Super Rugby has entered a new era.Sanzaar, the newly named governing body, has been praising the virtues of the expanded 18-team competition, which kicked off Friday. Teams from Japan (Sunwolves), Argentina (Jaguares) and South Africa (Southern Kings) have joined the field.But enthusiasm has been muted elsewhere. There will be more travel for the Australian and New Zealand teams now that Buenos Aires, Tokyo and Singapore (where the Sunwolves will play some of their home games) have been added to the schedule, but less for the South Africans, who will not have to make the four-week tour to Australasia anymore.The new format has many confused — now there are four conferences, and not every team will play one another. In addition, eight teams, up from six, will qualify for the playoffs. There also are concerns that the Sunwolves and the Southern Kings will not be competitive, given the problems that engulfed the franchises as the season approached.AdvertisementCoaches in New Zealand were also disgruntled to be told — via email — only weeks ago of changes to the try-scoring bonus point system. Teams now have to score three or more tries than their opponent to get the bonus points, rather than scoring just four tries in total.AdvertisementThis year will also be a transitional period for many of the established franchises, particularly in New Zealand and South Africa, where there has been a post-World Cup exodus of players.The Crusaders, who are seven-time champions but have not won the title since 2008 and missed the playoffs last year, had perhaps the biggest overhaul of all the New Zealand teams.While they still have Kieran Read, who was confirmed as the new captain of New Zealand last week, and several other well-established All Blacks, they have lost a great deal of experience with the departures of Richie McCaw, Dan Carter, Colin Slade and Tom Taylor.But Read, who is also the Crusaders’ captain, insists it has not been a big problem.“In some ways, they haven’t played as much for us in the last three or four years, with injury and being rested from the competition,” he said of McCaw and Carter. “We’re well set up to play without those guys. We’ve already done it and been very successful the last few years. Whoever steps up will do a good job.”Matt Todd will take over for McCaw at the openside flanker position, but who replaces Carter is not quite as clear-cut for the No. 10 jersey.The other New Zealand franchise to get a sizable makeover is the Blues, who fired John Kirwan as coach after the worst season in franchise history.He has been replaced by the former New Zealand captain Tana Umaga, who is starting to build a solid coaching résumé after stints with the French club Toulon and the New Zealand provincial team Counties Manukau.AdvertisementThe Blues will miss the front-rowers Tony Woodcock and Keven Mealamu, who retired. But they have plenty of talent left, including Jerome Kaino, Rene Ranger, the brothers Rieko and Akira Ioane, and Steven Luatua.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.For Umaga, this season is all about regaining credibility and making an impression from the start.“We want to stop the roll that we were on last year,” he said. “We want to get the confidence back. There’s a bit of a Catch-22 because you know that this is more of a marathon than a sprint, but we need to get credibility, and credibility comes at the start.”Last year’s champion, the Highlanders, have perhaps the most settled roster of the five New Zealand teams, which should be an advantage.Few observers gave the Highlanders, the less glamorous franchise at the bottom of New Zealand’s South Island, a chance last year, and Highlanders fullback Ben Smith — part of a star-studded back line — does not expect that to change in 2016.“People will still underestimate us,” he said. “We managed to go all right last year, and people will probably say it was a fluke. But that doesn’t really matter. Down here, we know what we’re capable of.”The Hurricanes, who lost in the finals last year, are also expected to be contenders, while the Chiefs are bolstered by the return of All Blacks flyhalf Aaron Cruden from a serious knee injury.In Australia, the Brumbies and Waratahs seem the strongest of their country’s five franchises. Both rosters are stacked with international players, and both have been regulars in the playoffs in recent years, with the Waratahs winning the 2014 title.The Rebels and the Force are likely to finish in the bottom half of the standings again, while the Reds are rebuilding after losing three stars in Will Genia, Quade Cooper and James Horwill. Reds Coach Richard Graham also has a lot to prove after his team won just four of 16 matches last year.In South Africa, all five franchises will have largely inexperienced rosters, given the huge number of players who have left for overseas clubs or are missing because of injury. Injuries to the international flyhalfs Handré Pollard (ruptured knee ligaments) and Pat Lambie (shoulder) are a big blow to the Bulls and the Sharks.Four of the teams — the Lions being the exception — have also overhauled their coaching staff.But the new format means three teams from the South African half of the draw, which includes the Sunwolves and the Jaguares, are guaranteed spots in the playoffs. That will ease some of the pressure on the South Africans, who in previous years needed to win their conference to be assured a place in the playoffs.We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.