By VICTOR MATHERFEB. 24, 2016
The United States and Mexico have one of the fiercer and most closely contested rivalries in world soccer. Among clubs in the two countries, there is a rivalry as well, but Mexican teams have had a significant edge for some time. Four Major League Soccer franchises are trying to change that this week.The annual showdown between the two nations’ teams comes in the Concacaf Champions League. Mexican and American teams are the strongest in the competition, which includes teams from North and Central America and the Caribbean. The winner of the tournament gets a berth in the FIFA Club World Cup in December in Japan, where it would potentially face the winner of Europe’s much more well-known Champions League.This season, four Mexican and four American teams won their three-team groups and advanced to the quarterfinals, when each of the matchups pits a United States team against a Mexican opponent. After Tuesday night’s games — there are two more Wednesday night — Mexico still holds the upper hand in the rivalry.Club América, the defending champion and the top seed after group play, traveled to Seattle to face the Sounders for the first leg of their two-leg tie. There was excitement in Seattle, as the 21-year-old forward striker Jordan Morris made his professional debut and Clint Dempsey twice put the Sounders ahead, on a long, bending free kick and a second-half header. But twice América came back to equalize, and the game ended 2-2.The tie is not over, but Seattle now faces the daunting task of overcoming those two away goals in the Estadio Azteca in Mexico City next week.AdvertisementIn Tuesday’s early game, D.C. United held out for 70 minutes in its first leg in Mexico against Querétaro but eventually fell, 2-0. Though returning home for the second leg on Tuesday night, D.C. United has quite a bit to do to advance.Mexican teams have won the Concacaf championship 10 straight times. In only one of those years did an American team even make the final. The last American win came in 2000 by the Los Angeles Galaxy, when the tournament, under a different name, was a simple three-round knockout played entirely in California.AdvertisementUnder the current format, the American teams have a few built-in disadvantages, most notably the timing of the quarterfinals. While the season in Mexico’s top division, Liga MX, is in full swing, M.L.S. teams are still in preseason training. Rust is often evident.An additional disadvantage is the unusual calendar of the tournament, which began last August and will not finish until the end of April. M.L.S. teams qualify for the tournament far in advance, and the teams often have significant personnel changes in the interim. The 2015 M.L.S. champion, the Portland Timbers, will not return to the Champions League until late this summer, and that edition of the tournament will not finish until 2017.On Wednesday night, M.L.S. fans will hope for better in the two remaining quarterfinal first legs. Tigres, the reigning Mexican champion, host Real Salt Lake, which did not make the M.L.S. playoffs last season and thus has not played a competitive match since October. In a more promising matchup for M.L.S., the star-studded lineup of the Los Angeles Galaxy — still getting to know one another — will play Santos Laguna in Carson, Calif.We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.