AdvertisementSupported byBy Karen CrouseCHARLOTTE, N.C. — “I’m not going anywhere,” Jason Bohn told his caddie on Friday as he rummaged through his golf bag outside the Quail Hollow clubhouse. “I’m planning to stick around for a while.” Bohn was referring to his plans in the immediate aftermath of a missed cut at the Wells Fargo Championship, but he might have been talking about his long-term prognosis after a heart attack at the Honda Classic in February. As chilling as it is for Bohn to consider, if he had failed to make the cut at the Honda at the end of February, he very likely would not have survived to celebrate his 43rd birthday on April 24. He said that had he not parred the last four holes at PGA National, a treacherous stretch, to make the cut with no strokes to spare, he would have showered, packed his suitcase, checked out of his room at the on-site hotel and headed to the airport for the next flight to Atlanta, where he lives in the suburbs with his wife, Tewana, and their sons, Conner and Cameron. “I would have never gotten checked out if I hadn’t made the cut,” Bohn said. “I just didn’t think it was severe enough.”But with two more rounds ahead of him, Bohn asked to see a doctor, hoping for an infusion of energy. He expected to be sent on his way after receiving an antibiotic for the bronchitis that had laid him low the week before. But when the paramedics arrived at his side and looked at an electrocardiogram, they said they needed to get him to the hospital posthaste. Further testing at the catheterization laboratory at Palm Beach Gardens Medical Center revealed that Bohn’s left anterior descending artery, commonly known as the widowmaker, was 99 percent blocked.The next day, instead of playing his third round, Bohn underwent a procedure in which a stent was used to open his blocked artery. After a six-week convalescence, Bohn, a two-time PGA Tour winner, returned and has made one cut in three starts.“My physicians said that if I hadn’t asked for a doctor, I probably would have died either in the hotel room or on the plane,” Bohn said. “You hear of people saying, ‘Oh, I don’t feel real well, I’m just going to go lay down,’ and then they never wake up. That’s kind of the position I was in.”In retrospect, Bohn said, he should have known his heart might be a ticking bomb. After his first round of the Honda Classic, he experienced a tightness in his chest that caused him to type “chest pressure” in a Google search. He stopped scanning the results when his eyes fell on what he thought was the most plausible explanation. “It said when bronchitis turns to pneumonia there can be that sensation of pressure in your chest,” Bohn said. “I didn’t notice anything about a heart attack.” Then again, you do not see what you are not looking for. His family had no history of heart disease, Bohn said. Or so they thought. After his hospitalization, Bohn’s 72-year-old mother, Carol, decided to move up her annual checkup. She has a healthy diet and an exercise regimen that includes daily walks. “She’s the last person you’d expect to have anything wrong with her heart,” Bohn said.His mother had an EKG and an echocardiogram. Neither showed any abnormalities. Her doctor recommended an exercise stress test, which she completed the week her son returned to competition at the RBC Heritage in Hilton Head Island, S.C. Bohn had just grinded to shoot a 69 to make the cut when he received a call from his mother. “She said, ‘I’m in the hospital, my doctors are saying I have a lot of blockage,’ ” he said. Three days later, Bohn’s mother underwent triple bypass surgery.Bohn became emotional at the thought that his health scare might have indirectly saved his mother’s life.“I’d have a heart attack every week to save my mom,” he said.Since Bohn’s return to golf, friends and strangers alike have told him that his health scare motivated them to get physicals. His fellow competitors have wrestled with their own mortality.Johnson Wagner, who played in a group with Bohn in the first two rounds of the Honda Classic, said: “I remember seeing him in the locker room after the second round, and he looked exhausted, like he had grinded on a tough golf course to make the cut on the number. Then I found out an hour and a half later he had had a heart attack and actually was in the middle of it the entire time.”Wagner recalled Bohn’s approach on 17 in the second round of the Honda Classic. It was a gutsy shot to a difficult pin that Bohn pulled off. He reacted by clutching his chest and stumbling backward. At the time, Wagner had assumed Bohn was playing to the gallery — and on Friday, Bohn said he had been — but from now on, whenever he sees a competitor react like that, he will involuntarily shudder.Wagner was so shaken, he vowed to give up tobacco because it elevates his heart rate. But what can he do about competition, which also makes his heart race?“I feel like, since Jason’s incident, I’ve been on the cut line every week, and I feel like I’m having a heart attack,” he said. “Not to make light of his situation, but it makes me wonder. I’ve actually panicked about it a little bit. I think, Am I having a heart attack or is it just nerves and the moment?” While he was away, Bohn missed the tingling limbs, the lightheadedness, the feeling of the club resting heavy in his hands as he prepared to pull off a difficult shot in the heat of competition. “In Hilton Head, I was really grinding to make the cut,” Bohn said, “and, man, I really felt it.”That sensation, he added, is what he loves most about golf.“It’s not necessarily the wins, because you come out on top very few times unless you’re some people,” Bohn said. “I think it’s the feelings of the grind, when you have a difficult shot and you execute it. That’s what everyone is so hooked on.”In moments of high stress on the golf course, Bohn said, he does not worry that what he is feeling is the onset of another heart attack.“It’s pretty amazing,” he said. “My cardiologists and everybody have built me a great level of comfort to know that I probably will never have another one.”Advertisement