AdvertisementSupported byBy Andrew KehOKLAHOMA CITY — It may be hard, watching LaMarcus Aldridge bop and twirl through these playoffs, to recall the days much earlier this season when his play was not so poised.Aldridge, 30, joined the San Antonio Spurs last summer on a four-year deal worth $84 million. He had made four All-Star teams with the Portland Trail Blazers, the only N.B.A. team for which he had played. But San Antonio represented a rarefied new environment, one with its own inscrutable language, distinguished culture and sophisticated style of play.David West, another new signee last summer, remembered commiserating with Aldridge as they waded through their first weeks and months together.“We always talked about it, trying to figure it out,” said West, 35, a 13-year veteran in the league. “It probably wasn’t until a couple months in where you say, ‘O.K., I got it.’ You start to recognize the hand signals, eye contact with guys, and everything else. It just came with time.”The efforts have been vividly realized in the Spurs’ Western Conference semifinal series against the Oklahoma City Thunder. San Antonio holds a lead of two games to one after an impressive road victory at Chesapeake Energy Arena, and Aldridge has scored 103 points in the three games so far.Aldridge’s numbers in Game 3 — 24 points, while shooting 8 for 21 from the field — represented a downturn from the ridiculously high standard he set in his first two games. Yet the Spurs never stopped giving Aldridge the ball, reinforcing the notion that he and Kawhi Leonard will be the pillars on which the team will rest its fortunes this postseason.It was pointed out to Aldridge after the game that, for all the talk through the season about his subsuming himself into the Spurs’ group, in the past three games he resembled the individually dominant player he had been in Portland.“It’s not about me,” he said. “It’s about the team. If it ends up being like that, then fine. But I’m just doing what the game gives me.”In Game 1, Aldridge scored 38 points without playing the fourth quarter. He scored 41 points in Game 2, making 33 of his 44 shot attempts in the two games.Midrange play has become unfashionable in the bombs-away league of today, but Aldridge has at least temporarily restored a measure of sheen to it.The Spurs have built their reputation on passing and movement, but they have been more than happy to let Aldridge engage in a more ponderous form of post-up play. With the Thunder showing him different defensive looks, Aldridge — with a combination of footwork, strength and shot-making ability — has easily dismantled most of them.“He’s taking his time, being patient, not forcing anything, being smart,” the Spurs’ Danny Green said. “He’s doing a lot for us and taking a lot of pressure off us offensively, because he’s carrying that load. We have to have him continue to do that.”After Aldridge scored at will in Game 2, much of the discussion during a three-day layoff centered on how the Thunder might approach him in their next meeting and whether they might double-team him more often.There was a simple tension that underpinned the discussion: Employing a second Thunder defender to help cover Aldridge would unbalance the Oklahoma City setup and risk revving up the Spurs’ passing offense. Yet the public was watching Aldridge slowly gobble up the Thunder on his own.Aldridge was curious, too, and he quickly discerned a pattern as Game 3 unfolded.“When I tried to go quick to the baseline, they doubled early, and I think that’s their scheme,” he said. “If I try to go baseline, they’re going to double-team me. Other than that, they played me straight up.”Months ago, Aldridge had far different concerns. It took him a while to feel comfortable expressing himself in the Spurs’ system and to learn to use it to his benefit. He acknowledged to reporters in the first month that he did not feel like himself, that the team’s “good-to-great passes” mantra was reverberating inside his head at all times.“It’s almost like learning a different language,” guard Patty Mills said of what Aldridge and other new players experience upon joining the team.Aldridge commended Coach Gregg Popovich for putting him and the other new players in positions to succeed, giving them options down the stretch with which Popovich knew they would feel comfortable.Green said there was nothing to worry about. “He has the sets down pat,” Green said of Aldridge. “He knows the sets better than most of the guys on the team.”It was not as if the acclimation process had particularly harmed the Spurs. The team won 67 regular-season games, and Aldridge made the All-Star team. He averaged 18 points per game in the regular season, down from the 23.3 he averaged in his final two seasons with Portland. But he was taking an average of 6.2 fewer shots per game this season than in those last two seasons with Portland. The increase in his shot attempts in the playoffs has been by design.“He’s been rounding into form, and we’ve been pushing him to do it because we know the type of player he is,” West said. “That initial time when he got here, he was trying to figure himself out, find his way. But we just need him to be himself, and the rest of us will adjust to him and Kawhi.”More important than Aldridge’s personal numbers, then, has been the continuing, subtle dynamic in which he has joined Leonard — himself groomed from a young age with the Spurs — to gradually take the team’s gearshifts from Tim Duncan and other linchpin veterans.Duncan, 40, played around seven minutes at the start of each half in Game 3 and scored 2 points in all. He appeared on the court for two seconds in the fourth quarter, merely to inbound the ball to Leonard, and the moment felt indicative of something larger. It was a funny thing to ask of a five-time champion and 15-time N.B.A. All-Star, one who had been cooling on the bench all game. But as Duncan settled back in his seat, his broad smile seemed to indicate how well it has all gone.Advertisement