The chorus was amplified by the megaphones of social media and also by the old-fashioned snowball effect in a time of societal shifts and global tension.
Global Sports By                     
 CHRISTOPHER CLAREY
 
DEC. 20, 2017
It was the year when athletes got political again, very political.By the time December arrived, it seemed more routine than incendiary when Lindsey Vonn, the star American skier, made it plain in a CNN interview that she would not be accepting an invitation to the White House if it were extended after the coming Winter Olympics.She said she would be representing her nation at the Games but not President Trump.“I am proud to be an American, and I want our country to continue to be a symbol of hope, compassion, inclusion and world unity,” Vonn said later, in another sign of the times, on her Instagram account. “My travels around the world have recently made clear that this is no longer how people view the United States. You cannot pick up a newspaper or turn on the TV in Europe without noticing how people are questioning our direction.”In a different era, Vonn, with her extensive list of corporate sponsors and hard-earned prominence in a niche sport, might have been the sort of well-entrenched figure who would have determined that she had much more to lose than to gain by taking a stand (or a knee) on a polarizing matter.There are still ample risks: see Colin Kaepernick’s current employment status after leading the way on national anthem protests in the N.F.L., or the menacing messages Vonn said she received from Trump supporters.AdvertisementBut there is no doubt that Vonn was part of a sports chorus in 2017.“I think ‘take a knee’ has really taken on a life of its own and spearheaded everything else that’s been going on,” said the former tennis champion Martina Navratilova, 61, who came out as a lesbian and often spoke up — to her own commercial detriment — during her remarkable career. “Things always kind of operate by waxing and waning. This has been a big spurt, and it’s not done yet, because it hasn’t really been resolved one way or the other as far as I can tell.”The chorus has been amplified by the megaphones of social media and also by the old-fashioned snowball effect in a time of societal shifts and global tension, not all of it generated by the American president.AdvertisementWhen one superstar goes public with strong personal views, it makes it less risky for the next. There is also the mentor factor. When a leading coach, like Steve Kerr of the Golden State Warriors or Gregg Popovich of the San Antonio Spurs, is so outspoken — and eloquent — on political issues, it is less risky for players to follow their lead.“Maybe during the Michael Jordan era, there was the idea that sponsors would frown upon this sort of thing, but the consequences I think are a lot more complex,” said Roger Pielke Jr., a political scientist and the director of the Sports Governance Center at the University of Colorado Boulder. “As athletes cross the lines that were maybe once taboo and they learn that the consequences are either not negative or, if you’re LeBron James or Steph Curry, maybe even positive, I think we’ll see more of it because that’s the incentive structure.”Could “Just Say It” become the new mantra to sell shoes?That depends on whether this surge in athlete activism is truly a new paradigm or whether it is part of the same cycle that led from Muhammad Ali and other Vietnam-era sports stars to the apolitical, resolutely mercantile approach of Jordan and Tiger Woods in a less fraught time.“I think now because of the situation we have in our country, reporters are more apt to ask political questions of athletes,” Navratilova said. “Kaepernick kind of opened that door again. We thought we were past it, but we’re not. When Obama was elected, I was like, O.K., we don’t need to worry about racism nearly as much anymore. And now it’s worse. We’re going backwards, which is why I think the athletes are speaking out more, because we are going backwards on so many fronts.”What is evident is that the internet’s capacity to make the distant seem personal is not going away. Whether they are asked political questions or not, athletes, like other celebrities, will continue to be able to deliver their messages — be they solipsistic or deeply civic — directly and immediately to the public, no gatekeepers required.The paradox is that Kaepernick, the former San Francisco 49ers quarterback, is more symbol than spokesman (he has declined many offers from universities and others to speak). His decision to sit and later kneel during the national anthem before games in 2016 in protest over racial inequality and police violence was the spark that led to the flame and other anthem protests from prominent athletes, including the American women’s soccer star Megan Rapinoe.AdvertisementBut the flame turned into a genuine bonfire only in September when Trump politicized the issue by criticizing the patriotism of N.F.L. players and urging owners to take action.It was the N.F.L. that mandated players be on the field for the anthem, beginning in 2009.“By the N.F.L. using athletes as props to try to market America as part of the N.F.L., they also gave athletes power to protest,” Pielke said.The protests angered Trump, and led to tweets that involved the president and two of the biggest American stars: Curry and James.When Trump withdrew a White House invitation to Curry — the point guard who had led the Golden State Warriors to the N.B.A. title but who did not plan on making the usual celebratory appearance at the White House — James weighed in on Twitter.“U bum @StephenCurry30 already said he ain’t going! So therefore ain’t no invite. Going to White House was a great honor until you showed up.”Athletes not only used their celebrity and new communication tools to get political in 2017. J.J. Watt, the star defensive lineman for the Houston Texans, started a fund-raising campaign to help  Houston after Hurricane Harvey and raised more than $37 million.Others, like members of the United States women’s national soccer and hockey teams, reaped the financial rewards after taking strong public stands about their right to better pay and working conditions.But while athlete activism was most audible in the United States in 2017, sports figures spoke out elsewhere, too.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.Prominent Australian athletes — including Australian Rules football players and rugby league players — urged their compatriots to vote yes in the same-sex marriage postal survey that eventually led to Australia legalizing same-sex marriage in December.AdvertisementIn Spain, athletes were weighing in or being asked to weigh in on Catalonia’s independence referendum, despite the Spanish government deeming it unconstitutional.Rafael Nadal, back at No. 1 in the tennis rankings, did not hesitate to respond when asked. “I can’t imagine Spain without Catalonia, and Catalonia without Spain; I don’t want to see it,” said Nadal, who is from Majorca and grew up speaking Catalan and Spanish.But more than 20 other Catalan athletes and coaches openly declared their support for independence. Pep Guardiola, the Manchester City coach and former Barcelona star and coach, spoke at a pro-independence rally earlier in the year.Though the Spanish government would declare the referendum illegal and take measures to block it, Gerard Piqué, the star Barcelona defender, was adamant that the Catalans should have had the right to vote.In the wake of the violence sparked by the government crackdown, Barcelona played a home game at the cavernous Camp Nou stadium against Las Palmas behind closed doors without spectators. Piqué was later booed and whistled as he took part in a Spanish national team training session.Though Piqué declined to say how he would have voted, he offered to leave the Spanish national team if Coach Julian Lopetegui believed it was best (Piqué stayed).“Politics is a drag, but why shouldn’t I express myself?” Piqué told reporters. “I understand those players who don’t want to say anything. We’re footballers but we’re people too. Why can a journalist or a mechanic express themselves but not a footballer?”But unlike the biggest stars and leading coaches in the N.B.A., the planet’s leading men’s soccer players have been much more reluctant to get political or even topical. They are restricted by club and national team policies and pressures, by concerns about sponsor reaction but also by their own proclivities.
CreditChang W. Lee/The New York Times        In 2015, Cristiano Ronaldo abruptly and profanely ended a CNN en Español television interview, which he had agreed to with the aim of promoting a new line of headphones, when he was asked about the FIFA corruption scandal and the 2022 World Cup in Qatar.Advertisement“I don’t care about FIFA, and Qatar!” he said.But there is no doubt the impact would be powerful if the Ronaldos, Messis and Neymars of the world were to find their voices on societal, political and soccer governance issues.The questions and opportunities will keep coming. There are plenty of flash points ahead, including next year’s World Cup in Russia, where human rights remain a major issue, just as they did when the Russians hosted the Sochi Winter Olympics in 2014.Beyond that are the European Games in Minsk in authoritarian Belarus in 2019, the 2022 Winter Olympics in Beijing and the 2022 World Cup in Qatar.“If you look at the calendar in the short term to 2018 and then beyond to 2022, you have some of the biggest human rights abusers hosting the biggest sports events,” said Minky Worden, director of global initiatives at Human Rights Watch. “With Russia at least, you have a perfect storm of all the major human rights abuses. They had North Korean slave labor building the St. Petersburg stadium. They’ve got laws restricting freedom of protest and expression. They’ve been arresting journalists as recently as last week and crushing civil society and of course there’s still the anti-gay law on the books with the added terrifying exhibit of the recent anti-gay purge in Chechnya.”Will athletes speak out in 2018 in a way they did not or felt they could not in Sochi? Or will they decline to take the risk, which Navratilova makes clear is still there.“I was lucky because I played an individual sport and couldn’t be kept out,” she said. “If I’d been playing on a college basketball team and I come out, the coach doesn’t put me in, and I don’t get to play. With Kaepernick, if he were a golfer or tennis player, he would still be playing, so rotten luck.”A version of this article appears in print on December 22, 2017, on Page B8 of the New York edition with the headline: The Year of ‘Just Say It’.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.See More »