AdvertisementSupported byOn Pro HockeyBy Ben ShpigelIn many visiting locker rooms, space is an indulgence, not a basic courtesy. They are small because that is how visiting locker rooms are supposed to be: skate, shower, get dressed, get out.Not so at Barclays Center, and a good thing, too. Every available inch was necessary Friday night for the Tampa Bay Lightning, whose players fanned out to recap their 2-1 overtime victory in Game 4 against the Islanders, in each corner a different catalyst.On one side, goalie Ben Bishop, who saved 27 of 28 shots, including 15 in a tenuous first period.In front of his locker, the hulking defenseman Jason Garrison, whose one-timer at 1 minute 34 seconds pushed the Islanders to a 3-1 series deficit and the brink of elimination.Over here, Alex Killorn, whose mucking in the corner freed the puck and initiated the sequence that led to the tying goal.And there, Nikita Kucherov, whose affinity for scoring at critical postseason moments evokes Brad Richards’s and Ruslan Fedotenko’s sorcery from the Lightning’s 2004 Stanley Cup run.“I like playing under pressure,” Kucherov said.Among the four conference finalists from last season, only Tampa Bay remains in the playoffs. The others — Chicago, Los Angeles and the Rangers — lost in the first round, ousted by teams that had undergone significant retooling.St. Louis dealt T. J. Oshie for Troy Brouwer and integrated younger players to a robust nucleus. San Jose changed goalies and coaches. Pittsburgh acquired Phil Kessel and Nick Bonino to bolster its offense and also fired its coach.Tampa Bay is the outlier, a contender that assessed its roster, loved its scoring and youth and depth, and then sent it, largely untouched, back onto the ice for training camp. The group that came within two victories of a Stanley Cup last year, led by defenseman Victor Hedman and Kucherov and Bishop, is older, better and just as opportunistic.It is also, after winning in overtime when trailing in the third period for the second time in four nights, one victory from returning to the Eastern Conference finals, with Game 5 scheduled for Sunday in Florida.“They haven’t raised the Stanley Cup, so that’s the one thing they haven’t seen,” Coach Jon Cooper said. “But pretty much everything until then, they have. I think that’s what puts us in the position that we’re in. We’ve gone through this. There’s no real panic button anymore.”Not anymore, though, as Cooper acknowledged, there was “kind of a little bit of a mourning period” late in the season, when the Lightning lost two crucial members to injury: the top-two defenseman Anton Stralman (broken leg), understated in his brilliance, and their leading goal scorer, Steven Stamkos (blood clot in arm).“If we had found this had happened to Stammer a couple days before Game 1 of Detroit, I don’t know if mentally we would have been able to take that,” Cooper said, referring to the Lightning’s first-round opponent. “But there was a little bit of time to gather our thoughts.”Killorn said: “I don’t want to say we were fortunate, but we had a couple games left in the regular season to kind of adapt to playing without them.”The night Tampa Bay announced Stamkos’s ailment, with two games remaining before the playoffs, General Manager Steve Yzerman told reporters how the Red Wings had soared without him one spring — and they did, winning two rounds in 1988 before he came back in time to lose in the conference finals.That the Lightning could benefit from Stamkos’s or Stralman’s presence is indisputable, though it is unclear when either may return. But just as in Pittsburgh, where the Penguins regrouped after Evgeni Malkin was injured and won 14 of 16 games, the Lightning recovered and, as Killorn said, adapted.Opportunities awarded to players like the 21-year-old wing Jonathan Drouin, who emerged as an offensive dynamo (8 points, nine games) after his trade request went unfulfilled, and Garrison, who absorbed some of Stralman’s minutes, were snatched.The Lightning adopted a mantra, that they did not want to let those be the final games Stamkos and Stralman played. Tampa Bay has gone 9-5 in their absence, 7-2 in the playoffs.“It’s really exciting just to know that there’s the potential for them to come back also, right?” Killorn said. “You see what we’re doing without them and you realize they’re around the corner and they could be back with us next series.”The Islanders might disagree with his presumptuousness, especially after they outplayed Tampa Bay for long stretches in both games, and on Friday had far more scoring chances.All the Lightning needed was one such chance in the third period, and they capitalized, with Kucherov — reunited on a line with Killorn and Tyler Johnson that pummeled Detroit last round — ripping a short-side one-timer through a hole the approximate size of a millipede.“Any shot’s a good shot,” Kucherov said, and those are indeed words to live by.Again his handiwork forced overtime, his eighth goal over all in nine games, and it vaulted him into third place in Lightning postseason history with 19.Already.He is 22.“He’s proven he’s not a one-hit wonder,” Cooper said.Kucherov most definitely is not. And neither is his team.Advertisement