
On Baseball By                     
 HARVEY ARATON
 
MAY 7, 2016
That baseball visionary, George Steinbrenner, was way ahead of Brian Cashman. A generation ago, the Boss was already trending with a bold new plan in the back end of the Yankees’ bullpen.His team won the 1977 World Series, boasting a closer, Sparky Lyle, who won 13 games, saved 26, pitched to a 2.17 E.R.A. and gratefully accepted the American League’s Cy Young Award.What did George do? He signed a premier closer, Rich Gossage, known as Goose, and sent Lyle onto the winter banquet circuit in a foul mood.A young reporter at The New York Post was tipped that Lyle had sounded off at an event in New Jersey. He called Lyle at home, having never had the pleasure of a conversation with him. No matter. Lyle sounded off to a stranger. A scoop on a screaming tabloid back page beckoned.AdvertisementGossage, next on the call list, agreed that the concept of two high-profile closers was crazy.Larry Rothschild, the Yankees’ current pitching coach, listened to this piquant slice of club history Saturday morning and smiled.Advertisement“The closers went multiple innings back then,” he said. “Now it’s different. Now it takes three guys to do what sometimes one guy would do.”No offense. Just fact. Back in the day when bullpen aces were no quiche-eating, one-inning wonders, Lyle could throw 137 innings, his 1977 career high. In his 17 seasons as the Yankees’ closer, Mariano Rivera, by most accounts the best in baseball history, averaged fewer than 70.Well into the age of specialists for specific innings, we come to the imminent return of Aroldis Chapman to active baseball duty on Monday after a suspension by Major League Baseball for violating its domestic violence policy — and the much-anticipated reshuffling of Manager Joe Girardi’s late-inning bullpen machinations.Cashman — the last general manager hired (and never fired) by Steinbrenner — made a stunning acquisition with his deal for the southpaw Chapman, who routinely hits 100 miles per hour on the radar gun, amazing to no less a flamethrower than Dellin Betances.“The difference between me and him is that I’ll hit 100” once in a while, Betances said, “where he hits it consistently. He’s a physical specimen, something else.”Cashman wanted to enhance the faded Yankee championship brand by making opponents cower if they trailed after six innings. The last-place team in the American League East, the Yankees have been taking on water in most other places, their disabled list increasingly inhabited by the aged and chronically infirm.In the rearrangement of relievers that Girardi said would most likely take effect as soon as the appropriate game situation presented itself, it’s another story altogether. There, perfection gets demoted.AdvertisementThat would be Andrew Miller and his 0.00 E.R.A., after Friday night’s rare flirtation with failure. A four-out, 36-pitch effort ended with Miller leaving the bases loaded in a 3-2 victory, recording his sixth save — after 36 last season, when he was honored as the American League’s best relief pitcher.Get the big sports news, highlights and analysis from Times journalists, with distinctive takes on games and some behind-the-scenes surprises, delivered to your inbox every week.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.Miller strolled into the clubhouse Saturday morning, ducked his lean, 6-foot-7 frame into his dressing stall, and spoke so dispassionately about his anticipated move to an eighth-inning setup role (with Betances taking over the seventh) that he sounded like a decaffeinated television analyst discussing it from the booth.“Might be a little bit of an emotional adjustment, trying to prepare quicker but not get too amped up,” he said. “I don’t think it’ll be too big an issue.”In a career of routine change — five teams in 11 seasons, starter to reliever to closer to setup — Miller, 30, has apparently found a healthy context, along with the four-year, $36 million contract Cashman provided him before last season.Betances, 28, also said he was all in with the program. Asked if he believed that he eventually would be the Yankees’ closer, he said: “I can’t get out of my lane. That’s where I’m at. Trying to be the best I can at that.”Joba Chamberlain once was heralded as Rivera’s heir. Who knows what the future brings? Who can even say how long Cashman will have the luxury of keeping Chapman, Miller and Betances?Cashman considered moving Miller after acquiring Chapman, who will be a free agent after this season. The three-man plan could be on a two-month tryout. If the Yankees settle into or around the A.L. East cellar, how could Cashman resist trading from strength?The late-inning relievers would be his best assets with which to inject more youth and hope into what, until this weekend, has played like an atrophying team. But on Saturday at Yankee Stadium, the Yankees chased Boston’s ace, David Price, and beat the Red Sox for a second straight day, 8-2.AdvertisementCashman expressed his frustration recently with what he called underperforming talent, but he has been at this for two decades and has to know that this team is far from his finest.If it fails to get into the postseason picture by July, count on calls for Cashman to produce the kind of coup Sandy Alderson scored for the Mets when he landed Noah Syndergaard and Travis d’Arnaud for the aging knuckleballer R. A. Dickey.Yes, it’s early. Chapman, who will be at the Stadium on Sunday to meet with reporters, should be on many days a sight to behold. Miller and Betances are formidable.The Yankees won Saturday behind Nathan Eovaldi’s eight strong innings, coasting without the services of Betances, who had pitched in three straight games, and Miller, who shook his head when told that Friday night’s wild ninth inning had made for riveting television.“I wish it hadn’t been,” he said, preferring and usually delivering less stress in the workplace.Friday night’s game — an emotional win against their fiercest rival — may have pumped some much-needed adrenaline into the Yankees’ collective body. It also illustrated why Cashman made the Chapman deal. Ordinary or old in too many places, the Yankees really needed to be dominant somewhere.Nor must Girardi stick to the 7-8-9 script every time the Yankees have a lead after six innings. He has always been considered a shrewd handler of his bullpen. Let the juggling begin.“I think it always depends on what the situation calls for,” Girardi said.Sparky Lyle might agree. In 1978, even with Gossage as the closer-in-chief, Lyle saved nine games, won nine more, and received another World Series ring. The Boss was right.A version of this article appears in print on May 8, 2016, on Page SP4 of the New York edition with the headline: Updating a Page in Steinbrenner’s Bullpen Guide.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.See More »