AdvertisementSupported byKeeping ScoreBy Benjamin HoffmanIf Jonas Valanciunas is emerging as the star many have assumed he would become, then it may not matter if Kyle Lowry and DeMar DeRozan find their missing jump shots anytime soon.On Thursday, his last day as a 23-year-old, Valanciunas, the starting center for the Toronto Raptors, led his team to a hard-fought win in Game 2 of a conference semifinal matchup with the Miami Heat. His display of ability and determination was just one more indication that, at the end of his fourth season, his long-predicted breakout had finally come.In Game 3 on Saturday, a 95-91 Toronto victory, he built on that momentum, scoring 16 points and grabbing 12 rebounds before leaving the game with a sprained ankle with 8 minutes 53 seconds left in the third quarter. He played just over 22 minutes as Toronto took a two-games-to-one lead in the series. His condition was listed as day to day.In Thursday’s game, as they have in so many others in the playoffs, the Raptors were beginning to crumble after a stretch of dominance, but that was when Valanciunas came alive. He scored 11 of his 15 points in the fourth quarter and overtime while fighting for offensive rebounds and playing solid defense.“He did that, and we didn’t even run any plays for him,” DeRozan told reporters after the game. “It was just him being hungry. I think he’s definitely the reason that we won.”Perhaps more remarkable than Valanciunas’s offense was his defensive performance late in Thursday’s game against Hassan Whiteside, who himself left the floor Saturday with an injury, to his right knee, in the second quarter.Defense is generally considered the weakest part of Valanciunas’s game. It was a subject that was apparently raised by his Toronto teammates heading into a series that, on paper, is an awfully tough matchup considering Whiteside’s prowess inside, Dwyane Wade’s vast playoff experience and the overall depth of the Miami roster.“I told Jonas that if he will play as hard on defense as he does on offense, we will win this whole series,” DeMarre Carroll told reporters.In truth, Valanciunas’s breakout has encompassed far more than his solid performance in Game 2, which ended with him having compiled 15 points, 12 rebounds, 3 steals, 2 assists and just 1 personal foul in 38 minutes. While Lowry and DeRozan have struggled — they were a combined 12 for 75 on 3-point attempts in the playoffs before Lowry broke out with a 33-point performance on Saturday that featured 5-for-8 shooting from behind the arc — and the second-seeded Raptors have seemed to be on the verge of fading away, Valanciunas has put the team on his broad shoulders, indicating that the four-year, $64 million contract extension he signed before the season might prove to be a bargain. In nine postseason games before Saturday, Valanciunas, a 7-footer taken with the fifth overall pick of the 2011 draft, averaged 14.9 points, 12.1 rebounds, 1.6 blocks and a steal per game. While impressive, those numbers are suppressed by his having averaged just 29.2 minutes a game in a rotation with Bismack Biyombo, a defensive specialist. Of the 62 lineups the Raptors had used in the playoffs, none included both of their talented young centers. If he continues like this, Valanciunas will be the first player in N.B.A. playoff history to average 14 points, 12 rebounds and 1.5 blocks while playing less than 30 minutes a game.If you adjusted Valanciunas’s numbers to a per-36-minutes rate — closer to a typical amount of playing time for a starter — they increased to 18.3 points, 14.9 rebounds, 1.9 blocks and 1.2 steals through Game 2. Put another way, Valanciunas has been the second-most-important player of the N.B.A. playoffs, according to the personal impact estimate, a statistic tracked by NBA.com that tries to assign a numerical value to how much a player has affected his team’s performance. His score, 20, trailed only that of Indiana’s Paul George, who had a 21.7 in seven games as his team was eliminated by Toronto.Should Valanciunas and Toronto get through Miami, it would be a huge step for the Raptors, yet the possibility of facing Cleveland in the next round would be even more daunting. Still, for a team that has become synonymous with collapse, Valanciunas is showing himself to be a pillar that it can rely on. And perhaps that can take some pressure off the Raptors’ struggling stars.Advertisement