By MIKE VORKUNOVSEPT. 27, 2016
David Ortiz ambled up to home plate in the seventh inning Tuesday night at Yankee Stadium in a situation he has often confronted.Over his career, he has made a generation’s worth of memories for Red Sox fans by bullying their once-imperious rival. Ortiz helped lead the unforgettable comeback in the 2004 American League Championship Series, breaking a famed curse. On Tuesday, the stakes were important but not monumental — he could launch the hit that brought Boston the American League East title and inched the Yankees closer to mathematical elimination.In the first inning, with the game barely underway, the fans greeted him with a mix of applause and jeers. This three-game series is most likely his final trip to Yankee Stadium before he retires at the end of this season, and the mixed reaction was a reflection of the feelings of Yankees fans. In the seventh, however, he was greeted with a familiar enmity — the chorus of boos that Ortiz said he prefers. The Yankees, having already blown a three-run lead and now caught in a tie game with Red Sox runners on first and second base, were teetering.“I’m like, what are the chances that he’s coming up in this situation?” Yankees Manager Joe Girardi said, recalling his thoughts. “It’s just kind of the way fate had it tonight.”AdvertisementWhen Girardi uttered those words after the game, he had the security of knowing the result. He could chuckle about the sequence that led to the Yankees’ 6-4 win over the Red Sox, with Ortiz failing in the seventh and again in the ninth, when he struck out to end the game. At that point, Girardi knew that Boston had not clinched the division title in New York and the Yankees’ playoff hopes, however dim, remained flickering as they remained four games behind the Baltimore Orioles for the A.L.’s second wild-card spot, with five games left in the regular season.AdvertisementBut in the moment, as Ortiz stood in the left-handed batter’s box in the seventh, the outcome was most definitely in doubt. Girardi left Blake Parker, a 31-year-old right-handed pitcher the club picked up off waivers last month, on the mound.Parker began the at-bat with two off-speed pitches to work an 0-2 count and then threw two more — one that Ortiz took for a ball and another that he fouled off. Parker threw him another, a curveball that Ortiz bashed into the infield dirt for an inning-ending groundout to shortstop.Get the big sports news, highlights and analysis from Times journalists, with distinctive takes on games and some behind-the-scenes surprises, delivered to your inbox every week.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.The Yankees took advantage of their reprieve in the bottom of the inning when the rookie Tyler Austin hit a two-run homer off David Price into the right-field stands to break the tie and give them a 6-4 lead that stood for the rest of the game.Ortiz came up in the ninth with two outs and two runners on. But Tyler Clippard struck him out with a 3-2 split-finger fastball that Ortiz swung through.“I wouldn’t have it any other way,” said Clippard, who recorded the save. “If I’m going to get it done, I’d rather get it done against David Ortiz.”The regard for Ortiz was clear, not just from the crowd but also from the Yankees. General Manager Brian Cashman bemoaned the Yankees’ poor history against him. Cashman was unsentimental about Ortiz’s retirement, especially since the 40-year-old slugger had posted a .970 on-base plus slugging percentage against the Yankees over his career.Girardi marveled at Ortiz’s final season, when he has hit 37 home runs and leads the A.L. in O.P.S. Girardi, too, was happily awaiting Ortiz’s exit from the stage.AdvertisementFor his part, Ortiz has come to enjoy his trips to New York. He revels in playing the antihero.“Yankee Stadium, it might be my favorite place to hit, to play, regardless,” he said before the game. “The dimensions are perfect for a left-handed power hitter. All the emotions, all the adrenaline, all the competition — competing against the Yankees has been outstanding.”The rivalry may have reached its zenith during Ortiz’s career, but it hasn’t been much this season. The loss Tuesday broke Boston’s 11-game winning streak, which began with a walk-off win over the Yankees 13 days ago at Fenway Park. That defeat sent the Yankees tumbling down the standings, and they seem likely to miss the postseason for the third time in four seasons. It will be considered a disappointing year by the way they measure their success.But the season has produced positives for the Yankees, as well. Gary Sanchez, 23, has stood out as a potential franchise pillar. He homered again Tuesday, hitting his 20th in just 51 career games. In doing so, he tied the major league record for the quickest 20 home runs to start a career. Didi Gregorius, still just 26, also homered against the Red Sox in his breakout season and now has 20 on the season.“There are some good things that have happened,” Girardi said. Still, he said, the season was frustrating because “we’re about winning championships, and whenever you fall short there’s a ton of disappointment. It’s very difficult.”An article in some editions on Wednesday about the Yankees’ 6-4 victory over the Boston Red Sox misstated the number of games it took the Yankees’ Gary Sanchez to hit 20 home runs. It was 51, not 50. The error was repeated in a picture caption in some copies.A version of this article appears in print on September 28, 2016, on Page B9 of the New York edition with the headline: Ortiz’s Farewell Visit Begins With a Rare Failure as the Yankees Hold On.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.