By BRAD SPURGEONOCT. 21, 2016
AUSTIN, Tex. — In the highly refined world of Formula One auto racing, there is little room for such lowly sentiments as road rage.But try telling a racer to slow down to let a faster driver pass or, worse, watch that faster driver react to the slower one who is blocking his way. Sparks can fly. This season, they already have.The reason is a rule about racing etiquette that is stricter in Formula One than in most other series: the blue flag requires slower drivers to move aside and let faster ones pass during races.For a Formula One driver, a blue flag is seen as the equivalent of a white flag for a soldier, and it goes against the ethos of racing itself. The debate about the rule has split the series along rich and poor lines, with the top drivers and the leading manufacturers grumbling about teams that cannot keep up and the others arguing that they are in races to compete, not just to fill out the field. Some are refusing to go along.AdvertisementThis season, there has been a chorus of criticism for slower drivers who refused to make way, including from one driver who called another an “idiot” over the radio and from the Mercedes driver Lewis Hamilton, who made an obscene gesture in a heated situation.Advertisement“Blue flag, come on, blue flag!” Sebastian Vettel yelled as he seethed in his Ferrari behind Kevin Magnussen’s Renault during the Japanese Grand Prix two weeks ago. Vettel, locked in a battle with Hamilton, was furious at Magnussen for ignoring the signal to let Vettel pass.In most racing series, the rules about how lapped cars must act when pressed by faster ones are lax or nonexistent. In IndyCar, the United States-based open-wheel series, the first time a car is lapped, it may defend its position to remain on the lead lap. But any time he is lapped after that, the blue flag signals drivers that they must let faster cars pass. In Nascar, the blue flag comes with a stripe but is an optional “courtesy” flag — the only one of its kind in the series.In Formula One, however, if a driver ignores three waved blue flags in a row, he is penalized with a drive through the pits, a punishment detour that usually means the loss of several positions.“I never had blue flags in my life before this,” said Esteban Ocon, a rookie driver for the Manor team, one of the slowest in the series. He complained Thursday in Austin, which will host the United States Grand Prix this weekend, that slowing down to let a faster driver pass can cost between one and three seconds a lap.To drivers at the lower end of the season standings, that can mean the difference between scoring points or not, and keeping a job for next season and beyond. Faster drivers and their teams counter that that is not their problem.Get the big sports news, highlights and analysis from Times journalists, with distinctive takes on games and some behind-the-scenes surprises, delivered to your inbox every week.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.Two weekends ago in Japan, the rage came not only from Vettel, who was fighting Hamilton for third place, but from several other drivers, including Ferrari’s Kimi Raikkonen, who was fighting for fifth position. Raikkonen, a taciturn Finn who is nicknamed Iceman, was burning up over the refusal of the slower drivers to get out of his way.“They are one lap down, and I understand sometimes they have their own fight, but it’s not difficult to let people past,” Raikkonen said. “Some of them were just crazy.”AdvertisementBut Guenther Steiner, the director of the Haas team whose driver, Esteban Gutiérrez, is considered this year’s biggest blue-flag offender, asked, Whatever happened to racing?“If you’ve got a car so much quicker, you should be quick enough to overtake yourself and not complain,” Steiner said. “Are you racing-car drivers, or do you want everybody to move? We need to get a little bit more back to being racers — and if your car is so much better, just overtake him.”The blue-flag rule exists to add excitement, its supporters say, by allowing the leading cars to race one another. An opposing camp argues that if the leaders get stuck behind slower cars from time to time, it can help other fast cars catch up and battle for position, limiting the structural advantage some wealthy teams have over other ones. Moreover, these critics argue, if the rule were dropped, then the drivers in the slower pack could also more effectively race one another, providing a secondary show.Gutiérrez, the Mexican driver most often blamed for ignoring the flags, is desperate to save his career: This year, he has not scored a single point in the series standings, although five times he has finished in 11th position — one spot away from earning points. Losing precious seconds each time he is ordered to slow down by a blue flag makes it harder for him to hold his position and claim that desired point.In addition to being criticized by several drivers, Gutiérrez was belittled by the Mercedes team director, Toto Wolff, who said he was just cruising around. Gutiérrez responded with a tight smile.“The same way that Toto is trying to lose the least possible amount of time in a blue flag for his drivers, and trying to put more pressure on the F.I.A. to be more strict on that,” he said, referring to the International Automobile Federation by its French acronym, “I, as a driver, in getting the blue flag, I am trying to lose the least time possible as well, within the rules without affecting anyone.”At the Singapore Grand Prix last month, where Gutiérrez again finished 11th and was accused of blocking faster cars, he pointed out that he was desperate to keep ahead of another car because he was close to scoring his first points of the season.“I was pushing like you have no idea, in the whole race,” he said. “I know that Toto said that I was cruising around, so it is clear that he has not driven a Formula One car.”No one this season knows as well as Max Verstappen what a difference a faster car can make. After he moved to Red Bull from the slower Toro Rosso team in April, he immediately won his first race. From his new seat, his feelings on blue flags have changed.Advertisement“Before, you were a bit angry that you had to move out of the way,” he said. “Now you are the one overtaking them, and you are getting a bit angry with them because they are not moving out of the way.”A version of this article appears in print on October 22, 2016, on Page D1 of the New York edition with the headline: Formula One Has Some Seeing Red in Blue Flags.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.