
On Soccer By                     
 SAM BORDEN
 
FEB. 23, 2016
LONDON — More than 50 years ago, European soccer’s governing body instituted a quirky regulation designed to break ties in the two-game, home-and-home aggregate series that are so common in soccer. The away-goals rule, as it has become known, is, on the surface, quite simple: If two teams score the same number of goals over two games, the team that scores more away from home advances.And yet the function of the rule is a bit trickier. While sometimes the away-goals rule just seems weird — in 2003, for example, A.C. Milan and Inter Milan, which share a stadium, had their Champions League semifinal decided by away goals despite the fact both games were played at the San Siro — the more common debate is whether it is fair, particularly in an era where the rigors of travel for professional teams are not especially taxing. And does it make teams play too cautiously? Or not cautiously enough?This much is sure: away goals weigh heavily on every Champions League tie, and they did again here Tuesday, when Arsenal tried desperately to avoid conceding an away goal against Barcelona but, after more than an hour of resolve, finally buckled and lost, 2-0, at Emirates Stadium.Again, the result — at first glance — does not seem so disastrous. But Barcelona’s two away goals in the first leg of this round-of-16 series may feel like nearly twice that because, if Barcelona scores even one goal in the return leg at Camp Nou next month (and they haven’t been shut out there all season), then Arsenal will need to score at least three goals to advance. For a team that has recently failed to score against such unintimidating competition as Hull City, Southampton and Stoke City, such a task may seem altogether out of reach.Advertisement“The score is a very good one,” Barcelona Coach Luis Enrique said afterward, a wry smile across his face.Arsène Wenger, the longtime manager of Arsenal, his own complexion more closely resembling a wilted flower, said, “Barcelona is through, 95 percent certainly.” He added, more angrily, “Once again, exactly the same — exactly the same as Monaco.”AdvertisementWenger was referring to his team’s exit from the Champions League last season, when Monaco, despite being a heavy underdog, beat Arsenal, 3-1, in the first leg here before holding on for a 2-0 loss in the second leg and advancing on away goals. Wenger referred to that result repeatedly in the run-up to this game, imploring his players to be disciplined in defense and essentially admitting that he would be ecstatic with a scoreless draw.Pulling that off, though, is another matter. Arsenal held to its designed restraint in the first half, stifling Barcelona with, Enrique said, “every player behind the ball.” Barcelona’s three-pronged attack of Lionel Messi, Luis Suárez and Neymar struggled to find any sort of space or rhythm, and the best chances actually fell to Arsenal during its occasional forays forward.Yet none were converted. The biggest miss came after 20 minutes, when Alex Oxlade-Chamberlain ended up with the ball after a scramble in front of goal but, with space to either side, somehow opted to shoot the ball straight at Barcelona’s goalkeeper. The fans groaned, and on the sideline, Wenger spun around in disbelief.There were other opportunities, other missed moments by Alexis Sánchez and Olivier Giroud, among others. Still, Wenger would be satisfied so long as Barcelona was unfulfilled, too.Except then came the letdown. In the 72nd minute, a blasted clearance from Barcelona bounced toward midfield and Suarez corralled the ball but looked hemmed in by an Arsenal defender and the sideline. Undeterred, Suárez coolly slipped the ball through the Arsenal player’s legs, where Neymar ran to it. He charged into the Gunners’ penalty area and passed to Messi, who blasted a shot into the net and took off running toward the corner of the stadium where the Barcelona fans were jumping and dancing with glee.Get the big sports news, highlights and analysis from Times journalists, with distinctive takes on games and some behind-the-scenes surprises, delivered to your inbox every week.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.The Arsenal players, meanwhile, outwardly grumbled to each other, their frustration obvious.“We had to score at one point here, and that’s why we don’t deserve anything,” defender Per Mertesacker said. “You’ll never keep them quiet for 90 minutes.”AdvertisementWenger fumed. “They are better than us, and I believe everybody knows that,” he said. “But I think we could have won the game tonight.”While Arsenal’s fans were understandably disappointed with the result, there is also a bit of internal conflict regarding the team’s place in the continental competition this spring. Sad as the fans — and, perhaps, even the players — might be to exit the Champions League in the first knockout round for a sixth straight season, Arsenal is just 2 points behind Leicester City in the Premier League table, a tantalizing position that surely represents the club’s best chance to win its national championship in recent years.While Leicester City has nothing to focus on but the Premier League — the Foxes aren’t playing in Europe and are already eliminated from both English cup competitions — Arsenal is still alive in the F.A. Cup and, for the moment, also has Champions League matches on its schedule, making its end-of-season run-in far more congested than that of the team it is chasing. That reality is why Wenger was particularly frustrated last weekend, when Arsenal tied, 0-0, with Hull City in the F.A. Cup, meaning the two teams will have to play again to determine who advances.Barcelona, too, has a full slate of games — the Spanish league, the Copa del Rey final and the Champions League fill its calendar — but the defending European champions appear relentless. Messi added a penalty-kick goal 11 minutes after his opener on Tuesday, celebrated with his teammates again and jogged back up the field while the home fans headed for the exits.Their resignation was understandable. On a night they would have been happy to see zero goals, they left having seen something far worse: two goals that felt like more.A version of this article appears in print on February 24, 2016, on Page B9 of the New York edition with the headline: Arsenal Gives Up 2 Goals, and Possibly All Hope.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.See More »