By ANDREW DASFEB. 24, 2016
The FIFA presidential election that will take place Friday in Zurich increasingly looks to be a two-man race between Sheikh Salman bin Ebrahim al-Khalifa, the president of the Asian Football Confederation, and Gianni Infantino, the general secretary of UEFA, the sport’s governing body for Europe. But there are three other candidates in the race. Here is a look at where they stand, how they faltered and what might come next:■ Prince Ali bin al-Hussein, the president of Jordan’s soccer association and a former member of FIFA’s executive committee, mounted a surprisingly strong challenge to Sepp Blatter in FIFA’s last presidential election, held in May. But after receiving 73 votes to Mr. Blatter’s 133 on the first ballot, he bowed to the inevitable math and conceded. Unfortunately for Prince Ali, the reform mantle he took on last year has been embraced by all the candidates this time around, and the presence in the race of Mr. Infantino (from Europe) and Sheikh Salman (from Asia) has siphoned off his core support. Some FIFA watchers see Prince Ali as a possible kingmaker this week, but he still has his eye on the top job: He has tried to position himself as a compromise choice for those not supporting either of the favorites.■ Jérôme Champagne, a French soccer administrator who once worked inside FIFA’s leadership as an aide to Blatter, has been running for FIFA president for about two years — he failed to get on the ballot last time — but he does not appear to have either the money or the votes to be a serious contender this week. His shoestring campaign has not lacked for pluck, though. Mr. Champagne clearly maintains his punctuation-challenged, multilanguage Twitter account himself, and on his website, he has posted long letters to FIFA’s member federations blasting his rivals. He also boasts of having gained the endorsement of a who’s who of prominent soccer names. The problem is that they are not the people who will decide the election.■ When Tokyo Sexwale, a South African businessman, announced his intention to run, he seemed an intriguing candidate because of his compelling back story as a former political prisoner with a fortune from mining and energy interests and because anyone who might marshal the support of Africa’s large bloc of voters would be considered a player. But Mr. Sexwale fumbled the rollout of his campaign and then failed to win the support of the African confederation’s executive committee (which is backing Sheikh Salman). On Monday, at an appearance with Mr. Infantino on Robben Island, off the coast of South Africa, Mr. Sexwale called himself a “realist” about his chances and said he was “open to negotiations and alliances.”A version of this article appears in print on February 25, 2016, on Page B11 of the New York edition with the headline: The Other Three Candidates in a Likely Two-Man Race .  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.