AdvertisementSupported byDevils 5, Rangers 2By Dave CaldwellNEWARK — Sergey Kalinin had a smile on his gnarled face and a bright red cut trailing down his nose after he scored a goal, had an assist and got into a fight in the Devils’ 5-2 victory on Tuesday over the Rangers at Prudential Center. He said he knew he had notched a “Gordie Howe Hat Trick.”Asked where he learned that, he smiled and said, “In Siberia — but we have Internet.”Kalinin, a rangy forward from Omsk, Russia, who is in his first N.H.L. season after five seasons in the Kontinental Hockey League, sealed a stirring Devils comeback by popping a breakaway shot over the right shoulder of goaltender Henrik Lundqvist.His sixth goal of the season — but first since Dec. 22 — gave the Devils (30-24-7) a 4-2 lead with 2 minutes 44 seconds left in regulation. Adam Larsson swept the puck into an empty net with 29 seconds to play to guarantee the end of the Devils’ three-game losing streak.But Kalinin had also provided an assist on a Tyler Kennedy goal that gave the Devils a 1-0 lead, and he traded punches with forward J. T. Miller after he thought Miller had come too close to taking out his knee with a knee.“First fight,” Kalinin said. “Not bad, actually.”Both received five-minute majors, and Miller also got an automatic match penalty for wearing tape on his hand. The Devils failed to score on the five-minute power play at the start of the third period, but Kalinin soon delivered the knockout blow with his goal.“It’s nice to have a guy his size be as versatile as he’s been for us,” John Hynes, the Devils’ first-year coach, said of the 6-foot-3, 200-pound Kalinin.This was an enormous victory for the Devils. Their last two losses had been to the Islanders and Washington on back-to-back nights by one goal each — and they gave up two goals in the last 6:05 in a 4-3 loss to the Capitals on Saturday.The Devils gave up a 1-0 lead when the Rangers (34-20-6) scored two goals in a 45-second span in the first period. Kevin Hayes scored on a rebound, and Dominic Moore tapped in a crisp pass from the defenseman Keith Yandle.But the Devils would rally, outshooting the Rangers in the second period by 17-5 (36-19 over all) — and, more important, outscoring the Rangers, 2-0, with Kalinin stirring up his team at the end of the period by picking the fight with Miller. Forward Reid Boucher rang a wrist shot off the left goal post.Eight minutes into the period, forward Kyle Palmieri rolled in alone on Lundqvist and rapped a shot off his left pad and glove. After the whistle, Palmieri looked up at the big screen and, chewing his mouthpiece, shook his head in dismay as he watched the replay.“If it wasn’t for Lundqvist in the second period, it could have been 5-2 or 6-2,” Devils goaltender Cory Schneider said.The Devils had the Rangers scrambling. During one brief but furious stretch, the Devils took two shots that Lundqvist, flitting from one post to the other, somehow stopped. Finally, Rangers forward Mats Zuccarello tripped Devils center Jacob Josefson.Less than a minute into the power play, Palmieri got another chance — and did not miss. Josefson worked the puck to the rookie forward Joseph Blandisi, who fed Palmieri for his 23rd goal of the season at 10:28. The Devils had 20 shots on goal, the Rangers 10.Lee Stempniak scored his 16th goal of the season at 18:06 of the period by taking another pass from Blandisi and pounding it past Lundqvist from the left face-off circle. Stempniak also had the game-winning goal in overtime in the Devils’ first game against the Rangers on Oct. 18.Blandisi tangled with the rookie defenseman Dylan McIlrath early in the second period, and both were sent to the penalty box. Six minutes later, McIlrath interfered with Blandisi, and Blandisi went down hard, earning an embellishment penalty.“Chippy games — I’d say those are my kind of games,” Blandisi said.The Devils crawled to within 1 point of Pittsburgh, which holds the last playoff berth in the Eastern Conference and which has played three fewer games than the Devils.“You can see where we are in the standings,” Stempniak said. “It was a big win for that.”SLAP SHOTSRangers defenseman Marc Staal was sidelined Tuesday with an undisclosed lower-body injury, so the team called up Brady Skjei from its Hartford farm team. Skjei had played in two games for the Rangers in December.Advertisement