By ROB HUGHESFEB. 24, 2016
LONDON — In a quiet corner after a tumultuous game in Italy, Bayern Munich captain Philipp Lahm spoke like a man who has seen it all and won it all.“The Champions League was the winner tonight,” he said for the benefit of Munich’s supporters back in Bavaria after the match against Juventus. “We can live with a 2-2 draw. We’re in a good position against a very good team, even if we did let then back into it through our own mistakes.”How we must envy those who can play to such a high level and intensity and then find the words to articulate the situation so calmly.Lahm could do this because he has the knowledge. Before retiring from international duty, he played 113 games for Germany, culminating in a World Cup victory in 2014. On Tuesday, in his 100th game in the Champions League, he was a part of a contest in which, as he said, there is not yet a winner — except for the tournament itself.AdvertisementDespite having to make do without its four best central defenders because of injuries, Munich controlled the first hour in a stadium where Juventus has not lost in almost two years. Bayern, in fact, was the last visiting team to win there in either the Champions League or in Serie A.AdvertisementThe Juventus Stadium is as close as anything can be to an impregnable home arena in Italian soccer. As Sami Khedira, a German playing his first season with Juventus, said afterward, “They are just 40,000, but it seems like 150,000.”And they are all for Juventus. The crowd, unaccustomed to any opponent’s coming into their home and dominating the play for the first hour, raised their voices to spine-chilling effect at the first hint that their team was fighting back against a two-goal deficit.Once the comeback started, once the home players showed that they would challenge Bayern’s apparent omnipotence, it was like the sporting version of La Scala: the music of fans and players in harmony.Both clubs looked like potential winners of the tournament. During that first hour, Bayern was determined to keep the ball away from its weakened defense, and it did that with 70 percent possession.Bayern was about speed of thought, as well as speed of movement, and it showed tactical assurance that bordered on arrogance.But Juventus, the perennial Serie A champion, can defend. It had not conceded a goal in its previous nine games.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.Yet to Bayern, it was like peeling oranges. The knives were on the flanks, where Arjen Robben and Douglas Costa had the cutting edge. The strikers Robert Lewandowski and Thomas Müller, who have scored a combined 57 goals this season, were subtle in their movements and nearly invisible until they needed to reappear for openings.Robben — who is back to that elusive form that for many made him the outstanding player of the 2014 World Cup — was both creator and scorer on Tuesday. Moments before halftime, he danced down the right and teased the ball across the face of Gigi Buffon’s goal.AdvertisementDouglas Costa, the other winger, then cut the ball back to where Müller could simply guide it seamlessly along the ground and into the net. Müller made the shot look like a pass beyond the goalkeeper’s reach, although on this occasion it was mystifying that the English referee, Martin Atkinson, did not rule the goal offside.FIFA has obscured the offside rule with its wording that a player can be in an offside position, provided he is not interfering with play. When Müller shot from 15 yards out, Lewandowski was standing right in front of the goalkeeper, surely “interfering” with Buffon’s view of the ball until it was too late.However, the goal stood. Ten minutes into the second half, Robben did as Robben so beautifully does. He sped in from the right, dodged Andrea Barzagli with a change of pace and direction, and curled the ball inside the far post with his left foot.Not Lionel Messi? It was pretty darn close, in beauty, movement and intuitive finishing.Game over, or so we thought. But Juventus Coach Massimiliano Allegri made the switches that led to Paulo Dybala’s speeding through to strike the first Juventus goal at 63 minutes. Then, with the momentum swayed and the roar of the crowd reaching a crescendo, one of the substitutes, Stefano Sturaro, sniffed out the second goal.Those two sharp and clinical finishes against the outstanding goalkeeper Manuel Neuer were planned. They exploited the one weakness of Bayern: young Joshua Kimmich is a midfield player with neither the height nor the knowledge to fill in as ably as his injured colleagues Jérôme Boateng, Holger Badstuber, Javi Martínez and Medhi Benatia.Give Bayern credit for being able to dominate for an hour in the Italian caldron without its core central defenders.But you also need to give credit to Juventus, which tied it in the end with its tactical switches, spirit and perseverance.Lahm was exactly right: The winner was the Champions League.We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.