By VICTOR MATHERFEB. 22, 2016
Anthony Davis earned several entries in the record books with his 59-point, 20-rebound explosion at Detroit on Sunday. But was it a sign of improvement for the struggling New Orleans Pelicans, or a single memorable moment in a lost season?Davis seemed poised this season to grow from star into superstar. Fifth in the Most Valuable Player Award voting last year at only 21, he was regularly compared to the best big men of recent times and seen as being on the verge of becoming the N.B.A.’s next big thing.His individual success extended to the Pelicans. A 21-win team known as the Hornets when Davis was drafted first over all out of Kentucky in 2012, New Orleans improved in his first three seasons to 27, 34 and then 45 wins and a playoff spot last season. Further progress was expected this season, but the Pelicans are 22-33, on a pace to slide back to 33 wins, making them by some measure the season’s most disappointing team.Even after his big effort on Sunday, Davis is lagging a bit behind last season’s figures in field-goal percentage and just about every other major statistic. Omer Asik and Alonzo Gee provide little frontcourt support, and Tyreke Evans and Jrue Holiday have had injury problems in the backcourt. (Evans is out for the season.)AdvertisementThe Pelicans are not compensating at the other end: NBA.com recently gave the team an F grade for defense, and New Orleans ranks 26th in the league in points allowed per 100 possessions.Get the big sports news, highlights and analysis from Times journalists, with distinctive takes on games and some behind-the-scenes surprises, delivered to your inbox every week.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.Despite Davis’s big total on Sunday, the team result was not especially impressive. The Pistons are under .500, and the Pelicans trailed them early in the fourth quarter and wound up winning by only 5 points, 111-106.With the playoffs looking increasingly unlikely — New Orleans is 11th in the West, five and a half games out of the last spot — Pelicans fans will be looking for big moments like Sunday’s to salvage the season. There were certainly some eye-popping numbers.Advertisement■ Davis took 34 shots and made 24 of them, both career highs. “That was a lot of fun, because the rim looked so big that it felt like everything I shot was going to go in,” Davis told The Associated Press.■ His 59 points shattered his previous career high, 43.■ His point total is the seventh highest in the last 10 seasons, behind a 65 in 2007 and two other games by Kobe Bryant, plus one each from Carmelo Anthony, LeBron James and Gilbert Arenas.■ The last time a player went for 50 points and 20 boards in a game was Chris Webber for Sacramento in 2001.■ Davis’s 59 were a New Orleans franchise record, surpassing a 50 by Jamal Mashburn in 2003.■ By the metric Game Score, which accounts for everything a player does, it was the best game played since Kobe Bryant’s 81-pointer in 2006. It is the sixth-best game since 1983-84 (the farthest back Game Score is tracked). Davis’s Game Score was 53.9. Bryant’s was 63.5. The best on record is Michael Jordan’s 64.6, from a 69-point game in March 1990.■ The point total is the highest of the season, passing DeMarcus Cousins’s 56 for the Kings in January.Like the Pelicans, Cousins’s Kings are struggling this season. And that may not be a huge surprise. While great players on elite teams do sometimes put up big totals, as often as not, the season’s leading single-game scorer plays for a weak team.For every Kyrie Irving (57 in 2014-15 for the elite Cavaliers), there is an Anthony (62 in 2013-14 for a Knicks team with a losing record) or a Deron Williams (57 in 2011-12 for a terrible Nets team).Going farther back, four of Michael Jordan’s five 60-point games (including playoffs) came before his Bulls won their first title.It is not too late for the Pelicans. They started 1-11, so they are 21-22 since, a respectable record. They have wins over the Spurs and the Cavaliers. But they have also lost to the Suns, and they are the only team to lose twice to the 11-46 Lakers.AdvertisementTeams have shown that winning with just one great player is an impossibility in the N.B.A. The Pelicans will need Davis to continue to blossom but will also have to identify and acquire a second and probably third star if the team is to join the elite. Though Davis may provide some more scintillating games, that won’t happen this season.Benjamin Hoffman contributed research.We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.See More »