By RAY GLIERFEB. 23, 2016
TUSCALOOSA, Ala. — The University of Alabama basketball program is on the other side of a high fence from the Alabama football program.There are many reasons for this, of course, but one statistic plainly shows how much separates the university’s flagship programs: Since 2008, Alabama’s football team has had 24 first- or second-round picks. In that same period, the Alabama basketball team has had none.“That’s something we had really struggled with over the last several years,” said Bill Battle, Alabama’s athletic director, when discussing what has held back Crimson Tide basketball.But thanks to a coaching change and a multimillion-dollar investment, basketball season in Tuscaloosa is suddenly something more than those few months between fall and spring football. Alabama is 16-11 over all, 7-8 in the Southeastern Conference, and had reeled off five straight wins before losses to Mississippi State last Saturday and Kentucky on Tuesday dinged the Tide’s N.C.A.A. tournament plans.AdvertisementThe changes started last March when Battle fired Anthony Grant after an eighth-place finish in the SEC. After Battle’s first choice, Gregg Marshall of Wichita State, turned down the job, Battle pivoted to the former N.B.A. player and coach Avery Johnson, 50, whose hiring seemed to signal Alabama’s desire to lure N.B.A.-caliber talent to its campus.AdvertisementJohnson clearly has an understanding of what N.B.A. talent looks like. An efficient guard known as the Little General, Johnson carved out a 16-year N.B.A. career by making the most of his talent, though he was never viewed as a star, the type of player Battle has mandated he recruit.“I came in through the back door, not a Diaper Dandy, or McDonald’s all-American,” said Johnson, who played at Southern University and still holds two N.C.A.A. Division I assist records (12.0 per game for his career, and 13.3 per game for a season). “People see the charter air travel of N.B.A. teams, the $1,000 suits. I was an around-the-clock player fighting for everything.”Johnson was the N.B.A. coach of the year in 2006 with the Dallas Mavericks, but he was fired there in 2008 despite a record of 194-70. Two years later, he was hired by the Nets, but he was fired 28 games into the 2013 season with a record of 60-116. But neither of those challenges compares to what he faces now: making Alabama the king of a second sport in the SEC.“Anthony had some good seasons,” Atlanta Hawks center Al Horford said of Grant, “but if anybody can do it, it would be Avery.”Horford played in college at Florida, which won national titles in basketball in 2006 and 2007 and championships in football in 2006 and 2008. Horford said Florida’s success was attributable in part to the signing of one high school all-American, Corey Brewer, and to the developing of less-heralded players like himself and Joakim Noah, a Chicago Bulls forward.Johnson said that he had the same playbook: He will recruit the top high school players in the country, but he will also pursue athletes that he might shape into the kind of player he was.“The first thing is identifying who has that kind of N.B.A. talent and being able to project them moving forward,” Johnson said. “Everybody doesn’t have that eye for talent.”AdvertisementWhile there have been name-brand hires in the SEC in the last two years — Auburn’s Bruce Pearl, Tennessee’s Rick Barnes, Mississippi State’s Ben Howland — Johnson’s first-year success has stood out, so far, as the league tries to make a name for itself in basketball beyond Kentucky.In addition to reviving the Tide on the court, Johnson has stimulated the fan base. Alabama has already announced five sellouts, the most in a season since 2006-7.Though Johnson is new to college coaching, he is hardly an apprentice. He brought to Alabama the offensive spacing game he learned under San Antonio Spurs Coach Gregg Popovich, and he said the Crimson Tide uses as many defensive coverages of the pick-and-roll as the best defensive teams in the N.B.A.Get the big sports news, highlights and analysis from Times journalists, with distinctive takes on games and some behind-the-scenes surprises, delivered to your inbox every week.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.The senior guard Retin Obasohan said he watched film of Johnson as a player and said it was obvious that his new coach thrived on competitive zeal. Obasohan and his teammates have adopted the same approach, he said, which may be why Alabama, picked to finish 13th in the SEC in the preseason, is in the discussion for an N.C.A.A. tournament at-large berth.“He talks about the Bad Boys, the Detroit Pistons from back in the day, and how tenacious they were,” Obasohan said. “That’s how we want to play.”Obasohan has gone from a 6.2-points-per-game scorer as a junior to 16.9 as a senior. He said Johnson had taught him the nuances of getting an easy basket, of the inside-out dribble, and of faking backdoor before popping out to receive a pass for an open shot.Johnson said: “The boys were pleasantly surprised when I came on campus at how much I actually work and that I am not just a motivator. They liked that I was a teacher, not just a psychologist. Some coaches get boxed in like that.”A version of this article appears in print on February 24, 2016, on Page B10 of the New York edition with the headline: Alabama Is Piling Up Victories, and No, It’s Not the Football Team.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.