By THE ASSOCIATED PRESSMAY 19, 2016
The United States downed the Czech Republic, 2-1, in a shootout Thursday to reach the semifinals of the ice hockey world championship in Moscow. The United States will face Canada — which advanced by pounding Sweden, 6-0, in St. Petersburg, Russia — in Saturday’s semifinal.Although loaded with young talent, the Americans were heavy underdogs after losing four times in the group stage. Auston Matthews scored in the second period to tie the game and later scored the only goal in the shootout, sliding the puck between goaltender Dominik Furch’s legs.Matthews, 18, is widely expected to be the No. 1 pick in next month’s N.H.L. draft.“He almost presses too hard sometimes, you know,” Nick Foligno said of his teammate Matthews. “I talked to him, I said, ‘You know, your moment’s going to come,’ and sure enough, it comes in the shootout. He’s just young, and he’s learning, but he’s got all the tools and all the talent.”The other semifinal will feature Russia, which beat Germany, 4-1; and Finland, the only unbeaten team in the tournament, which beat Denmark, 5-1.AdvertisementKnicks forward Kristaps Porzingis and Minnesota Timberwolves forward Karl-Anthony Towns were unanimously selected to the N.B.A. all-rookie first team. Also making the first team were Phoenix’s Devin Booker, Denver’s Nikola Jokic and Philadelphia’s Jahlil Okafor.AdvertisementTowns, the rookie of the year, led all rookies in scoring (18.3 points per game) and rebounding (10.5 per game). Porzingis was third among rookies in scoring (14.3), second in rebounding (7.3) and first in blocks (1.86).Bucks Tricked by Scam The Milwaukee Bucks said they had inadvertently provided tax information regarding employees, including players, to someone who was impersonating the team’s president over email.Chris Sale went the distance on a masterful four-hitter, becoming the first pitcher since 2008 to win his first nine starts, and the host Chicago White Sox edged the Houston Astros, 2-1, to end their four-game losing streak.Sale walked none and struck out a season-high nine on the way to his second straight complete game. Houston broke the shutout bid in the eighth when Evan Gattis clubbed Sale’s first pitch for a home run.Sale lowered his E.R.A. to 1.58, second in the American League to his teammate Jose Quintana’s 1.54.Reyes Nears Return Contrite but happy to be back on a baseball field, shortstop Jose Reyes worked out at the Colorado Rockies’ spring training facility, his first step in returning from a 59-day suspension for violating Major League Baseball’s new domestic violence policy.Reyes was suspended through May 31 after being charged with domestic violence for an altercation with his wife in Hawaii last October.Advertisement“It’s good to be on the field and put that stuff behind me,” Reyes said. “I’m sorry. I made a mistake and will stand here like a man. I just have to try to be a better man, a better husband.”Around the Majors Milwaukee Brewers pitcher Junior Guerra used his split-finger fastball to strike out a career-high 11 in a 5-3 victory over the visiting Chicago Cubs.  The Atlanta Braves removed infielder Erick Aybar from the starting lineup against the Pittsburgh Pirates after a chicken bone became stuck in his throat.N.F.L. Commissioner Roger Goodell told Senators John McCain and Jeff Flake of Arizona that the league was refunding $723,734 paid by the Defense Department to honor military service members at league games and events.Get the big sports news, highlights and analysis from Times journalists, with distinctive takes on games and some behind-the-scenes surprises, delivered to your inbox every week.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.The senators had complained that the Pentagon spent more than $10 million in marketing and advertising contracts with professional sports teams between 2012 and 2015 for what the senators called “paid patriotism.”Around the N.F.L. Jaguars defensive back Jalen Ramsey, the fifth overall selection in the N.F.L. draft, sustained a small tear to the meniscus in his right knee during an on-field workout this week, the team said.  A national poll conducted by The Washington Post found that nine of 10 Native Americans were not offended by the Washington Redskins name.  The former Detroit Lions running back Jahvid Best, whose career was cut short by concussions, is trying to qualify for the Rio de Janeiro Olympics as a sprinter for St. Lucia.Kaká remains M.L.S.’s highest-paid player, with $7.2 million in total compensation from Orlando City, according to figures released by the players’ union.Toronto’s Sebastian Giovinco, the league’s reigning most valuable player, is second, with $7.1 million, followed by Toronto’s Michael Bradley ($6.5 million) and Los Angeles’s Steven Gerrard ($6.1 million).Frank Lampard, who has yet to play a match for New York City F.C. this season, receives $6 million in total earnings, just above his teammates Andrea Pirlo ($5.9 million) and David Villa ($5.6 million).AdvertisementJordan Spieth covered his mouth in disbelief on the 16th green when his long eagle putt stopped short of falling in for a share of the lead.He then rushed to finish the final two holes, recording a six-under-par 64 before the first round of the Byron Nelson in Irving, Tex., was suspended because of darkness. Sergio Garcia, Danny Lee and Johnson Wagner shared the lead at seven-under.Spieth, whose first PGA Tour event was the Nelson as a 16-year-old amateur six years ago, is playing only his second tournament since squandering a five-stroke lead on the back nine at the Masters.Around Golf The Masters champion Danny Willett shot a seven-under 65 in the opening round of the Irish Open to take a two-shot lead over the home favorite Rory McIlroy in Straffan, Ireland.  Mika Miyazato had five birdies in six holes and finished with a six-under 65 to take the first-round lead in the L.P.G.A.’s Kingsmill Championship in Williamsburg, Va.  Kenny Perry birdied the final hole for an eight-under 64 and a two-stroke lead in the Regions Tradition in Birmingham, Ala., the first of five PGA Tour Champions majors.A version of this article appears in print on May 20, 2016, on Page B14 of the New York edition with the headline: U.S. and Canada to Meet in World Semifinals.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.