MAY 20, 2016
The Orlando Magic completed a whirlwind week on Friday by formally announcing Frank Vogel as their new head coach. He has the playoff experience the team wanted, leading the Indiana Pacers to four playoff appearances in his five full seasons with the team.Vogel replaces Scott Skiles, who surprised the organization when he resigned on May 12. Vogel’s Indiana teams were usually one of the top defensive clubs in the N.B.A. but he did not have his contract renewed after this season. The Pacers made the playoffs but were bounced in Game 7 of the first round by the Toronto Raptors.The Magic are building around young players like Nikola Vucevic, Aaron Gordon, Victor Oladipo and Elfrid Payton and also say they want to re-sign forward Evan Fournier, who will hit the free-agent market in July.An M.V.P. Debate Consider Gary Payton unimpressed by Golden State guard Stephen Curry becoming the first unanimous most valuable player in N.B.A. history.AdvertisementPayton, who was known as one of the N.B.A.’s great trash talkers during his 18-season Hall of Fame career, told Sports Illustrated that the vote just “happened to go” Curry’s way. He said players like Michael Jordan, Larry Bird, Wilt Chamberlain, Bill Russell and Kareem Abdul-Jabbar also could have been considered unanimous picks even though the vote did not go that way.AdvertisementThe Texas Rangers could be playing in a new $1 billion retractable-roof stadium by 2021 and would remain in Arlington, Tex., until at least 2054 under plans revealed by the team and the city.The proposed agreement for a public-private partnership calls for a 50-50 split of the estimated cost of the stadium and related infrastructure, with the city’s portion capped at $500 million. Arlington voters in November are expected to be asked to support the project by continuing existing sales taxes that are used to help pay for $1.2 billion AT&T Stadium, the home of the Dallas Cowboys.Around the Majors Tim Lincecum signed a one-year, $2.5 million deal with the Los Angeles Angels, giving the injury-plagued team additional depth for its rotation. A two-time National League Cy Young Award winner, Lincecum had left hip surgery on Sept. 3.  The Athletics’ Josh Reddick will probably miss at least a month after fracturing his thumb on a spike while stealing second base.  Four minor leaguers were suspended after testing positive for performance-enhancing drugs. Toronto outfielder David Harris and Seattle pitcher Jose Luis Santiago will miss 76 games, while Dodgers pitcher Sebastian Martinez and Colorado pitcher Jose Rodriguez will miss 72 games.Get the big sports news, highlights and analysis from Times journalists, with distinctive takes on games and some behind-the-scenes surprises, delivered to your inbox every week.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.New padded robots operated by remote control are being used by the Pittsburgh Steelers in off-season workouts, with more potentially available to N.F.L. teams next year.The Mobile Virtual Players — dummies on wheels that can weave, change direction, speed up and stop — are being used as more than simulated tackling surrogates by Steelers Coach Mike Tomlin, who has them testing receivers and rushers. The robots were developed and first used at Dartmouth College and are quickly helping the Steelers hone their skills without man-on-man drills.AGENCE FRANCE-PRESSEGamecocks Lose Quarterback The former South Carolina starting quarterback Connor Mitch will leave the Gamecocks after he graduates this summer with two years of eligibility remaining. Mitch won the starting job last summer but did not play again after hurting his shoulder and hip in an early September loss to Kentucky.Rain washed out all track activity at Charlotte Motor Speedway, which will now try to cram Nascar’s All-Star weekend into one day. The steady showers forced Nascar to call off the scheduled Sprint Showdown, a race that will qualify five additional drivers into the All-Star Race. The Truck Series race also was postponed. Both events were rescheduled for early Saturday, with the $1 million All-Star Race still scheduled to go off in the evening.AdvertisementPractice Makes Perfect Team Penske’s Will Power pushed Chevrolet to the top of the Indianapolis 500’s practice speed chart with a fast lap of 232.672 miles per hour, the best all week. Another Chevy driver, Josef Newgarden of Ed Carpenter Racing, finished second at 232.344 m.p.h., but Hondas claimed the next nine spots. Qualifying will be held Saturday and Sunday on the historic 2.5-mile oval.Brendan Rodgers was hired as the new coach of the Scottish champion Celtic seven months after being fired by Liverpool. He is replacing Ronny Deila, who left after guiding Celtic to its fifth straight Scottish league title. Rodgers’s first season will coincide with the return to the Scottish top flight of Rangers, Celtic’s fierce Glasgow rival, after its spell in the lower leagues for financial mismanagement.Ben Crane made a 14-foot birdie putt on his last hole for a seven-under-par 63 and a one-stroke lead after two rounds at the Byron Nelson in Irving, Tex. At 12-under 128, Crane was one stroke ahead of Jordan Spieth, Sergio García, Brooks Koepka and Bud Cauley.Crane first took the lead after six birdies in an eight-hole stretch, including a 70-foot shot from a greenside bunker at the par-4 third hole. The last time Crane led a tournament was at Memphis two years ago, the last of his five PGA Tour victories.Around Golf Rory McIlroy, who shot a two-under 70 in the second round of the Irish Open, is one stroke behind the leaders Danny Willett and Marc Warren.  So Yeon Ryu had six birdies in an eight-hole stretch and shot a seven-under 64 to take the lead in the Kingsmill Championship in Williamsburg, Va. Ryu is one stroke ahead of Stacy Lewis, Amy Yang and the first-round leader Mika Miyazato.  Kenny Perry shot a two-under 70 to maintain a one-stroke lead over Bernhard Langer and Billy Andrade in the Regions Tradition in Birmingham, Ala.A version of this article appears in print on May 21, 2016, on Page D4 of the New York edition with the headline: Vogel Brings His Playoff Credentials to Magic.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.