By THE ASSOCIATED PRESSMAY 19, 2016
Sidney Crosby, Phil Kessel and Chris Kunitz scored third-period goals, helping the Pittsburgh Penguins beat the host Tampa Bay Lightning, 4-2, in Game 3 of the Eastern Conference finals on Wednesday night.Carl Hagelin broke a scoreless tie late in the second period and Matt Murray had 26 saves for the Penguins, who took a 2-1 lead over the Lightning, the defending Eastern Conference champions, in the best-of-seven series.A power-play goal by Crosby restored a two-goal lead midway through the final period. Kunitz also beat goalie Andrei Vasilevskiy from the right circle to make it 4-1.Tyler Johnson and Ondrej Palat scored in the third for the Lightning, who have lost two straight after winning the series opener in Pittsburgh.AdvertisementTampa Bay generated scoring chances early, forcing Pittsburgh’s Matt Murray to make 12 saves in the opening period, but the Lightning were outshot by 48-28, including 38-16 over the last two periods. The Lightning had been outshot by a combined 76-41 in the first two games.AdvertisementVasilevskiy won Game 1 in relief of the injured Ben Bishop, and the Penguins took Game 2 in Pittsburgh when Crosby scored the first overtime playoff goal of his career, less than a minute into the extra period. Game 4 will be Friday on the Lightning’s home ice.RETIREES’ SUIT GOES FORWARD A federal judge in Minnesota denied the N.H.L.’s latest attempt to throw out a class-action lawsuit by former players over head injuries.The league had argued that the suit should be tossed because the issues raised by the former players were covered by the collective bargaining agreement. But the judge found that the contract does not pre-empt legal action, in part because the retired players are no longer subject to it.Dan LaCouture, Michael Peluso, Gary Leeman, Bernie Nicholls, David Christian and Reed Larson represent former players who allege that the N.H.L. did not sufficiently protect the players or inform them of the dangers of head injuries they had sustained when they played.Stuart Davidson of Robbins Geller, a lawyer for the players, called the order a “historic decision in American sports and labor law.”In a statement, the N.H.L. said it disagreed with the decision but believed the opinion deferred the pre-emption issues to another day.G.M. AWARD NOMINEES ARE NAMEDWashington’s Brian MacLellan, Dallas’s Jim Nill and Pittsburgh’s Jim Rutherford are the finalists for the N.H.L. General Manager of the Year Award. The winner will be announced June 22 in Las Vegas.AdvertisementSevilla stunned Liverpool with a 3-1 comeback victory in Basel, Switzerland, to capture a record third straight Europa League title. The victory gave Sevilla a spot in next year’s Champions League group stage.Sevilla tied the game 18 seconds into the second half on a Kevin Gameiro goal from close range, and Coke then struck in the 64th and 70th minutes. The second goal was furiously disputed by Liverpool after an assistant referee signaled offsides and then lowered his flag.Get the big sports news, highlights and analysis from Times journalists, with distinctive takes on games and some behind-the-scenes surprises, delivered to your inbox every week.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.Liverpool had taken a lead in the 35th minute on a beautifully curled left-foot shot by Daniel Sturridge.RED BULLS AND N.Y.C.F.C. GET READY The Red Bulls and New York City F.C. will enter their match Saturday at Yankee Stadium with runs of recent success.The Red Bulls got a goal from Mike Grella early in the second half to beat visiting Chicago, 1-0. They have won three of their last five games after starting 1-6. Luis Robles posted his second shutout of the season in his 118th consecutive start, a streak that ties an M.L.S. record.N.Y.C.F.C. extended its club-record unbeaten streak to five games with a tie against host Toronto F.C., 1-1. Kwadwo Poku scored in the 16th minute, but N.Y.C.F.C.’s bid to extend its three-game winning streak ended with a second-half goal by Will Johnson.EXTRADITED OFFICIAL ARRAIGNEDJulio Rocha, a former head of the Nicaraguan soccer federation and the last of seven men extradited in a FIFA corruption case, pleaded not guilty to racketeering charges.Rocha, 65, entered the plea in federal court in Brooklyn. Rocha and six others, including two FIFA vice presidents, were charged in what officials called a sprawling bribery scheme involving international soccer’s governing body.AdvertisementThe former Atlanta Braves manager Fredi Gonzalez said he learned that he had been fired by an automatically generated email telling him about his ticket out of town.Gonzalez said he had received the email on Monday, from the team’s travel agency, about his flight for the next day — but the Braves were scheduled to play in Pittsburgh through Thursday night.Gonzalez confirmed his dismissal — and the embarrassing logistical gaffe — with Atlanta’s traveling secretary and then went to talk with General Manager John Coppolella, taking two bottles of wine.“There was no animosity,” Gonzalez said.VERLANDER REACHES MILESTONE Justin Verlander struck out 10 batters, including the 2,000th of his career, to help host Detroit beat Minnesota, 6-3.Verlander (3-4) allowed three runs over seven and a third innings while matching his season high in strikeouts. He became the 76th in baseball history to reach 2,000 strikeouts. The Twins dropped to 10-29.Around the Majors Tyler Goeddel hit his first career homer, Jeremy Hellickson pitched six sharp innings, and the Philadelphia Phillies beat visiting Miami, 4-2. Jeanmar Gomez earned his 16th save in 17 tries.  Khris Davis hit his fourth home run in two games, and Oakland completed a sweep of visiting Texas, 8-1. Davis hit a solo home run in the sixth inning a day after hitting three homers, including a game-ending grand slam.  Mark Trumbo and Matt Wieters had back-to-back homers, and Chris Tillman won his fifth straight start as Baltimore beat visiting Seattle, 5-2.  Kevin Kiermaier, Logan Morrison and Desmond Jennings each homered as visiting Tampa Bay beat slumping Toronto, 6-3. The Rays outscored the Blue Jays by 31-7 in their three-game sweep.Saúl Álvarez vacated his World Boxing Council middleweight title rather than be pressured into a deal to fight Gennady Golovkin, although Álvarez said in a statement that he still wanted the fight to happen.The W.B.C. had imposed a deadline of Tuesday for scheduling a fight between Álvarez and Golovkin, the unified titleholder. But Álvarez, widely known as Canelo, said he did not want to negotiate terms under such a time constraint.Álvarez said he had instructed his promoter, Oscar de la Hoya, to continue negotiating for a fight with Golovkin and “to finalize a deal as quickly as possible.”A version of this article appears in print on May 19, 2016, on Page B14 of the New York edition with the headline: Furious Third-Period Attack Lifts Pittsburgh.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.