MAY 18, 2016
Brent Burns scored San Jose’s first two power-play goals of the Western Conference finals, and Martin Jones stopped 26 shots for his second shutout of the postseason as the Sharks beat the Blues, 4-0, Tuesday night in St. Louis to even the series at a game apiece.Tommy Wingels and Dainius Zubrus also scored, and Logan Couture had two assists to help the Sharks bounce back from a tight loss in the opener.Burns’s fifth and sixth goals of the postseason came on one-timers with Troy Brouwer in the penalty box, and were his only shots of the game. He made the score 2-0 in the second off a setup from Joe Pavelski only 16 seconds after Brouwer went off for slashing, and he made it a three-goal gap about 12 minutes into the third off a feed from Patrick Marleau 24 seconds after Brouwer was whistled for high-sticking.FINLAND ROUTS CANADA AT WORLDS Finland was the only unbeaten team left in the world championship after routing Canada, 4-0, in St. Petersburg, Russia.AdvertisementFinland finished at the top of Group B, setting up a quarterfinal against Denmark, while Canada must face Sweden in a rematch of the 2014 Olympic final.AdvertisementThe Czech Republic topped Group A by beating Switzerland, 5-4, in Moscow. The Czechs learned they will play the United States in the quarterfinals, even though the Americans lost to Slovakia, 3-2, in overtime.With the team bottoming out, the Atlanta Braves fired Manager Fredi Gonzalez.Atlanta is in the midst of a dismal start that failed to meet even the lowered expectations of a rebuilding year, so Gonzalez felt the brunt of the disappointment and was sent packing in his sixth season.The Braves had lost eight of their last 10 games entering Tuesday night’s game against Pittsburgh. Atlanta had baseball’s worst record at 9-28 and was already 13 ½ games out of first place in the National League East.Brian Snitker, who has been manager of the Braves’ Class AAA Gwinnett team, will move up as interim manager. The Braves also fired the bench coach Carlos Tosca. Terry Pendleton will move from first-base coach to bench coach.AROUND THE MAJORS Chase Anderson took a no-hitter into the eighth inning and finished with eight and two-thirds strong innings to lift the Brewers over the Chicago Cubs, 4-2, in Milwaukee.  Tommy Joseph hit his first major league homer to lead the Phillies to a 3-1 win over the Miami Marlins in Philadelphia.Bill Self isn’t paying state taxes on the bulk of his income as men’s basketball coach at Kansas, and it’s all legal under 2012 tax changes pressed by Gov. Sam Brownback.KCUR Radio reported that while Self — the state’s highest-paid employee — earns a taxable salary of $230,000 a year, he also gets at least $2.75 million annually from the entity that runs the school’s intercollegiate sports. That money goes to Self’s limited liability company, which is among the nearly 334,000 Kansas businesses that owe no state income taxes under the 2012 tax cuts.AdvertisementKANSAS STATE HIRES KILL Kansas State has hired the former Minnesota football coach Jerry Kill as an associate athletic director. Kill led the Gophers back to respectability, but he decided to retire from coaching last October because of his health.ALABAMA PLAYERS ARRESTED Alabama offensive lineman Cam Robinson and defensive back Laurence Jones were arrested on drug and weapons charges in Louisiana. Ouachita Parish Sheriff’s records showed that Robinson and Jones were cited for the misdemeanor charge of carrying a weapon in the presence of narcotics. Robinson also faces a charge of felony possession of stolen firearms.Manchester United beat visiting Bournemouth, 3-1, in a Premier League game hastily rearranged because of a bomb scare, sealing fifth place and a spot in the Europa League while gaining some momentum heading into the F.A. Cup final against Crystal Palace on Saturday.Eighth-ranked Belinda Bencic, who has been dealing with a back injury since March, has pulled out of the French Open, which begins Sunday. She will be replaced in the main draw by Lauren Davis.Caroline Wozniacki, the former world No. 1, also withdrew from Roland Garros because of an injured right ankle. Wozniacki has not played since the Miami Open in March.Gun Runner, third-place finisher in the Kentucky Derby, will skip the Preakness, leaving a likely field of 11 for the middle leg of the Triple Crown on Saturday at Pimlico Race Course in Baltimore.Gun Runner’s absence tightens the focus on Nyquist and Exaggerator, the top two finishers in the Derby.Giulio Ciccone won the 10th stage of the Giro d’Italia, which was marked by the withdrawal of the Sky team leader and race favorite Mikel Landa.Get the big sports news, highlights and analysis from Times journalists, with distinctive takes on games and some behind-the-scenes surprises, delivered to your inbox every week.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.Bob Jungels took the leader’s pink jersey from his teammate Gianluca Brambilla after the 136-mile stage between Campi Bisenzio and Sestola. Jungels holds a 26-second lead over Andrey Amador in the overall standings. (AGENCE FRANCE-PRESSE)AdvertisementLATE BURST WINS STAGE Julian Alaphilippe won the third stage of the Tour of California, producing a perfectly timed late burst on a grueling final climb to overtake rider Peter Stetina in the final half-mile of the rugged 104.1-mile course from Thousand Oaks to Santa Barbara. Alaphilippe’s victory catapulted him into the overall lead.(AGENCE FRANCE-PRESSE)A version of this article appears in print on May 18, 2016, on Page B14 of the New York edition with the headline: Power-Play Goals Give Sharks a Series Tie.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.