AdvertisementSupported bySports BriefingThe Tampa Bay Lightning beat the Pittsburgh Penguins in Game 1 of the Eastern Conference finals on Friday night, but their victory may have come with a steep price: goaltender Ben Bishop.Bishop was outside the crease during a Pittsburgh power play in the first period. When he turned around to scramble back into position, his left leg appeared to wrench awkwardly underneath him, and he tumbled to the ice writhing in pain before being taken off on a stretcher.Andrei Vasilevskiy took his place and made 25 stops, and the Lighting took advantage of some sloppy miscues by the Penguins’ defense to win, 3-1, and take away Pittsburgh’s home-ice advantage in the best-of-seven series. Game 2 will be Monday night in Pittsburgh.Alex Killorn, Ondrej Palat and Jonathan Drouin scored for Tampa Bay, and the Lightning kept Pittsburgh’s dynamic offense under wraps for long stretches.Patric Hornqvist picked up his sixth goal of the playoffs for the Penguins. Matt Murray, Pittsburgh’s rookie goaltender, finished with 17 saves but was put in tough spots several times because of defensive miscues in front of him.Addison Russell, David Ross and Kris Bryant homered, and the Chicago Cubs beat the Pittsburgh Pirates, 9-4, to end their first losing streak of the season — a two-game skid from a doubleheader sweep.Russell and Ross connected for three-run shots, and Bryant hit a two-run drive as the Cubs improved their record to 26-8, the best in the majors.“It’s nice to have a little fun today after the panic set in,” Ross joked. “We lost two in a row. Now everyone can relax, we finally won one.”Chicago’s Jason Hammel (5-0) struck out a season-high eight over six and two-thirds innings.Phillies Squeeze Out a Win Jeremy Hellickson struck out nine and drove in the go-ahead run on a suicide squeeze, and the Phillies beat the visiting Reds, 3-2.Hellickson (3-2) allowed two unearned runs over seven innings. David Hernandez worked the eighth, and Jeanmar Gomez finished for his 14th save in 15 chances.The Phillies ended a seven-game losing streak against the Reds with their fifth win in the past six games.Dartmouth Coach Buddy Teevens makes a promise to recruits before they take the field: “In four years, you will never tackle another Dartmouth football player.”Teevens, a former Dartmouth player who has coached at the school for 15 years, has eliminated live tackling from practices. He told a congressional committee on Friday that the result had been far fewer concussions, less time missed because of injury — and victories.Since cutting back on tackling in 2010, Dartmouth has not had a losing record. Just as important to Teevens: No defensive player sustained a concussion in 2015.Teevens’s players practice on stand-in targets, including a robotic dummy.“I love football,” Teevens said, “but I love my players more.”The University of Kansas put James Naismith’s original rules of basketball on display in a new multimillion-dollar building constructed to house the two-page document.The new building, the $21.7 million DeBruce Center, is the permanent home of “The Original 13 Rules of Basket Ball,” which Naismith wrote in 1891. A Kansas alumnus bought it at auction in 2010 for $4.3 million.Kansas Coach Bill Self said the display reminded him of Leonardo da Vinci’s “Mona Lisa.”“What makes it so cool is how simplistic it is,” Self said. “For those two pieces of paper to have such an impact in our sport is what makes it so special.”Maker Prepares for Leap Thon Maker is preparing to become the first player in 11 years to go directly from high school to the N.B.A.Maker, a 7-footer from South Sudan, is attending the N.B.A. draft combine in Chicago after being ruled eligible for the draft last month.The league instituted a rule in 2005 requiring American players be at least 19 and one year removed from high school to be eligible for the draft. Maker turned 19 in February and argued that he had earned his high school diploma in 2015, despite having spent a year at a Canadian prep school.The N.C.A.A. has asked the United States Supreme Court to hear a case that successfully challenged its use of names, images and likenesses of college athletes without compensation.The plaintiffs in the case, which was originally filed by the former U.C.L.A. basketball star Ed O’Bannon, petitioned the Supreme Court in March to hear the case.In 2014, a federal judge decided the N.C.A.A.’s amateurism rules violated antitrust law and said universities could — but were not required to — pay football and male basketball players up to $5,000 per year for use of their names, images and likenesses. An appeals court overturned the ruling on the payments last year but left the N.C.A.A.’s amateurism rules vulnerable to other challenges.The Los Angeles Kings and Darryl Sutter, their two-time Stanley Cup-winning coach, agreed to a multiyear contract extension that will begin in the fall.The agreement is reportedly for two more seasons with an option for a third. Sutter’s deal was to expire July 1.Advertisement