AdvertisementSupported byOrioles 6, Yankees 5By Billy WitzBALTIMORE — The Yankees might have had plenty of questions around New Year’s Day, but first base was not one of them. They had Mark Teixeira, who had a resurgent season last year until it was ended in mid-August by a freak accident, a foul ball off his shin. They also had a worthy young successor in Greg Bird, who coolly slugged 11 home runs in the final seven weeks.Now, the position is threatening to become a sinkhole, one that appears ready to stand as a proxy for the Yankees’ season.After losing Bird to season-ending shoulder surgery before the start of spring training, Teixeira plunged into a prolonged slump and on Friday night he left a 6-5 loss to the Baltimore Orioles with an injured right knee.Teixeira exited in the third inning with what was described by the team as “discomfort,” was examined by an Orioles doctor and sent for a magnetic resonance imaging test.The loss was disheartening not only for Teixeira’s injury, but also for how it unfolded. The struggling offense got three home runs — from Carlos Beltran, Alex Rodriguez and Austin Romine — but pitcher Nathan Eovaldi, who had won his last five starts, could not hold a 5-2 lead.The Orioles pushed across the go-ahead run in the seventh against Dellin Betances, who has allowed a run in three consecutive appearances, the first time that has happened in his career.At the end of the game it was unclear how serious Teixeira’s injury might be. Though he was hitting .181 with a career-long 142 at-bat homerless streak, the Yankees have few attractive options if his injury requires him to miss an extended period of time.His backup, Dustin Ackley, had season-ending shoulder surgery Friday, and Chris Parmalee and Nick Swisher are at Class-AAA Scranton/Wilkes-Barre, but neither of them was called up to replace Ackley. When Teixeira left the game, he was replaced by Rob Refsnyder, who played the position for the first time Friday.Teixeira showed no overt signs of discomfort in his one at bat, running out a second-inning grounder, and he played the next inning in the field, then left in the bottom of the third.Last season Teixeira had hit 31 home runs, driven in 79 runs and was placing himself in the conversation for the American League’s Most Valuable Player Award when he fouled a ball of his shin on Aug. 17. The injury was eventually was diagnosed as a cracked fibula.Since 2011, Teixeira, who is in the final year of an eight-year, $160 million contract, has been hurt often.He has been on the disabled list the last five years with wrist, hamstring, calf and lat injuries, as well as the cracked fibula. He was briefly sidelined twice this season with neck spasms, which required two cortisone shots.Teixeira said at the start of this trip that he was not is not injury prone; the injuries are just a result of him playing hard.“These things happen,” he said. “It’s what being an athlete is all about; just trying not to get hurt too much. I’ve played through plenty of stuff early in my career. Sometimes things happen. That’s sports.”Advertisement