By LIAM STACKJUNE 23, 2016
An openly transgender athlete will be featured for the first time in the “Body Issue” of ESPN The Magazine, which has made a point of featuring a wide range of body types in its annual package of nude images of professional athletes.The athlete, Chris Mosier, 35, a transgender man who competed with the United States national team at the world duathlon championships this year, described his participation in the issue as an opportunity to celebrate a body with which he has sometimes felt uncomfortable, as well as to highlight challenges faced by the transgender community, like discrimination and violence.“I have had such an interesting relationship with my body and it has really evolved over time,” Mosier said on Wednesday, “so I felt this was a real challenge for me and a great way to celebrate where I am at right now. It felt amazing, given that for 29 years of my life I didn’t even like being in pictures.”The special issue of course serves a marketing purpose for ESPN’s print offering, but groups representing lesbian, gay, bisexual and transgender people hailed the decision as another sign of growing acceptance.AdvertisementMosier has long been an advocate for L.G.B.T. people in sports. He played a role in propelling the International Olympic Committee’s decision in January to change guidelines that excluded many transgender people from competing at the international level. Under the new policy, transgender athletes are no longer required to undergo sex reassignment surgery, a procedure that some do not want.AdvertisementPosing nude for a major magazine felt like another form of activism, Mosier said.“It is a great opportunity to break the misconceptions or stereotypes people have about trans bodies,” he said. “Trans bodies are so heavily scrutinized and that’s one of the issues we face.”“That is something I have personally faced with the media,” he added. “The questions I get from reporters are questions they would not ask any other athlete or any other person. They are questions about my body.”What you need to know to start your day, delivered to your inbox Monday through Friday.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.Mosier will join 19 other athletes in the eighth edition of the Body Issue, including the mixed martial arts star Conor McGregor, Elena Delle Donne of the W.N.B.A., Dwyane Wade of the N.B.A., Vince Wilfork of the N.F.L. and the diver Greg Louganis, who was one of the first Olympians to come out as gay and talk about living with H.I.V. (and, at 56, is the oldest person to pose nude in the issue).
            Stepped out of my comfort zone for the #BodyIssue on stands July 6th. Sharing #myNAKEDtruth https://t.co/jFBlVEBcW3 pic.twitter.com/2Qn1ykwNhL Vulnerability and empowerment are a focus for the issue each year, Neely Lohmann, senior deputy editor at ESPN, said in a statement. Alison Overholt, the magazine’s editor in chief, said the goal was to get the athletes to show “the mental and emotional journey they’ve each been on to embrace what is different, unique and often imperfect about their own bodies and body stories.”Wilfork, a defensive tackle, said in the statement that the posing nude came easy to him. “If people can look at me, look at a guy that’s 325-plus doing an issue like this, I’m pretty sure that they might have a little confidence after seeing that it’s O.K. to be who you are,” he said.L.G.B.T. leaders have cheered Mosier’s inclusion in the magazine. Victoria M. Rodríguez-Roldán, a lawyer at the National LGBTQ Task Force who works on transgender issues, called it a “bold statement,” but said it was also a reminder of the problems that transgender people face.“For example, our nation still lacks a strong federal law that protects transgender people against discrimination,” she said. “This means that to this day too many transgender high school athletes are denied the opportunity to compete in the sport in which they excel.”We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.