By THE ASSOCIATED PRESSSEPT. 21, 2016
Henrik Lundqvist made 45 saves, and Sweden wrapped up the top seed in Group B by reaching overtime in a 4-3 loss to Team North America.Nathan MacKinnon scored the winner for North America, but Sweden got the point it needed to advance.Lundqvist, the Rangers’ starting goaltender, has stopped 81 of 85 shots at the World Cup.Auston Matthews, Vincent Trocheck and Johnny Gaudreau also scored for North America. Filip Forsberg, Nicklas Backstrom and Patrik Berglund scored for Sweden.North America goalie John Gibson stopped 35 of 38 shots starting in place of Matt Murray.CANADA MOVES ON, TOO Jonathan Toews had two goals and an assist and Team Canada easily beat Team Europe, 4-1, in its final preliminary round game at the World Cup of Hockey in Toronto.Get the big sports news, highlights and analysis from Times journalists, with distinctive takes on games and some behind-the-scenes surprises, delivered to your inbox every week.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.Canada won Group A and will face North America or Russia in the semifinals on Saturday night.Nolan Arenado hit a grand slam, German Marquez pitched five solid innings for his first major league win, and the Colorado Rockies beat visiting St. Louis, 11-1, and at least temporarily slowed the Cardinals’ playoff pursuit.AdvertisementMarquez (1-0), allowed one run and struck out three in his first major league start after three appearances out of the bullpen.AdvertisementMARINERS WIN IN 12TH Robinson Cano had a sacrifice fly in the 12th inning, and host Seattle beat Toronto, 2-1, to prevent the Blue Jays from extending their lead in the American League wild-card race.A federal judge removed the former Baylor football coach Art Briles and the former athletic director Ian McCaw from a lawsuit brought by woman who said they and the university had ignored her claims that she was sexually assaulted by a former player who was later convicted.Briles’ lawyers had argued that the men could not be sued as individuals in their official capacity under the federal gender discrimination law. The woman’s lawyer said both men would be sued again in federal court.The lawsuit against Baylor will continue.The Minnesota Timberwolves were working on a buyout with the 15-time All-Star forward Kevin Garnett, according to news reports.Garnett, 40, spent 12 seasons in Minnesota before being traded to Boston, where he helped the Celtics win the 2008 N.B.A. championship. He returned to Minnesota in 2014.Garnett, has averaged 17.8 points and 10 rebounds for his career since being drafted out of high school by the Timberwolves in 1995.BUCKS’ MIDDLETON INJURED Milwaukee Bucks guard Khris Middleton will have surgery to repair a torn left hamstring, an injury that will keep the team’s best shooter out for about six months.W.N.B.A. PLAYOFFS BEGIN  Angel McCoughtry scored 37 points and host Atlanta beat Seattle, 94-85, in the W.N.B.A. playoffs. The Dream will face the Chicago Sky on Sunday.A version of this article appears in print on September 22, 2016, on Page B14 of the New York edition with the headline: Sweden Advances to Hockey World Cup Semifinals.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.