By THE ASSOCIATED PRESSSEPT. 21, 2016
The United States was eliminated at the World Cup of Hockey on Tuesday night with a 4-2 loss to the tournament favorite Canada in Toronto.The United States (0-2) could not keep up with Canada’s talent, depth and speed in a Group A game it needed to win to stay alive. Canada and Team Europe, both 2-0, clinched spots in the semifinals.Matt Duchene scored twice, and Corey Perry and Patrice Bergeron each had a goal for Canada, which got 34 saves from Carey Price. United States goalie Jonathan Quick stopped 30 shots.Ryan McDonagh and T. J. Oshie scored for the Americans.SWEDEN SHUTS OUT FINLAND Rangers goaltender Henrik Lundqvist made 36 saves, Anton Stralman scored his first goal of the World Cup, and Sweden beat Finland, 2-0, in Toronto. With the win, Sweden (2-0) has a firm hold on the top seed in Group B.AdvertisementNew England Patriots Coach Bill Belichick would not rule out the injured quarterback Jimmy Garoppolo for Thursday night’s game against the Houston Texans.AdvertisementGaroppolo was a limited participant in Tuesday’s practice as he continued to recover from a right shoulder injury that he sustained late the first half of the Patriots’ 31-24 home victory over the Miami Dolphins last Sunday. Garoppolo, a third-year player, did not practice on Monday.The Patriots have yet to add another quarterback to their roster, making it seem more likely that the rookie Jacoby Brissett could make his first career start if Garoppolo cannot play.CUTLER SPRAINS HIS THUMB Chicago Bears Coach John Fox said quarterback Jay Cutler sustained a sprained right thumb in Monday night’s 29-14 loss to the visiting Philadelphia Eagles. Fox would not rule Cutler out for this weekend’s game against the Dallas Cowboys. If Cutler is not ready, Brian Hoyer will start.Pinch-hitter Brandon Guyer singled in a run with two outs in the ninth inning, and host Cleveland moved closer to an American League Central title with a 2-1 victory over Kansas City.Guyer’s hit off Joakim Soria landed just fair in the right-field corner and scored Coco Crisp. Guyer was the third pinch-hitter of the inning used by Indians Manager Terry Francona.Brian Flynn walked Jose Ramirez to start the ninth, and then dropped a bunt by Crisp, who was batting for Lonnie Chisenhall, for an error. A few batters later, Guyer delivered the game winner.The Royals, the reigning World Series champions, will be eliminated from contention in the division if they lose to Cleveland on Wednesday night.AdvertisementORTIZ KEEPS RED SOX ROLLING David Ortiz broke open a tight game with a three-run homer in the seventh inning, and Boston beat the host Baltimore Orioles, 5-2, for its sixth straight victory.With no European competitions clogging their schedules, Chelsea and Liverpool placed more importance on the English League Cup than usual this season.Both advanced to the final 16, but they took different routes.Chelsea came from two goals down at the Premier League champion Leicester, taking a tie game to extra time after goals by defenders Gary Cahill and César Azpilicueta before Cesc Fàbregas’s double clinched a 4-2 win.Visiting Liverpool defeated the second-tier Derby County, 3-0, with Ragnar Klavan, Philippe Coutinho and Divock Origi scoring the goals.Get the big sports news, highlights and analysis from Times journalists, with distinctive takes on games and some behind-the-scenes surprises, delivered to your inbox every week.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.AROUND EUROPE Host Sevilla moved to second place in the Spanish league after defeating Real Betis, 1-0, in the Seville derby. Defender Gabriel Mercado scored from a free kick delivered by midfielder Samir Nasri in the 51st minute.  Edinson Cavani scored his sixth goal of the season, and his teammate Lucas netted his fourth as host Paris St.-Germain returned to the top of the French league with a 3-0 victory over the newly promoted Dijon.  The French teenager Ousmane Dembélé scored his first goal in the German league for visiting Borussia Dortmund in a 5-1 rout of Wolfsburg.  A.C. Milan defeated visiting Lazio, 2-0, in the Italian league. Carlos Bacca opened the scoring in the first half, and M’Baye Niang converted a penalty after the break. Milan moved to 1 point behind the Serie A leader, Napoli.A version of this article appears in print on September 21, 2016, on Page B10 of the New York edition with the headline: Canada Ousts United States at the World Cup.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.