By THE ASSOCIATED PRESSSEPT. 20, 2016
Carson Wentz followed up an impressive N.F.L. debut with another solid performance, throwing for 190 yards and a touchdown, and the Philadelphia Eagles beat the Bears, 29-14, on Monday night in Chicago.Wentz showed plenty of poise, just as he did in his debut against Cleveland. Wentz, the No. 2 overall draft pick, completed 21 of 34 passes without an interception.Ryan Mathews ran for two scores, and the Eagles (2-0) scored two touchdowns late in the third quarter to break open a 2-point game.The Bears (0-2) lost several players and fell again after opening with a loss at Houston.Bears quarterback Jay Cutler, who completed 12 of 17 passes for 157 yards, walked to the locker room after an interception by Nigel Bradham late in the third quarter. Cutler was seen having his right hand examined on the sideline early in the third after a strip-sack by Destiny Vaeao. Brian Hoyer took over for Cutler and was 9 of 12 for 78 yards.AdvertisementMinnesota Vikings running back Adrian Peterson has a torn meniscus in his right knee, Coach Mike Zimmer said. The Vikings are still evaluating the injury and have not yet determined how much time he will miss.AdvertisementZimmer initially announced the nature of the injury while recording his weekly appearance on a local radio show and told KFXN-FM that he had not yet ruled out Peterson for the game on Sunday against the Carolina Panthers.Peterson was injured in the third quarter of Minnesota’s 17-14 victory over the Green Bay Packers on Sunday night on a 5-yard run, his longest of the night.AROUND THE N.F.L. Denver Broncos linebacker DeMarcus Ware will undergo surgery Tuesday on his broken right forearm and is expected to miss four or five weeks, Coach Gary Kubiak said. Ware was hurt when he ran into Von Miller while chasing down Indianapolis quarterback Andrew Luck in Denver’s 34-20 win on Sunday. • Cleveland’s Josh McCown will miss at least one game with an injured left shoulder, forcing the Browns to start their third quarterback in three games. McCown was filling in for Robert Griffin III, who broke a bone in his left shoulder in the season opener and will miss at least eight games. The rookie Cody Kessler will start on Sunday at Miami. • The San Diego Chargers have placed the versatile running back Danny Woodhead on season-ending injured reserve with a torn anterior cruciate ligament in his right knee. Woodhead was hurt when he was tackled after a catch in the first quarter of a 38-14 victory against Jacksonville on Sunday.Rick Porcello pitched a four-hitter for his major-league-high 21st victory, David Ortiz and Mookie Betts hit two-run homers, and the Boston Red Sox beat the host Baltimore Orioles, 5-2, on Monday night.The Red Sox stand atop the American League East by a season-high four games.Adam Jones homered and Mark Trumbo picked up his 102nd R.B.I. for the second-place Orioles, who started the day with a one-game lead over Toronto for the top A.L. wild card.Get the big sports news, highlights and analysis from Times journalists, with distinctive takes on games and some behind-the-scenes surprises, delivered to your inbox every week.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.Porcello (21-4) struck out seven and walked none in his third complete game of the year.ROYALS’ VENTURA GOES THE DISTANCE Yordano Ventura picked up his first complete-game victory, Kendrys Morales hit a three-run homer and the host Kansas City Royals defeated the Chicago White Sox, 8-3.The Royals have won three straight, keeping their faint playoff hopes flickering with 12 games remaining. The Royals went 14-5 against the White Sox this year.AdvertisementVentura (11-11) gave up nine hits, struck out five and walked one. His only other complete game in the majors was a 3-2 loss July 28 at Texas.Leon Draisaitl scored at 2 minutes 6 seconds in overtime to lift Europe to a 3-2 victory over the Czech Republic on Monday at a World Cup of Hockey game in Toronto.Mats Zuccarello sprung Draisaitl in all alone and beat the Czech goalie Petr Mrazek low on his blocker side for his second goal of the tournament.Zdeno Chara and Zuccarello scored in regulation while Jaroslav Halak stopped 28 shots for his second win of the tournament as Europe (2-0) moved into first place in Group A. Jakub Voracek and Martin Hanzal responded for the Czech Republic (0-2), which is all but eliminated from advancing to the semifinals.In another game Monday, Russia was given a fright by a youthful North America team before winning, 4-3, in a Group B game.The North American team, made up of players 23 and under from the United States and Canada, took a 1-0 lead in the first period. But Russia took control in the second period, surging to a 4-1 lead.New York City F.C. said that midfielder Frank Lampard was expected to be sidelined for three to four weeks after straining a muscle in his left calf.The team said that the injury was a low-grade strain of the soleus muscle and that it was distinct from the injury he sustained earlier this season.Lampard, 38, was hurt during Sunday’s game against Dallas. He has 12 goals this season.A version of this article appears in print on September 20, 2016, on Page B14 of the New York edition with the headline: Rookie Quarterback Leads the Eagles to 2-0.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.