By THE ASSOCIATED PRESSJULY 22, 2016
By the time Stephen Strasburg settled down and looked like his dominant self, it was too late, and his undefeated season was over.Strasburg struck out 10 but allowed six runs and seven hits, including two home runs, as the host Washington Nationals lost to the Los Angeles Dodgers, 6-3, on Thursday.Strasburg ended a 13-game winning streak that was the longest to begin a season for a National League starter since 1912, when Rube Marquard went 18-0 for the Giants when they played in New York.“During the streak he was outstanding,” Nationals Manager Dusty Baker said about Strasburg. “You know every streak is going to end. That’s the best streak I’ve ever seen, I think. Now you just go back to the drawing board and start a new streak.”AdvertisementStrasburg allowed two- and three-run homers to Justin Turner and an R.B.I. single to Adrian Gonzalez. After Turner’s second home run, Strasburg retired 12 of his final 13 batters.Advertisement“It was just a couple of pitches where I just didn’t execute when I needed to, and I got beat on them,” Strasburg said.SOUTH KOREAN CHARGED WITH GAMBLING South Korean prosecutors formally charged the Korea Baseball Organization pitcher Lee Tae-yang over allegations that he deliberately allowed first-inning walks and runs in two games last season after receiving 20 million won ($17,500) from a gambling broker, who has been arrested.Around the Majors Dustin Pedroia went 5 for 5, and David Ortiz had a two-run homer as the host Boston Red Sox beat the Minnesota Twins, 13-2.  • Francisco Liriano struck out 13 to lead the host Pittsburgh Pirates to a 5-3 victory over the Milwaukee Brewers.  • Ichiro Suzuki recorded two hits, moving within four of 3,000 for his career, as the visiting Miami Marlins beat the Philadelphia Phillies, 9-3.  • Aledmys Diaz’s walk-off single in the ninth gave the host St. Louis Cardinals a 6-5 victory over the San Diego Padres.Lynetta Kizer had a career-high 21 points as the visiting Indiana Fever beat the Liberty, 82-70, in the final game for both teams before the Olympic break.With the game tied at 58-58 near the end of the third quarter, Marissa Coleman hit a 3-pointer to start a 15-2 burst. She had 11 points during that run, including three 3-pointers and a tough fall-away jumper. Her last 3-pointer made it 73-60 with 6 minutes 10 seconds left in the game.Tina Charles had 25 points and 13 rebounds for the Liberty, who fell to 18-8.MARC GASOL TO MISS OLYMPICS The Spanish basketball federation said center Marc Gasol would miss the Rio Olympics after breaking his right foot in February with the Memphis Grizzlies. Spain won silver medals at the last two Olympics, losing both finals to the United States.A TOURNAMENT MADE IN UTAH The University of Utah, Brigham Young, Utah State and Weber State will play in a December men’s basketball tournament called the Beehive Classic starting this season and running through 2019.AdvertisementTEMPORARY HOUSING The Minnesota Lynx will play their home games next summer at Xcel Energy Center in St. Paul so their current home — Target Center in Minneapolis — can be fully renovated in time for the N.B.A.’s Timberwolves to open their 2017-18 season.The Jacksonville Jaguars worked out the polarizing defensive end Greg Hardy in a bid for pass-rushing help after failing to land Olivier Vernon or Robert Ayers in free agency.After five seasons in Carolina, Hardy had a tumultuous season in Dallas last year. It started with a four-game suspension for domestic violence and featured several other disruptions, including a physical confrontation with an assistant coach.Green Bay Wants to Host Draft The Green Bay Packers would like to host the N.F.L. draft in the league’s smallest market. Mark Murphy, the team president, told stockholders that the Packers have applied to host in 2019, 2020 or 2021. The last two drafts have been held in Chicago after years of being held in New York City.Three Italian players will be investigated by the International Tennis Federation’s anti-corruption unit after they were suspended by their national federation for match fixing.The Italian federation suspended the 143rd-ranked Marco Cecchinato for 18 months and fined him 40,000 euros ($44,000) over allegations that he lost on purpose in Mohammedia, Morocco, in October 2015. He was beaten in a quarterfinal match by Kamil Majchrzak, 6-1, 6-4.Get the big sports news, highlights and analysis from Times journalists, with distinctive takes on games and some behind-the-scenes surprises, delivered to your inbox every week.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.Riccardo Accardi and Antonio Campo, who do not compete on the ATP Tour, were barred for several alleged attempts to fix matches. Accardi was barred for 12 months and Campo for four.Cilic Splits With Coach Marin Cilic, who is ranked 12th in the world, split with coach Goran Ivanisevic after nearly three years together, including a United States Open win in 2014. Ivanisevic won Wimbledon in 2001.AdvertisementAround Tennis Top-seeded Angelique Kerber, who lost to Serena Williams in the Wimbledon final, withdrew from the Swedish Open because of an elbow injury.  • Gastao Elias won a dramatic tiebreaker to upset top-seeded Pablo Cuevas in the second round of the Croatia Open.Borussia Dortmund is bringing back forward Mario Götze from Bayern Munich. Götze left Dortmund for Bayern in 2013 but never settled down and was mostly a bench player under the previous coach, Pep Guardiola. Dortmund said Götze would sign a four-year contract once he had passed a medical examination.Götze did not play a major role for Germany at this year’s European Championships. In the 2014 World Cup title game, he scored the extra-time goal that beat Argentina.Spain Names New Coach Spain handed the reins of its men’s national team to Julen Lopetegui, who was fired by F.C. Porto in January. He replaces Vicente del Bosque, whose eight-year stint included World Cup and European Championships titles.Woody Austin made four birdies in a six-hole stretch on the back nine and finished with a four-under-par 68 on to take the first-round lead in the Senior British Open in Carnoustie, Scotland. Mark O’Meara joined six other golfers who were a stroke back.Lead Shared at PGA Event The United States Open champion Dustin Johnson made a 10-foot eagle putt on the 18th hole for a six-under 66 and a share of the Canadian Open lead with Luke List in Oakville, Ontario. Johnson played the three par-5 holes on the back nine in four under.The English Heritage charity kicked off an unlikely campaign for jousting to be included at future editions of the Summer Olympics. In jousting, competitors wearing armor gallop toward opponents while thrusting a lance.Next month, the International Olympic Committee will select baseball/softball, surfing, skateboarding, karate or sports climbing to be added for the 2020 Tokyo Olympics.A version of this article appears in print on July 22, 2016, on Page B12 of the New York edition with the headline: Home Runs End Strasburg’s 13-Game Winning Streak.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.