SEPT. 18, 2016
In Gee Chun won the Evian Championship on Sunday at 21 under par — the best 72-hole finish in a major by a man or woman — after having missed the cut in the same tournament in Évian-les-Bains, France, last year.Chun needed to sink a 10-foot par put on the 18th after sending her tee shot into the rough but captured her second career major after her caddie raised the stakes.“I was so nervous,” Chun said. “So my caddie David Jones told me, ‘If you make the par, I buy the dinner.’”Chun dropped in the par putt to break the record of 20 under held by Henrik Stenson and Jason Day. The women’s record had been 19 under.AdvertisementChun, 22, shot a two-under 69 in the final round — her highest of the tournament by three strokes — for a 263, four strokes ahead of her South Korean countrywomen Sung Hyun Park and So Yeon Ryu.AdvertisementMiguel Cabrera got his 2,500th career hit, J. D. Martinez and Justin Upton homered and visiting Detroit beat Cleveland for only the second time this season.Detroit had been outscored by 91-40 in the teams’ first 14 meetings of the year.AROUND THE MAJORS Mark Trumbo hit his major-league-leading 43rd home run to break an eighth-inning tie and host Baltimore beat Tampa Bay, 2-1.  Tucker Barnhart tied his career high with four R.B.I. as Cincinnati beat visiting Pittsburgh, 7-4, and ended the Pirates’ four-game winning streak.  Christian Yelich hit a game-tying homer before J. T. Realmuto’s go-ahead infield single and Miami rallied past host Philadelphia, 5-4.  Chris Carter homered and pitcher Wily Peralta hit a run-scoring single as visiting Milwaukee beat the Chicago Cubs, 3-1.Camilo Zúñiga scored less than a minute after entering the game and helped Watford defeat visiting Manchester United for the first time in 30 years.Zúñiga scored in the 83rd minute to restore Watford to the lead, and Troy Deeney scored on a penalty in the fifth minute of stoppage time as Manchester United lost for the third time in a week.RAPINOE KNEELS; AMERICA WINS Carli Lloyd scored her 94th international goal as the United States women’s team beat the Netherlands, 3-1, in Atlanta after Megan Rapinoe again knelt during the playing of the national anthem.Get the big sports news, highlights and analysis from Times journalists, with distinctive takes on games and some behind-the-scenes surprises, delivered to your inbox every week.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.Rapinoe has knelt to express solidarity with the protest of San Francisco 49ers quarterback Colin Kaepernick, who is trying to bring attention to racial inequality.ONE UNDER HIS BELT Landon Donovan scored his first goal since coming out of retirement, and the visiting Los Angeles Galaxy tied Sporting K.C., 2-2. Donovan entered in the 74th minute and scored on a give-and-go two minutes later.AdvertisementBLOWING A LEAD AND A CHANCE Jozy Altidore scored his second goal of the game in the 86th minute and Toronto F.C. tied the visiting Red Bulls, 3-3. The Red Bulls blew leads of 2-0 and 3-1 to miss a chance to clinch a playoff spot.Simon Pagenaud won the GoPro Grand Prix in Sonoma, Calif., to clinch his first IndyCar title in his second season driving for Team Penske.Pagenaud entered the race 43 points ahead of his teammate Will Power. Power dropped out 38 laps into the 85-lap race with mechanical problems.NASCAR CHASE BEGINS Martin Truex Jr. shot to the front after a late restart to win the Teenage Mutant Ninja Turtles 400, the first race of the Chase for the Sprint Cup Championship. Argentina reached the Davis Cup final over the defending champion, Britain, even without Juan Martín del Potro.Leonardo Mayer played in del Potro’s place and beat Dan Evans, 4-6, 6-3, 6-2, 6-4, to seal Argentina’s victory. Del Potro, who beat Andy Murray on Friday, sat out because he did not want to risk aggravating his wrist injuries.Argentina has reached the Davis Cup final five times but has never won. It will face Croatia, which advanced to its second final by defeating France when Marin Cilic beat Richard Gasquet in straight sets, 6-3, 6-2, 7-5.Team North America — composed of American and Canadian players ages 23 and under — beat Finland, 4-1, in Group B at the World Cup of Hockey in Toronto.Jack Eichel, Johnny Gaudreau, Jonathan Drouin and Nathan MacKinnon scored for North America, which peppered Finland goaltender Pekka Rinne with 43 shots.AdvertisementSWEDEN BEATS RUSSIA Jacob Markstrom made 27 saves in place of the ill star goaltender Henrik Lundqvist, and Sweden beat Russia, 2-1.A version of this article appears in print on September 19, 2016, on Page D4 of the New York edition with the headline: A Major Record, Even After a Modest Round.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.