By THE ASSOCIATED PRESSSEPT. 17, 2016
Jaroslav Halak made 35 saves as Team Europe upset the United States, 3-0, in Toronto in a stunning opening game at the World Cup of Hockey.Marian Gaborik, Leon Draisaitl and Pierre-Edouard Bellemare scored for Team Europe, which is made up of players from Slovakia, Switzerland, Germany, Austria, Norway, Denmark, France and Slovenia.The United States outshot Europe by 35-17, but Jonathan Quick allowed three goals on 17 shots, falling victim to blunders in front of him. A mistake by defenseman Ryan McDonagh set up Gaborik’s goal, and a turnover by forward Patrick Kane led to Draisaitl’s.Cleveland Indians starter Carlos Carrasco broke his pitching hand on the second pitch of a 1-0, 10-inning win over the Detroit Tigers when a line drive by Ian Kinsler struck him. The Indians, who lead the American League Central, did not provide a timetable for Carrasco’s recovery, but they said catcher Yan Gomes would be sidelined for six to eight weeks with a broken right wrist.AdvertisementAROUND THE MAJORS Ryan Braun hit two two-run homers in the Milwaukee Brewers’ 11-3 rout of the host Chicago Cubs, reaching 30 home runs for the first time since his suspension for performance-enhancing drugs in 2013.  Evan Longoria homered and tripled as the Tampa Bay Rays beat the host Baltimore Orioles, 5-2.  Jeremy Hellickson pitched a three-hitter as the host Philadelphia Phillies beat the Miami Marlins, 8-0.Get the big sports news, highlights and analysis from Times journalists, with distinctive takes on games and some behind-the-scenes surprises, delivered to your inbox every week.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.Andy and Jamie Murray kept Britain alive in its Davis Cup semifinal against Argentina in Glasgow, winning their doubles match over Juan Martín del Potro and Leonardo Mayer, 6-1, 3-6, 6-4, 6-4, and reducing Britain’s deficit to 2-1.AdvertisementMarin Cilic and Ivan Dodig put Croatia ahead by 2-1 in its semifinal against France in Zadar, Croatia, by upsetting the top-ranked doubles pair Nicolas Mahut and Pierre-Hugues Herbert, 7-6 (6), 5-7, 7-6 (6), 6-3.In Gee Chun of South Korea remained on course for the second major of her career after posting a six-under-par 65 in the third round of the Evian Championship. At 19 under, Chun held a four-shot lead over Sung Hyun Park and has a chance to post the lowest 72-hole score in a major. Henrik Stenson and Jason Day share the record at 20 under.ITALIAN OPEN Alexander Levy surged into a one-shot lead before play was suspended because of darkness in Monza, Italy. He started six shots off the lead but recorded an eagle and five birdies in a brilliant front nine.Coach Pep Guardiola is already making history at Manchester City, which beat visiting Bournemouth, 4-0. Manchester City has opened a season with eight straight wins — five in the Premier League and three in the Champions League — for the first time in the club’s 136 years.AROUND EUROPE Lionel Messi scored twice as Barcelona won, 5-1, at Leganes.  Arkadiusz Milik came off the bench and scored twice to help host Napoli beat Bologna, 3-1.N.Y.C.F.C. 2, DALLAS 2 Khiry Shelton finished Jack Harrison’s diagonal cross with a header in the 78th minute as New York City F.C. tied visiting Dallas. Thomas McNamara scored in the eighth minute for N.Y.C.F.C., which is 12-9-9.A version of this article appears in print on September 18, 2016, on Page SP2 of the New York edition with the headline: Europe Stuns U.S. in Hockey World Cup Opener.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.