SEPT. 16, 2016
Argentina took a 2-0 lead over Britain, the defending champion, in a Davis Cup semifinal in Glasgow on Friday as Juan Martín del Potro defeated Andy Murray in five sets (and more than five hours) and Guido Pella beat Kyle Edmund in four. At 5 hours 7 minutes, the Murray match was the longest of both players’ careers.In the other semifinal, Marin Cilic beat Lucas Pouille in four sets in Zadar, Croatia, enabling Croatia to draw even with France. Earlier, Richard Gasquet defeated Borna Coric in straight sets.The former N.F.L. safety Darren Sharper was included this week on the Pro Football Hall of Fame nomination list. Sharper, a five-time Pro Bowl player, pleaded guilty in a case in which he was accused of drugging and raping up to 16 women in four states. He was sentenced last month to 18 years in prison. A spokesman for the Hall of Fame in Canton, Ohio, Joe Horrigan, noted that there is no character clause in the bylaws. Hall members with criminal records include O. J. Simpson and Lawrence Taylor.A BILLS FIRING Buffalo fired its offensive coordinator, Greg Roman, a day after its record fell to 0-2 with a 37-31 loss to the Jets. The coach of the running backs, Anthony Lynn, will take over.Get the big sports news, highlights and analysis from Times journalists, with distinctive takes on games and some behind-the-scenes surprises, delivered to your inbox every week.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.The Chicago Cubs celebrated the National League Central title with a dramatic 5-4 home victory over the Milwaukee Brewers. After Miguel Montero connected for a leadoff home run in the 10th, the Cubs mobbed him at home plate and then pulled on postseason hats and shirts as the crowd of 40,823 cheered.AdvertisementBEANBALL BRINGS SUSPENSION Major League Baseball suspended Atlanta Braves pitcher Jose Ramirez three games and fined him an undisclosed amount for throwing a pitch in the area of Jose Fernandez’s head during a game with the Marlins on Wednesday.AdvertisementIn Gee Chun posted a five-under-par round of 66 to take a two-shot lead at the Evian Championship. Chun, a 22-year-old South Korean who won the 2015 United States Women’s Open, had six birdies and a bogey at Évian-les-Bains, France. Sung Hyun Park of South Korea and Shanshan Feng of China were tied for second at 11 under par.Tamera Young scored 22 points to lead the Chicago Sky to their third straight victory, 92-68, over the visiting Liberty. The Sky (18-15) moved a game in front of Atlanta for the No. 4 seed in the playoffs and a first-round bye. The Liberty (21-13) rested several players in their final regular-season game, including Epiphanny Prince, who had signed a multiyear contract extension earlier in the day.The stuntman Eddie Braun successfully jumped over the Snake River Canyon in Idaho in an ode to his boyhood idol, Evel Knievel.Braun's custom-built rocket, called Evel Spirit, was launched off a steep ramp on the edge of the canyon rim and reached an estimated 400 miles per hour before its parachute deployed, allowing Braun and the ship to land safely in fields on the other side of the canyon. Braun has said the rocket was identical to the model Knievel used for his failed canyon attempt on Sept. 8, 1974, when Knievel landed in the bottom of the canyon, sustaining minor injuries, after his parachute deployed prematurely.A version of this article appears in print on September 17, 2016, on Page D6 of the New York edition with the headline: Del Potro Beats Murray in Davis Cup Match.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.