By THE ASSOCIATED PRESSSEPT. 15, 2016
Major League Baseball suspended A. J. Preller, the general manager of the San Diego Padres, for 30 days without pay on Thursday because of improprieties regarding his July trade of pitcher Drew Pomeranz to the Boston Red Sox.A person with direct knowledge of the deal confirmed a report by ESPN that the Padres had deliberately withheld medical information from other teams in trade talks. M.L.B. said it considered the matter closed and had no further comment, and the person was not authorized to speak publicly.The Padres issued a statement that called the concealing of medical information “unintentional, but inexcusable,” and Preller said he took full responsibility.“I want to emphasize that there was no malicious intent on the part of me, or anyone on my staff, to conceal information or disregard M.L.B.’s recommended guidelines,” Preller said in a statement.AdvertisementIt was the second suspension for Preller, who was suspended for three months (later reduced to one) while working for the Texas Rangers in 2010. That suspension involved an improper negotiation with an international free agent.AdvertisementPreller’s tenure with the Padres has been marked by aggressive moves. Hired after the 2014 season, he traded many of the prospects he had inherited for veterans, a strategy that failed when the team went 74-88. Preller has since dumped many of the players he acquired — and others — as the team continues to struggle.In one July deal, the Padres sent starters Andrew Cashner and Colin Rea to the Miami Marlins in a seven-player trade. But Rea needed Tommy John surgery after one start with Miami and was returned to the Padres for another prospect in the deal.Even so, the only move for which Preller was disciplined was the trade of Pomeranz, who has made all his starts for the Red Sox but cost the team pitcher Anderson Espinoza, widely considered to be the best prospect traded this summer. Pomeranz, who was an All-Star for San Diego, is 2-5 with a 4.60 E.R.A. in 11 starts for Boston.TYLER KEPNERAROUND THE MAJORS Jose Abreu continued his torrid streak with a home run and single, and Carlos Sanchez drove in the winning run in the ninth inning in the Chicago White Sox’ 2-1 victory over the visiting Cleveland Indians. The first-place Indians remained six games ahead of the Detroit Tigers in the American League Central.  Brian Dozier’s two-run single highlighted a four-run second inning, and the Minnesota Twins handed the host Detroit Tigers a 5-1 loss.  Andrew McCutchen hit two solo homers, Chad Kuhl pitched six effective innings and the Pittsburgh Pirates beat the Phillies, 15-2, in Philadelphia.Feyenoord of the Netherlands stunned Manchester United, 1-0, on the opening day of Europa League play in London on Thursday, handing the English giant a second loss in less than a week.For Feyenoord, it was just more of the same: The team has won all five of its Dutch league matches.Midfielder Tonny Trindade de Vilhena broke the deadlock in a tight Group A match when he side-footed the ball just inside David de Gea’s right-hand post in the 79th minute, after running onto a cutback from the right by Nicolai Jorgensen.Get the big sports news, highlights and analysis from Times journalists, with distinctive takes on games and some behind-the-scenes surprises, delivered to your inbox every week.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.As United, playing without the first-team regulars Wayne Rooney, Luke Shaw and Antonio Valencia, stormed the Feyenoord goal in an attempt to tie the score, Zlatan Ibrahimovic fired a low free kick through a wall of defenders during injury time, but the reserve goalkeeper Brad Jones got down easily to block the effort.AdvertisementFive days after losing by 2-1 to crosstown rival Manchester City, United struggled to threaten Feyenoord.SCORING IN RECORD TIME Liberec midfielder Jan Sykora got the Europa League off to a flying start by firing in the competition’s fastest ever goal, just 10.69 seconds into their Group J clash with Qarabag in Baku, Azerbaijan.Qarabag kicked off, and Sykora ran onto a loose ball in open space and slotted a low shot past goalkeeper Ibrahim Sehic from the edge of the penalty area.Sykora’s strike was nearly three seconds quicker than the previous best, set in March last year when Vitolo scored for Sevilla in 13.21 seconds against Villareal.Qarabag ultimately snatched a 2-2 draw.RAPINOE KNEELS BEFORE U.S. MATCH Megan Rapinoe knelt during the national anthem before a friendly match between the United States women’s national team and Thailand in Columbus, Ohio.Rapinoe first knelt during the anthem on Sept. 4 before a game with her National Women’s Soccer League team, the Seattle Reign. She said she wanted to express solidarity with San Francisco 49ers quarterback Colin Kaepernick, who, to bring attention to racial inequality, is not standing during the anthem.Rapinoe entered Thursday’s match, a 9-0 rout by the United States, at the start of the second half.In Gee Chun and Sung Hyun Park, both of South Korea, birdied eight holes each as they carded eight-under-par rounds of 63 for a share of the lead in the first round of the Evian Championship.AdvertisementIn the fifth and final L.P.G.A. major of the season, Lydia Ko’s bid to defend her title — and clinch a third career major by the age of 19 — got off to a rocky start as she finished seven shots behind the leaders in Évian-les-Bains, France.While Ko’s play was patchy, with a bogey and only two birdies, her rival Ariya Jutanugarn of Thailand had a day to forget with a two-over 73 featuring a triple bogey.Annie Park of the United States posted an eagle and five birdies in a seven-under round of 64 to move into a tie for third place with the Olympic bronze medalist Shanshan Feng, who was third here last year. They are one stroke behind the leaders.A version of this article appears in print on September 16, 2016, on Page B14 of the New York edition with the headline: Padres’ G.M. Suspended 30 Days Over Trade.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.