By THE ASSOCIATED PRESSSEPT. 14, 2016
Cristiano Ronaldo and Álvaro Morata scored late goals as Real Madrid rallied to beat visiting Sporting Lisbon, 2-1, on Wednesday and avoid starting its defense of the Champions League title with a shocking defeat.Ronaldo tied the game with an 89th-minute free kick against Lisbon, his former club, and Morata scored the winner deep in injury time to allow Real Madrid to win a game that Lisbon had largely controlled.Madrid avoided what would have been only its second loss in 31 Champions League matches at home.Bruno César gave Sporting the lead with a left-footed shot three minutes into the second half. Later, though, Ronaldo’s free kick bounced in off the post after being touched by Sporting goalkeeper Rui Patricio.The winner also came in dramatic fashion, coming from two second-half substitutes: James Rodríguez curled a cross into the penalty area, and Morata found the net with a firm header from near the penalty spot.AdvertisementDELAYED, BUT NOT DAUNTED Sergio Agüero scored a hat trick for Manchester City in a 4-0 win over visiting Borussia Mönchengladbach in a Champions League match that had been rescheduled because of torrential rain.AdvertisementAgüero tapped in the opening goal in the ninth minute, converted a penalty kick in the 28th and rounded the goalkeeper in a one-on-one chance in the 77th.AROUND THE CHAMPIONS LEAGUE Tottenham’s Champions League relocation to Wembley Stadium in London got off to a bad start with a 2-1 loss to Monaco.  Lyon, playing without five of its regular starters, beat visiting Dinamo Zagreb, 3-0.  F.C. Porto drew, 1-1, with Copenhagen, which held on for the tie despite having Jan Gregus sent off in the 66th minute after a second yellow card.  Bayer Leverkusen squandered a two-goal lead in a 2-2 draw against C.S.K.A. Moscow at home.UEFA NAMES NEW PRESIDENT Aleksander Ceferin, the head of the Slovenian soccer federation, was named the new president of UEFA, the sport’s governing body in Europe, to finish the term of the suspended Michel Platini.Get the big sports news, highlights and analysis from Times journalists, with distinctive takes on games and some behind-the-scenes surprises, delivered to your inbox every week.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.Platini, in a farewell address before Ceferin’s election at a meeting in Athens, insisted that he would continue to fight the four-year suspension imposed on him by FIFA, soccer’s global governing body.Anthony Rizzo hit two home runs, and Jon Lester pitched eight strong innings as the visiting Chicago Cubs beat the St. Louis Cardinals, 7-0, to secure a playoff spot.The Cubs improved their major-league-best record to 93-52 and can clinch their first National League Central title since 2008 on Thursday with a win over visiting Milwaukee or a loss by St. Louis at San Francisco.Lester (17-4) allowed just four Cardinals to reach base.AROUND THE MAJORS Alex Cobb, who recently returned after Tommy John surgery, won for the first time in almost two years as Tampa Bay won at Toronto, 8-1.  Mark Trumbo hit his major league-leading 42nd home run Baltimore won at Boston, 1-0, to pull one game behind the Red Sox in the American League East.AdvertisementLinebacker Brandon Marshall and safety Darian Stewart were fined for helmet-to-helmet hits on Panthers quarterback Cam Newton during Denver’s 21-20 win over Carolina in the season opener.Marshall was fined $24,309 and Stewart $18,231, according to news reports. But both players said the fines would not deter them from playing aggressively.The N.H.L. will employ concussion monitors at each game and four more watching all games from a central location this season.The spotters, who will work in the league’s department of player safety, will have the authority to remove players from games based on their visible symptoms.Previously, team-affiliated concussion spotters could recommend to medical staffs that players be removed from games but not require it.A version of this article appears in print on September 15, 2016, on Page B14 of the New York edition with the headline: Real Madrid’s Title Defense Gets a Late Start.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.