AdvertisementSupported byBy Justin SablichThe Sablich brothers have provided award-winning fantasy football advice for The New York Times since 2010. See their weekly player rankings and visit 5thDownFantasy.com for more fantasy analysis. You can also ask them questions through their Twitter account, @5thdownfantasy.Carson Palmer (ARI at Dolphins) — After up-and-down performances in the first six weeks of the season, Palmer has turned into one of the more reliable fantasy options, with at least 340 passing yards or two touchdown passes in each game since Week 7, and seven touchdown passes over his last three games. He should keep it rolling against the Dolphins, who have given up at least 30 fantasy points in each of the last two games to quarterbacks and the fourth-most points to the position this season.Ben Roethlisberger (PIT at Bills) — At first glance, a road game against the Bills seems like trouble from a fantasy perspective. But Buffalo has been one of the friendlier defenses to opposing quarterbacks in the last five games, the floor being a 17-point performance by Andy Dalton in Week 11 with every other quarterback topping 20 points. Roethlisberger is more reliable at home, but he threw three touchdown passes on the road against the Colts just two weeks ago.Sleeper: Trevor Siemian (DEN at Titans)Proceed With Caution: Marcus Mariota (TEN vs. Broncos)These player rankings from the Sablich brothers are for standard scoring formats and will be updated each week.Jeremy Hill (CIN at Browns) — This is the first of two good fantasy playoff matchups for Hill, who totaled 192 yards and a touchdown against the Browns in Week 7. This time around, Giovani Bernard, who had 17 carries in that game, will not be eating into his workload. The Browns have yielded the second-most fantasy points to the position through 13 weeks.Matt Forte (NYJ at 49ers) — It takes bravery to start anyone on the Jets these days, but in this matchup, Forte is capable of doing plenty of damage. Incredibly, in 12 games against the 49ers this season, 15 backs have topped at least 10 fantasy points. Nine of them reached at least 15 points. In fact, the only starting back not to reach at least 10 fantasy points was Todd Gurley in Week 1.Ryan Mathews (PHI vs. Redskins) — Assuming he is healthy enough to return, Mathews gets a plus matchup against the Redskins, who have been exploited by opposing backs over the last three weeks, allowing five touchdowns.Sleeper: Doug Martin (TB vs. Saints)Proceed With Caution: Jay Ajayi (MIA vs. Cardinals)Tyrell Williams (SD at Panthers) — He has found the end zone in each of the last four games. Since Week 5, he has had at least 10 standard fantasy points in six of eight games. Next up is a favorable matchup with the Panthers, who have given up the sixth-most fantasy points to wide receivers this season.Jamison Crowder (WAS at Eagles) — Few receivers have been as consistent as Crowder of late. He has scored at least 10 standard fantasy points in six of the last seven games, including a touchdown in four of the last five. Crowder had 52 receiving yards and a touchdown against the Eagles in Week 6, and Philadelphia has allowed the sixth-most fantasy points to the position.Julian Edelman (NE vs. Ravens) — He is clearly the focal point of the Patriots’ passing game, with Rob Gronkowski sidelined. Edelman was targeted 17 times when Gronk was out in Week 11 and caught eight of 12 targets for 101 yards last week. The Ravens are now considered a favorable matchup for receivers, having yielded the 10th-most fantasy points to the position this season.Sleeper: Quincy Enunwa (NYJ at 49ers)Proceed With Caution: T.Y. Hilton (IND vs. Texans)Tyler Eifert (CIN at Browns) — With A.J. Green expected to be out again this week, Eifert should get more attention, though there’s no explaining why he was targeted only twice last week. He still turned one of those into a touchdown, and he is facing a team that has allowed the third most fantasy points to the position this season.Sleeper: Hunter Henry (SD at Panthers)Proceed With Caution: Dwayne Allen (IND vs. Texans)Defense/Special TeamsStart: CIN at Browns; MIN at Jaguars.Advertisement