AdvertisementSupported bySports BriefingBy The Associated PressJoel Embiid scored 16 of his 25 points in the fourth quarter and overtime to lead the Philadelphia 76ers to their first victory of the season, a 109-105 defeat of the Indiana Pacers on Friday night. Ersan Ilyasova added 14 points for Philadelphia, which was the last winless team in the N.B.A. The 76ers ended a 44-game losing streak in October and November that dated to Nov. 22, 2013.Paul George had 26 points, and Monta Ellis added 19 for the Pacers.”The Philadelphia Phillies acquired the versatile Howie Kendrick on Friday in a trade with the Los Angeles Dodgers for first baseman Darin Ruf and the utility man Darnell Sweeney.Kendrick, 33, hit .255 for the Dodgers. A career .289 hitter, he is to be paid $10 million next season. Ruf, 30, hit .205 last season. Sweeney, 25, batted .233 for the Class AAA Lehigh Valley Iron Pigs.BLUE JAYS SIGN MORALES The Toronto Blue Jays agreed to a three-year, $33 million deal with designated hitter Kendrys Morales. Morales, 33, batted .263 with 30 homers and 93 R.B.I. for the Kansas City Royals.Mike Aaman and Romone Saunders scored 15 points each to lead visiting Wagner to a 67-58 upset of No. 18 UConn in the season opener for both teams. It was the Huskies’ first loss in a home opener on campus in Storrs after 27 wins. A transfer, Terry Larrier, had 19 points, and the freshman Alterique Gilbert had 14 to lead the Huskies.A player making his debut for Germany notched a hat trick in an 8-0 rout of tiny San Marino in Frankfurt in a qualifying match for the 2018 World Cup in Russia.Serge Gnabry became the first player to score a hat trick in his debut for Germany since Dieter Mueller in 1976. San Marino did not manage a shot at goal and remained winless in 126 international matches.Charging into violent 30-foot waves at a Maui surf break known as Jaws, a group of women made history as they competed for the first time in the World Surf League’s big-wave surfing competition.During the first heat, two women were taken to the hospital with knee injuries, and during the second, Bianca Valenti’s surfboard broke in half when she wiped out on a wave. Paige Alms, a surfer from Hawaii, won the competition.The N.F.L. fined Travis Kelce, the Kansas City Chiefs’ tight end, $24,309 after he was ejected for protesting a noncall on Sunday by mockingly tossing his towel toward an official.Jets cornerback Buster Skrine and defensive lineman Sheldon Richardson were each fined $9,115 for unnecessary roughness.JETS UNCERTAIN  The Jets listed quarterback Ryan Fitzpatrick as questionable for the game Sunday against the Los Angeles Rams and said his participation would be a game-time decision. He sprained his left knee. Bryce Petty will get his first N.F.L. start if Fitzpatrick cannot play.Carolina Hurricanes forward Bryan Bickell has been told he has multiple sclerosis, the team announced.Bickell, 30, has scored one goal in seven games with the Hurricanes this season. He won the Stanley Cup with the Chicago Blackhawks in 2010, 2013 and 2015.“Since the 2015 playoffs, I’ve been struggling to understand what was going on with my body,” Bickell said in a statement. “Again during the past few weeks, it felt like something wasn’t right. Obviously this is a bit of shock for my family and me, but I am hopeful I will be able to return to the ice and continue playing the game that I love.”REUTERSDEVILS WIN IN OVERTIME Andy Greene scored on a penalty shot 29 seconds into overtime, giving the Devils a 2-1 victory over the host Buffalo Sabres. Greene earned the penalty shot when he was held from behind by Buffalo’s Evander Kane on a breakaway. Yohann Auvitu scored his first N.H.L. goal, and Keith Kinkaid made 25 saves to help the Devils win their third straight.Advertisement