By BILL PENNINGTONDEC. 6, 2016
EAST RUTHERFORD, N.J. — The Giants were a squabbling, hobbling team when they left Pittsburgh in defeat Sunday night. During their first day back at work in New Jersey on Tuesday, a tiff involving Victor Cruz was resolved, but defensive players spoke as if the injured defensive end Jason Pierre-Paul was already ruled out of the team’s next game, against the Dallas Cowboys.“His presence is going to be missed,” linebacker Jonathan Casillas said of Pierre-Paul, who missed most of the Pittsburgh game after injuring his groin in the second quarter.Using Pierre-Paul’s nickname, Casillas added, “We have guys who are going to step up, but no one is J.P.P.”The Giants issued no medical update on Pierre-Paul, who walked through the locker room Tuesday without a limp but declined to talk to reporters.AdvertisementLosing their best defender against the Cowboys, who have the N.F.L.’s best record, would be a serious setback, especially since Pierre-Paul has had some of his most dominating games against the Cowboys.“Interceptions, sacks — he’s done it all against Dallas,” Casillas said. “Tony Romo probably had nightmares about him for years.”Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.In Pierre-Paul’s absence, defensive ends Kerry Wynn and Romeo Okwara would most likely see more playing time. There is a possibility that Pierre-Paul will miss multiple weeks. He crumpled to the turf while rushing Steelers quarterback Ben Roethlisberger on Sunday. In 12 games this season, Pierre-Paul has seven sacks and 53 tackles and has forced three fumbles. He took one of those fumbles into the end zone for a touchdown.Cruz, who was upset that he did not have a pass thrown his way in Pittsburgh, seemed placated by a meeting Tuesday with Coach Ben McAdoo.“It was a conversation that needed to be had, and we turned the page and moved on,” Cruz said. “It was not contentious — just two guys trying to problem-solve. I saw opportunities last week when I could have gotten the football, but sometimes the defense dictates where the ball is going.”Cruz has only 27 receptions this season, but his average gain per catch (17.1 yards) leads the team. He had the game-winning touchdown catch in the Giants’ season-opening victory over Dallas on Sept. 11.“My only quarrel,” Cruz said, “was that I’m trying to compete at the highest level and be a catalyst for helping my team win. I think there will be a concerted effort to get everyone the ball, myself included. I feel like I’ll be getting at least one target this week.”We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.