AdvertisementSupported bySports BriefingJimmy Graham needed only one hand to catch two first-half touchdown passes from Russell Wilson, and the Seahawks held off a late rally for a 31-25 victory over the Buffalo Bills on Monday night in Seattle.The Seahawks won their 11th straight Monday night game behind a huge game from Graham, a tight end. Still less than a year removed from a major knee injury, Graham used his right arm to catch a 17-yard touchdown pass from Wilson on the first play of the second quarter and later used the same arm to cradle an 18-yard touchdown pass in the final moments of the first half.But the Seahawks had to hold on as quarterback Tyrod Taylor led the Bills inside the Seattle 10 in the final seconds.Taylor was sacked by Cliff Avril on a third-and-goal from the 8, and on fourth-and-goal, Taylor’s pass into the end zone fell incomplete.JETS UNCERTAIN OVER FITZPATRICK Bryce Petty took the first four snaps of his N.F.L. career on Sunday. Whether he achieves another milestone this weekend — his first N.F.L. start — depends on the stability of Ryan Fitzpatrick’s left knee.Jets Coach Todd Bowles said he needed to see how Fitzpatrick, who sprained a knee ligament in the third quarter of the Jets’ 27-23 loss at Miami, fared at practice before deciding who would start against the Los Angeles Rams at MetLife Stadium on Sunday. Bowles emphasized that Fitzpatrick’s health — and not any desire to gauge Petty’s viability at quarterback — would be the determining factor.“We’re 3-6: We’re down, not out,” Bowles said in a teleconference Monday. “Right now, I’m not worried about turning the page. I’m worried about who gives us the best chance to win. Right now, Fitz gives us the best chance to win if he’s healthy.”In Sunday’s loss to the Dolphins, Fitzpatrick threw two interceptions, including one in the end zone in the fourth quarter, to run his league-worst total to 13. Benched before reclaiming his starting job when Geno Smith hurt his knee, Fitzpatrick is unlikely to be demoted again unless the coaching staff determines that it should begin evaluating Petty, a fourth-round pick in the 2015 draft who completed both of his pass attempts in Fitzpatrick’s absence.The Jets’ chances of making the playoffs are minuscule; with seven games remaining, they trail Denver, which is line for the A.F.C.’s second wild-card berth, by three games. But Bowles has been adamant that the team is focusing only on the present. He said Fitzpatrick would have to practice at least on Friday and reveal a strong understanding of the game plan to warrant consideration for Sunday. BEN SHPIGELCal Clutterbuck and Andrew Ladd scored 1 minute 39 seconds apart midway through the third period to lift the Islanders over the Vancouver Canucks, 4-2, at Barclays Center.It was the Canucks’ ninth straight loss.Jason Chimera and Nikolay Kulemin also scored, and Jaroslav Halak stopped 30 shots for the Islanders, who won for just the second time in seven games (2-3-2).Daniel Sedin scored and Ryan Miller had 28 saves for Vancouver, which is 0-8-1 since opening the season with four wins.AROUND THE N.H.L. Tuukka Rask rebounded from his first loss with 32 saves for his second shutout, Brad Marchand and David Krejci scored power-play goals in the second period, and host Boston beat Buffalo, 4-0. Reilly Smith scored a tiebreaking goal with 4:28 left, Roberto Luongo made 34 saves, and the Florida Panthers beat the visiting Tampa Bay Lightning, 3-1. The Winnipeg Jets agreed to terms with defenseman Jacob Trouba on a two-year, $6 million deal, ending his long contract stalemate. Columbus Blue Jackets defenseman Seth Jones will be out for at least three weeks with a hairline fracture on the top of his right foot. The team said Jones, 22, was injured in Saturday’s game at St. Louis and had been put on injured reserve.Rafael Nadal expects to return from a wrist injury to play in an event in the United Arab Emirates in late December.Nadal, a 14-time Grand Slam champion, wrote on his Facebook page that he would compete in the six-player, $250,000 Mubadala World Tennis Championship.The event is not connected to the ATP Tour and will be held in Abu Dhabi from Dec. 29 to 31.Last month, Nadal had said he was cutting short his 2016 season to fully recover from an injured left wrist that sidelined him for more than two months this season.Gary Cohen, a voice of the Mets for the past 28 seasons, first on radio and then on television, was named one of eight finalists for the Ford C. Frick Award, which is presented annually to a broadcaster by the National Baseball Hall of Fame.Among the other finalists are Ken Harrelson (Chicago White Sox), Pat Hughes (Chicago Cubs), Mike Krukow (San Francisco Giants) and Dewayne Staats (Tampa Bay Rays).This is the first year with a new nominating procedure for the award. This year, it will be given to a local announcers from an existing Major League Baseball market. In the following years, the award will rotate to national voices and early-team voices and pioneers.Graham McNamee, who won the Frick last year, called 12 World Series on radio starting in 1923. He died in 1942.The winner will be announced Dec. 7 at the baseball winter meetings. RICHARD SANDOMIRThe South Korean police said they were pressing criminal charges against 21 people, including two pitchers in the KBO League, on suspicion of match fixing.In 2014, the pitchers, Lee Sung-min of the NC Dinos and Yoo Chang-sik of the Hanwha Eagles, deliberately walked batters in return for gifts and cash from match-fixing brokers, the police said. Lee now plays for the Lotte Giants and Yoo for the Kia Tigers.The police said two NC Dinos officials covered up the match fixing when Lee confessed to it and then traded Lee to the KT Wiz for $875,000. CHOE SANG-HUNAdvertisement