NOV. 6, 2016
LeBron James scored 25 points, moving into 10th place on the N.B.A.’s career list, and added 14 assists and eight rebounds as the unbeaten Cleveland Cavaliers held off the winless 76ers, 102-101, in Philadelphia. James passed the Hall of Famer Hakeem Olajuwon, who finished his career with 26,946 points.WESTBROOK LEADS THUNDER Russell Westbrook scored 28 points to help Oklahoma City beat the visiting Minnesota Timberwolves, 112-92. Westbrook also had eight assists and six rebounds.CLIPPERS WIN IN SAN ANTONIO Blake Griffin scored a season-high 28 points, and the Los Angeles Clippers handed the Spurs a second straight home loss, 116-92.Derek Stepan and Kevin Hayes each scored short-handed goals, Antti Raanta made 35 saves, and the surging Rangers beat the host Boston Bruins, 5-2.AdvertisementPavel Buchnevich added a power-play goal, and Michael Grabner and Nick Holden also scored for the Rangers, who won their fourth straight game and their seventh in their last eight. David Pastrnak and Patrice Bergeron scored for Boston, which had won three in a row.Get the big sports news, highlights and analysis from Times journalists, with distinctive takes on games and some behind-the-scenes surprises, delivered to your inbox every week.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.OILERS TOP ISLANDERS IN SHOOTOUT Mark Letestu scored the only goal of a shootout to lift the visiting Edmonton Oilers to a 4-3 victory over the Islanders. Nick Leddy, Shane Prince and Casey Cizikas scored in regulation for the Islanders.AdvertisementLIGHTNING ROLL PAST DEVILS Victor Hedman and Nikita Kucherov each had a goal and an assist, and the Tampa Bay Lightning beat the visiting Devils, 4-1. The Devils got a goal from Damon Severson.Sixteen goals scored without a reply, five successive wins — now on top of the Premier League, Chelsea is a club transformed under Antonio Conte.Eden Hazard scored twice in a 5-0 victory over visiting Everton that demonstrated the attacking might that could be capable of propelling Chelsea to the title. Marcos Alonso, Diego Costa and Pedro also scored for Chelsea.The impressive display came against an Everton team that had the league’s second-best defensive record before heading to west London and had earned a 1-1 draw at Manchester City a month ago.AROUND SOCCER Marten de Roon headed in a late equalizer as Middlesbrough snatched a 1-1 draw against Manchester City.  Victor Anichebe inspired last-place Sunderland to win its first game in the Premier League this season, scoring the opener and winning a penalty in a 2-1 victory at Bournemouth.  Hoffenheim remained unbeaten in 10 Bundesliga games, tying host Bayern Munich, 1-1.Lucas Glover had a six-under-par 65 to take a one-shot lead in the Shriners Hospitals for Children Open in Las Vegas as he tries to collect his first PGA Tour win in five years.A version of this article appears in print on November 6, 2016, on Page SP9 of the New York edition with the headline: Raonic’s Injury Lets Murray Claim No. 1 Spot.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.