AdvertisementSupported byBy Seth BerkmanBecause of rainy conditions, the Mets did not even play a full game on Thursday in Atlanta, yet they still arrived at Citi Field on Friday with more injury news.Before opening a weekend series against the Miami Marlins, the Mets announced that catcher Travis d’Arnaud was headed to the 10-day disabled list with a bone bruise in his right wrist.The move allowed the Mets to officially recall pitcher Rafael Montero from Class AAA Las Vegas. Montero was scheduled to start Friday night’s game, taking the place of Noah Syndergaard, who was placed on the disabled list on Monday with a right latissimus tear that could keep him out of action for months.The decision to put d’Arnaud on the list was not surprising. But it was discouraging, because d’Arnaud’s career continues to be hindered by injuries.Since the start of the 2015 season, d’Arnaud’s appearances have been limited to 164 games because of a fractured right hand, a sprained left elbow and a right rotator cuff strain. Before 2015, d’Arnaud battled concussions, a herniated disk in his back, a torn posterior cruciate ligament and a fractured left foot.“It’s pretty frustrating for us, because we know what this guy’s potential is,” Manager Terry Collins said. “We’ve seen it. It seems like just as he starts to get it going, something happens. It’s not one of those three- or four-day things; it’s something that takes him out of the lineup for two weeks, for three weeks. Hopefully, this doesn’t take that long.”Many of d’Arnaud’s injuries have come on fluke plays — fouling a ball off his foot or getting his arm caught by a runner at a play at the plate. His latest wrist injury occurred two weeks ago when his hand hit the bat of the Phillies’ Aaron Altherr while he was trying to throw out a base runner.Asked if he was frustrated by the random nature of so many of his injuries, d’Arnaud said he did not view it that way.“It’s baseball,” d’Arnaud said. “What can you do? Keep moving forward.”D’Arnaud, 28, will wear a splint on his hand for about one week, immobilizing his wrist to give it time to heal. Since Tuesday, when d’Arnaud aggravated the injury, he has iced his hand and has been prescribed a mix of anti-inflammatory treatments.D’Arnaud said that his wrist had begun to tighten up earlier this week as he tried to hit a pitch from the Atlanta Braves knuckleballer R. A. Dickey, a former Met. When the swelling did not subside, d’Arnaud had the wrist re-examined, and the bone bruise was revealed.D’Arnaud did not believe the injury was as serious as others that have caused him to miss months at a time, but Collins was cautious.“It sounds like it’s not a big deal, but we know from the past it is a big deal,” Collins said. “So there’s no time frame right now.”Collins added that he did not think d’Arnaud would be available after the initial 10 days on the disabled list were over.Rene Rivera was in line to catch Montero on Friday night, with Collins citing Rivera’s ability to communicate with Montero, who primarily speaks Spanish. Kevin Plawecki is scheduled to catch Saturday, given his experience working with Robert Gsellman in the minor leagues, with Rivera returning behind the plate Sunday.Beyond that, Collins did not indicate whether he would have a set starting catcher in d’Arnaud’s absence.Until he was injured again, d’Arnaud appeared to be rediscovering the solid swing that made him a highly coveted prospect in the minor leagues. D’Arnaud’s offensive potential was so vaunted that he was seen as the centerpiece of the 2012 trade with the Blue Jays in which Dickey went to Toronto and the Mets also acquired Syndergaard.Although he was hitting only .203 this season, d’Arnaud had four home runs and 16 R.B.I. in 22 games; last year, he hit only four homers for the season, with 15 R.B.I.“He’s upbeat because he thinks he’s got his swing back,” Collins said. “He said, ‘When I come back, I’m going to continue where I left off.’”Advertisement