By JAMES WAGNERMAY 3, 2017
Twenty-seven games into the 2017 season, the Mets find themselves where they have been a number of times before. Once again, a series of injuries is undermining their ambitions and has left them facing renewed questions about how they try to keep players from being hurt and how they handle physical setbacks when they occur.If all of this seems familiar to frustrated Mets fans, it’s because it is. Even Sandy Alderson, the team’s general manager, acknowledges that.Alderson came aboard before the 2011 season, and on Monday reflected on how the team, in part, was perceived when he first took over.“That we have injuries, that we don’t explain injuries, that we’re too optimistic on when players will come back,” Alderson said.AdvertisementAnd yet, he added, “Here we are, seven years later, with the same accusations.”Actually, seven years does not capture how often the injury issue has driven the Mets to distraction in the last two decades. Late in 2004, for instance, after a season in which a still-emerging Jose Reyes spent what seemed like forever recovering from hamstring problems, the Mets made major changes to their training and medical staffs.AdvertisementAn agreement with the New York University Hospital for Joint Diseases was cut short. Instead, the Mets signed on with the Hospital for Special Surgery and turned back to Dr. David Altchek as the team’s medical director. Ray Ramirez was brought in as the new head trainer.That arrangement has remained ever since. It has not always been smooth sailing.In 2008 and 2010, the Mets had difficulty in quickly reacting to concussions suffered by outfielders Ryan Church and Jason Bay. Both continued to play when they shouldn’t have. Both ended up missing a considerable number of games.Also in 2010, the Mets and Scott Boras, the agent for outfielder Carlos Beltran, engaged in an unusual public skirmish after Beltran had arthroscopic surgery on his knee that the Mets said they did not approve.A year later, with Alderson in charge, David Wright, after playing in pain for weeks, was found to have a stress fracture in his back. He missed two months. In 2015, Steven Matz told the Mets he felt soreness after his major league debut, was allowed to make a second start, and then went on the disabled list for two months with a torn lat muscle, the injury now afflicting Noah Syndergaard.Every major league team, of course, deals with repeated injuries, and every team makes mistakes in trying to address them. In the marathon race that is the 162-game season, the sport becomes a battle of attrition. Virtually every fan base second-guesses its team’s medical staff, even booing the trainers on opening day, which has happened with the Mets.Two seasons ago, the Washington Nationals did what the Mets did in 2004, replacing their medical and training staffs after a 2015 campaign that was sideswiped by too many players being injured. At the time, Mike Rizzo, the general manager, said the team did so to adopt a more proactive and preventive approach.“It may be the next frontier, the next ‘Moneyball,’ keeping players on the field,” Rizzo said then.AdvertisementWhile Mets fans may think that their team is continually cursed with injuries, and there have been plenty of them, the numbers suggest that it could be worse.According to ManGamesLost.com, which keeps track of disabled-list transactions and day-to-day injuries, the Mets, from 2010 to 2016, had 5,545 instances in which players missed a game because of an injury. That left them ranked seventh out of 30 teams. The Los Angeles Dodgers, who won four straight National League West titles in that time, were first with 7,169.The teams that ranked between the Dodgers and the Mets — the Texas Rangers, the San Diego Padres, the Boston Red Sox, the Oakland Athletics and the Philadelphia Phillies — were a mix of successful and struggling franchises.That mix was even reflected by the Mets. When they reached the 2015 World Series, they finished the regular season with 1,332 instances in which an injured player sat out, the third-most in the majors, according to the website. Yet last season, when they overcame numerous ailments to key players to nab the top wild-card spot in the N.L., they ranked just 17th, with 886 instances of games missed.Even this season, amid the Mets’ mounting injuries, ManGamesLost.com calculated that the club ranked only 12th in baseball in that statistic up to last weekend.Where the Mets have endured the most aggravation, perhaps, is in the effects of their injuries. Nathan Currier, the founder of ManGamesLost.com, has created a statistic called Injury Impact to Team, and the figure shows that from 2010 to 2016, the Mets led baseball in this metric. The statistic uses wins above replacement to assign weight to the importance of the injured player.Injuries to Johan Santana, Matt Harvey, Wright, Matz, Beltran and Reyes probably had a good deal to do with the fact that the Mets were No. 1 in this category. And the team’s latest ranking this season does not include Syndergaard, the Mets’ ace, going down for what could be several months.Over the past week, Alderson has gone out of his way to address the injury issue, saying the Mets would have to re-evaluate everything they do in trying to keep their players from being hurt. He even cited the need to take a close look at the weight training, stretching and hydration regimens used by Yoenis Cespedes, now out with a hamstring injury.AdvertisementAlderson also said he has examined the number of days Mets players have been on the disabled list and — like ManGamesLost.com — notes that it is not far from the average. He has pointed out that the Mets have an older team — their position players average 30.1 years of age, the highest in the N.L. — and that can be a factor that leads to injuries.Get the big sports news, highlights and analysis from Times journalists, with distinctive takes on games and some behind-the-scenes surprises, delivered to your inbox every week.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.At the same time, Alderson has defended the Mets’ treatment of Cespedes, who was not put on the 10-day disabled list when he first hurt his hamstring and then strained the same hamstring more seriously when he returned to action five days later. Cespedes is expected to be out a few weeks.Alderson has also defended how the Mets handled Syndergaard, who declined to have a magnetic resonance imaging test after reporting some biceps discomfort and then ended up with a lat tear days later. Syndergaard will be out a lot longer than Cespedes.Cespedes thought he was ready to play, Syndergaard thought he was ready to pitch, and nobody on the Mets’ training and medical staff said they couldn’t. Indeed, the toughest part for a team and a player is determining how many aches and pains can be considered just part of the job and not something that requires an M.R.I. or a stay on the D.L. More than anything, players have to be truthful.“I don’t know if what they’re saying really coincides with how they really feel,” Manager Terry Collins said of his players.In that regard, Collins has tried to keep close tabs on shortstop Asdrubal Cabrera, who dealt with a knee injury for much of last season and landed briefly on the D.L. This season, Cabrera has had soreness near his knee, and Collins said he called Cabrera into his office frequently to ask if he needed rest.“If anybody thinks from what we said in spring training that is not our first priority, to make sure these guys are O.K., they’re crazy,” Collins said. “This is all we’ve harped on.”And yet the injuries mount. It is a tough spot to be in, and Alderson said that he did not try to make things sound better than they are. A 15-day injury estimate, he said, does not become 10 just to make things a little less depressing.“I try to give everybody the most current information I’ve got,” Alderson said. “If that changes, it changes. But I don’t have any real motive to be overly optimistic.”A version of this article appears in print on May 4, 2017, on Page B9 of the New York edition with the headline: For Mets, It’s Injury After Injury, Year After Year.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.