By THE ASSOCIATED PRESSAPRIL 8, 2017
Pittsburgh Steelers quarterback Ben Roethlisberger is not quite ready for retirement.Roethlisberger said Friday that he had told the Steelers of his plans to return to the team for the 2017 season.“Informed the team I am looking forward to my 14th season,” Roethlisberger wrote on Twitter. “Steeler Nation will get my absolute best.”Roethlisberger, a two-time Super Bowl winner who turned 35 last month, hinted after Pittsburgh lost to New England in the A.F.C. championship game that he needed to take stock before committing to another season. But the team remained confident he would return.“There is no question Ben wants to win championships for the Pittsburgh Steelers, and we know he will do everything possible to lead our entire team to achieving that goal,” Coach Mike Tomlin said in a statement.AdvertisementHERNANDEZ JURY DELIBERATES The jury in the double-murder trial of the former New England Patriots tight end Aaron Hernandez finished its first day of deliberations in Boston without reaching a verdict.AdvertisementHernandez is accused of fatally shooting two men in 2012. He is already serving a life sentence for another killing in 2013.49ERS CORNERBACK ARRESTED San Francisco cornerback Tramaine Brock was released Friday, a day after he was arrested after being accused of hitting a woman. Brock, 28, started all 16 games for the 49ers last season and finished with one interception and 48 tackles.JaCoby Jones capped a wild eighth inning with a bases-loaded walk, and Detroit outlasted the flu-bitten Boston Red Sox, 6-5, to win its ninth straight home opener.The Red Sox stars Hanley Ramirez and Mookie Betts were ill and out of the lineup. Boston also was without shortstop Xander Bogaerts and reliever Matt Barnes, who are on the bereavement list.The Tigers blew a 4-0 lead in the top of the eighth, but the Red Sox relievers quickly gave it back. Heath Hembree walked two batters, and pinch-hitter Mikie Mahtook followed with a game-tying double off Robby Scott. Joe Kelly then allowed consecutive walks to James McCann and Jones, forcing in the final run.NATIONALS 7, PHILLIES 6 Bryce Harper, Daniel Murphy and Jayson Werth hit homers to back Max Scherzer and Washington won at Philadelphia, 7-6. Scherzer, last year’s National League Cy Young Award winner, struck out seven. He waited until the fourth game to take the mound because a broken knuckle set him back in spring training.Serbia, Australia, France and Belgium were one victory away from reaching the Davis Cup semifinals after each won their two opening singles matches.Get the big sports news, highlights and analysis from Times journalists, with distinctive takes on games and some behind-the-scenes surprises, delivered to your inbox every week.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.Novak Djokovic and Viktor Troicki gave host Serbia the advantage over Spain in Belgrade. Djokovic returned in style after an elbow injury, sweeping past Albert Ramos Viñolas, 6-3, 6-4, 6-2. Troicki followed with an emphatic victory over Pablo Carreño Busta, 6-3, 6-4, 6-3.AdvertisementHost Australia took charge against the United States in Brisbane. Nick Kyrgios finished off John Isner with his 20th ace to win, 7-5, 7-6 (5), 7-6 (5), after Jordan Thompson upset Jack Sock, 6-3, 3-6, 7-6 (4), 6-4.France had an easy time with visiting Britain, which was without Andy Murray because of an elbow injury, in Normandy. After Lucas Pouille beat Kyle Edmund, 7-5, 7-6 (6), 6-3, Jeremy Chardy beat Dan Evans, 6-2, 6-3, 6-3.Following a tricky start, Belgium took control against visiting Italy in Charleroi. Steve Darcis rallied to beat Paolo Lorenzi, 6-7 (3), 6-1, 6-1, 7-6 (4), and David Goffin had an easier time against Andreas Seppi, 6-4, 6-3, 6-3.WOZNIACKI OUSTED Jelena Ostapenko of Latvia upset fifth-seeded Caroline Wozniacki of Denmark, 6-2, 6-4, to reach the semifinals at the Volvo Car Open in Charleston, S.C.Wozniacki was the highest remaining seed and the lone former champion still in the tournament.AN APPEAL SUCCEEDS Daniel Garza of Mexico successfully appealed penalties to the Court of Arbitration for Sport in a match-fixing case. He had been suspended after the Tennis Integrity Unit said he attempted to influence the outcome of a match at a low-level Futures tournament in March 2015.Kevin Durant returned to practice and experienced no problems with his left knee, making him available for Golden State’s game against visiting New Orleans on Saturday.Durant has been out since he was hurt Feb. 28 at Washington, but the Warriors hoped to have him back before the regular season ended. Even without Durant, the Warriors are riding a 13-game winning streak and have secured the No. 1 seed in the Western Conference.AdvertisementHAWKS 114, CAVALIERS 100 Tim Hardaway Jr. scored 15 of his 22 points in the fourth quarter as Atlanta, despite resting center Dwight Howard and missing three other key starters, stunned host Cleveland.Mike Dunleavy added 20 points for Atlanta. LeBron James scored 27 and Kyrie Irving 18 for Cleveland.Frank Mason III of Kansas and Kelsey Plum of Washington won the John R. Wooden Award as national players of the year in Los Angeles.Mason, who also claimed the Bob Cousy point guard of the year award, became the first player in Big 12 history to average 20 points and 5 assists in a season. He led the Jayhawks to the round of 8 in the N.C.A.A. tournament, where they lost to Oregon.Plum became the N.C.A.A. Division I career scoring leader with 3,527 points this season. She also set marks for single-season points (1,109) and career free throws made (912).The Denver senior Will Butcher has won the Hobey Baker Award as the top player in college hockey, becoming just the seventh defenseman to win the award since 1981.Butcher, a fifth-round selection by the Colorado Avalanche, has seven goals and a team-high 30 assists in 42 games. Butcher and the Pioneers will face Minnesota-Duluth in the Frozen Four final Saturday night in Chicago.A version of this article appears in print on April 8, 2017, on Page D6 of the New York edition with the headline: Pro Football; Steelers’ Roethlisberger Back for a 14th Season.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.