By WALLACE MATTHEWSMAY 2, 2017
Twenty-five games is hardly a complete baseball season, but in that small sliver of the Yankees’ 2017 campaign, Aaron Judge is showing himself to be a complete baseball player.Even had he not hit two more home runs in Tuesday’s 11-5 victory over the Toronto Blue Jays at Yankee Stadium, Judge would have had a game a lot of players with his level of experience might feel inclined brag about.In the second inning, Judge, who last year struck out in half his at-bats, fought back from a 1-2 count to work a walk, after which Aaron Hicks drove him in with a two-run homer.In the fourth inning, Judge, in right field, made a running, diving, full-lay-out catch of a sinking liner off the bat of Jose Bautista that probably should have been caught by Hicks, the center fielder.AdvertisementAnd in the eighth inning, having already sent two balls over the fence to put himself atop the major league leaderboard with 12 home runs, Judge patiently took a walk instead of trying to put up his first three-home-run game in the big leagues.AdvertisementThose nights surely will come. As Manager Joe Girardi said: “What he’s doing doesn’t happen every day.”Girardi added: “He’s been in the minor leagues not a real long time, and he’s making a huge impact.”So far this season, it has been the Aaron Judge Show in the Bronx, with the rest of the Yankees as his supporting cast.Even on a night in which Brett Gardner had three hits, two home runs and three R.B.I., he was the secondary story to Judge, a 25-year-old rookie who stands 6 feet 7 inches and hits home runs that can only be described as Ruthian.“Aaron seems to be doing it every night,” Gardner said. “I’m just trying to keep up with him.”So far, no one can. Before the game, the Yankees’ in-house magazine set up a photo shoot that played off the immense size difference between Judge and the 5-foot-8 shortstop Ronald Torreyes, having them switch jerseys for comedic effect.Everyone got a chuckle out of seeing Judge inhale and pull his shoulders together to squeeze into Torreyes’s jersey while the tails of his own No. 99 jersey practically reached Torreyes’s ankles.Once the game begins, though, no one is laughing at Judge.In fact, even before his second home run of the night — a three-run blast into the left-field seats off reliever Jason Grilli in the seventh that provided the final runs in the Yankees’ victory — the crowd had taken up a chant that might become as common in Yankee Stadium as a Judge home run: “M.V.P.”Advertisement“I didn’t think much of it,” Judge said. “I was on defense, trying to help the pitcher any way I can. I just kind of zoned it out and was focusing on the pitcher.”In this surprising season — the win pushed the Yankees’ record to 16-9, tying them with the Baltimore Orioles atop the American League East — no player has been more surprising than Judge.Consider the difference between the glimpse the Yankees got of him last season and the eyeful that they, and the rest of baseball, are getting this year.Through Tuesday night’s game, Judge has had 84 at-bats this year, precisely the number he had in his two-month call-up during the second half of last season.Then, Judge’s numbers included a .179 batting average, four home runs, 10 R.B.I. and 42 strikeouts.Get the big sports news, highlights and analysis from Times journalists, with distinctive takes on games and some behind-the-scenes surprises, delivered to your inbox every week.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.This year, the numbers are .313, 12, 25 and 26. His on-base percentage this year is .424, compared with last year’s .263.“I expected him to improve,” Girardi said. “But I don’t think you expect anyone to hit 10 home runs in a month, and then to start to carry it over into the next month. If you put those numbers together over a year, you’re talking 60 homes runs. That doesn’t happen every day. I’ve been really impressed. He’s done everything we have asked him to do and more.”AdvertisementWith Judge’s two home runs, Gardner’s two and Hicks’s one, the Yankees hit five homers for the second time in a week — they had five in Friday’s 14-11 win over the Orioles — and they lead the A.L. with 42.On a day that started with bad news — first baseman Greg Bird went on the disabled list with a bone bruise on his right ankle, and center fielder Jacoby Ellsbury was shelved for at least a couple of days with a bruised nerve in his elbow — the Yankees showed once again that there is no ill they can suffer that the long ball cannot cure.Hicks’s home run was his fifth of the season, a total he did not reach until Aug. 12 last year. And the total of 17 home runs between the two Aarons — Judge and Hicks — is one more than the Boston Red Sox’ entire team has managed.But just like Torreyes in an oversize jersey, everything that Hicks, Gardner and starter Masahiro Tanaka, who won his fourth game in five decisions, did was overshadowed by the one Yankee who, so far this season, has been larger than life.INSIDE PITCHThe Yankees recalled the utility player Rob Refsnyder from Class AAA Scranton/Wilkes-Barre to replace Greg Bird on the roster. Refsnyder batted for Matt Holliday in the eighth and flied out. … Catcher Gary Sanchez homered on the first pitch he saw playing for Scranton in the first game of a rehabilitation assignment. Sanchez, who has been on the disabled list since April 8 with a biceps strain, also had a run-scoring double.A version of this article appears in print on May 3, 2017, on Page B9 of the New York edition with the headline: Hit Hard by Injuries, Yankees Respond With Five Homers.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.