By JAMES WAGNERMAY 2, 2017
ATLANTA — The 2017 season, at least the beginning, was not supposed to be easy for Matt Harvey. After he underwent an operation last July to alleviate thoracic outlet syndrome, the Mets believed it would take 10 months before he regained his full strength and velocity.Although he showed signs of improvement late in spring training and even flashes in April, Tuesday’s start in a lethargic 9-7 loss to the Atlanta Braves seemed to provide evidence that he was not yet back in peak condition.“When this guy is on and what made him so good was great stuff and great command,” Mets Manager Terry Collins said. “And right now, the stuff is coming back but the command is not there. It’s real inconsistent. His secondary pitches are real inconsistent.”Harvey surrendered six runs on eight hits over five and a third innings, walking three batters and striking out only two. The Mets’ home run-dependent offense was exactly that against Braves starter R. A. Dickey; the only runs came on shots by Jay Bruce and Asdrubal Cabrera.AdvertisementBruce’s grand slam with two outs in the ninth inning off reliever Matt Wisler trimmed the Mets’ deficit to two runs and injected the game with late hope. But Jim Johnson, the Braves’ closer, replaced Wisler and struck out Neil Walker to end the game.And, because it was a Mets game, it involved an injury. Catcher Travis d’Arnaud, who has provided some power at the plate this season, left the game in the sixth inning with what the team called a sore right wrist.D’Arnaud originally hurt the wrist two weeks ago when his throwing hand hit the bat of an opposing hitter while throwing to second base on a stolen base attempt. He returned to catching a week later and smashed home runs over the weekend.Get the big sports news, highlights and analysis from Times journalists, with distinctive takes on games and some behind-the-scenes surprises, delivered to your inbox every week.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.But after lining out in the fifth inning, d’Arnaud said, the wrist tightened up. He alerted the team, and he was removed an inning later, though he said he unconcerned about the flare-up.When he left the game, the Mets already trailed 6-3, all the runs charged to Harvey. Harvey’s recent progress has been difficult to evaluate, as each of his two previous starts were moved up a day on short notice because of injuries to Jacob deGrom and Noah Syndergaard. Some trends have nevertheless emerged.AdvertisementLower velocity was to be expected following the second major arm-related surgery of Harvey’s career, so it was clear that he would need strong command to survive without blowing hitters away.His fastball velocity was strong on Tuesday, ranging from 93 to 97 m.p.h., but his command was not as potent.He coughed up a long two-run home run to Freddie Freeman in the first inning on a slider that caught too much of the plate. In the fourth inning, he gave up three runs, including two on a single on a similar pitch to Ender Inciarte.In all, Harvey has struck out only five batters over his past three starts. Over 35 innings logged this season, he has fanned 20, while walking 13 and surrendering seven home runs.“When you get into a tough situation when you need a strikeout, that becomes tough when you really can’t,” Harvey said. “But that’s just location.”Entering Tuesday night, Harvey had a swinging strike percentage of 7.5 percent, according to FanGraphs, a sign of the swing-and-miss quality of his pitches. It was near 10 percent in 2016, and around 12 percent the previous three years.D’Arnaud said Harvey’s pitches were “phenomenal.” Harvey said he was pleased with the improvements he had made to his mechanics since his last few starts. He added it was the best he had felt “in a long time.”“It’s fine-tuning that,” he said.On Tuesday, however, that didn’t translate into results. While the velocity was encouraging, the command was not there. Collins said he even checked the advanced data, and the spin rate of Harvey’s pitches were fine. He said he has seen the frustration on Harvey’s face.Advertisement“You’re talking about a guy that did not pitch very much last year,” Collins said. “He’s coming back from a surgery that not a lot of guys have really come back to be 100 percent again. Especially when you’ve lost the feeling in your fingers, you’ve got to regain the release point and the feel of the seams.”Once Harvey exited the game, Mets relievers Josh Smoker and Fernando Salas combined to allow three runs.With the pitching staff battling inconsistencies and injuries, the Mets will need its offense to carry its weight. The offense has been uneven, with hitters such as Walker and Curtis Granderson struggling at the plate. Granderson, who is hitting .124, got Tuesday night off while Juan Lagares started in center field.“We have to step up,” Bruce said. “We have to take advantage of all the opportunities.”Bruce has been one of the bright spots of the Mets’ offense, and he did his best to help by driving in six runs alone. It will take some more time until Harvey can do his part, as well.INSIDE PITCHSeth Lugo and Steven Matz, two starting pitchers dealing with elbow injuries, threw off the mound without discomfort on Tuesday at the Mets’ spring training facility in Port St. Lucie, Fla., Manager Terry Collins said. … First baseman Lucas Duda hit off a tee after pausing his minor league rehabilitation assignment with a setback regarding his hyperextended elbow. … Outfielder Brandon Nimmo and infielder Wilmer Flores continued their minor league rehabilitation assignments in Class AAA Las Vegas. Flores could rejoin the Mets by the weekend.A version of this article appears in print on May 3, 2017, on Page B9 of the New York edition with the headline: Harvey and the Mets Struggle Again.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.