By JAMES WAGNERMAY 1, 2017
ATLANTA — The Mets’ roster received another significant blow on Monday, one that renewed questions about the club’s handling of injuries, when the team announced that Noah Syndergaard, the hard-throwing ace, would be out indefinitely with a partial tear of his right latissimus muscle.Mets General Manager Sandy Alderson, speaking before Monday night’s 7-5 win over the Atlanta Braves, declined to speculate on how many weeks Syndergaard would miss, nor did he want to compare the injury to a similar one that forced Steven Matz, a fellow Mets starter, to miss two months of the 2015 season.“It’s going to be a considerable amount of time,” Alderson said.Syndergaard underwent a magnetic resonance imaging examination on Monday morning in New York after leaving his start in Washington on Sunday after only one inning and a third. After throwing a second-inning strike to the Nationals star Bryce Harper, Syndergaard grimaced and grabbed his right side, leading to his exit.The injury severely hampers an already depleted Mets roster that is now without one of its most talented pitchers (Syndergaard), one of its most talented hitters (Yoenis Cespedes), its starting first baseman (Lucas Duda), two infielders (David Wright and Wilmer Flores) and two other crucial pitchers (Steven Matz and Seth Lugo). Rafael Montero will most likely start in place of Syndergaard on Friday.Advertisement“Somebody has got to pick up the slack,” Mets Manager Terry Collins said. “I’m not asking any stating pitcher to be Noah Syndergaard. I’m asking them to be themselves, and go pitch a good game.”AdvertisementRobert Gsellman, a rookie starter and Syndergaard’s roommate in New York, showed some improvement early in his start on Monday. He tailed off as the game went on, allowing five runs over five-plus innings. Home runs by Jose Reyes and Michael Conforto, who drove in three runs, helped the Mets solve Julio Teheran, the Braves starter who has confounded them in the past.A victory provided a momentary salve on a day when the Mets drew scrutiny over the circumstances surrounding the injury to Syndergaard, whose start last week had been pushed from Thursday to Sunday because of biceps discomfort. Alderson said a doctor told him that Syndergaard’s biceps issue last week was not related to the current injury to his lat muscle, which stretches from the armpit to the back.“The question was specifically asked and the answer was, ‘No,’ that there was not a connection,” Alderson said. “Now, that’s an opinion, but coming from a pretty knowledgeable source.”The episode added to criticism that the Mets had already drawn regarding injuries, especially to Cespedes and Syndergaard. Cespedes first injured his hamstring on April 20, was not placed on the 10-day disabled list and was given five days of rest. He returned to play, but he landed on the disabled list on April 28 after he reinjured the hamstring.“He thought he was ready to go,” Alderson said. “Now, is it a surprise that Cespedes is on the disabled list for the hamstring? No. We knew that he was susceptible to this, and there was some issue. But at the same time, we can’t put somebody on the disabled list who says they’re not hurt.”A near mirror episode happened last year with Cespedes and a quadriceps injury, which Alderson said then the Mets hoped to avoid, yet it happened again this year.Syndergaard’s injury, though, brought more questions. He was scratched the morning of his Thursday start because the Mets did not want to risk further injury, as he had been dealing with what the team called right biceps tendinitis and soreness in his biceps and shoulder.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.Syndergaard called it a “little hiccup” and said he felt better with anti-inflammatory medication, but insisted he could have started on Thursday. He also refused an M.R.I., a decision that was heavily scrutinized a few days later after he walked off the mound holding his side with a trainer.AdvertisementThe Mets had cleared Syndergaard to start after he threw a bullpen session with no problem in front of coaches on Friday.Alderson said on Monday that it was his decision to allow Syndergaard to pitch.“It was with input from a variety of different sources, including Noah himself,” he said. “The M.R.I. was not dismissed out of hand simply because Noah said he wouldn’t do it. We evaluate whether it’s important to do so in spite of his opposition.”Alderson said he “sincerely” believed that Syndergaard was being truthful about feeling fine.“He was throwing 100 miles an hour in the first inning,” Alderson said. “Was that because he was trying to show someone or us that he was fine? I don’t know the answer to that.”Asked whether Syndergaard was compensating for one discomfort and it led to another, Alderson said, “Anything’s possible.”Alderson said he did not want to speculate, but he said the Mets would have to evaluate whether Syndergaard’s adding more muscle in the off-season had had an adverse effect, or if changes needed to be made to Syndergaard’s hard throwing.Mets strength and conditioning coaches visit players in the off-season, Alderson said, but “we don’t control everything they do.”Asked if he regretted any decisions on Syndergaard, Alderson said it was hard to answer. He took in all the available information, he said, from the medical staff to Syndergaard to his own experience, in making the decision.“But let’s assume he got the M.R.I. and it didn’t show anything and he got injured,” he said. “Am I better off? The team’s not better off.”Over the weekend, Alderson said the Mets needed to appraise everything from weight training to hydration of players, such as Cespedes, who had a history of leg issues, to prevent recurring injuries. On Monday, Alderson said that he had “absolute confidence” in the information he received from the medical staff.AdvertisementWhen Alderson took over as general manager in 2011, he said he knew the Mets had a reputation for struggling with injuries. “I don’t seem to have done anything to improve it,” he said.A version of this article appears in print on May 2, 2017, on Page B8 of the New York edition with the headline: Questions Add to Drumbeat of Mets Injuries.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.