By THE ASSOCIATED PRESSAPRIL 6, 2017
LeBron James had 36 points, 10 rebounds and 6 assists, and the Cleveland Cavaliers ran past the Celtics, 114-91, in Boston on Wednesday night to move back into first place in the Eastern Conference.The teams had identical records entering the game, their final regular-season matchup; Cleveland (51-27) now has a one-game lead over Boston (50-28) with four games to play. Cleveland also holds the tiebreaker.Kyrie Irving added 19 points and 5 assists for the Cavaliers, who were missing their starting center, Tristan Thompson, because of a sprained right thumb. They made do without him, surging at the start of the second quarter and taking a 29-point lead in the third quarter. They also outrebounded Boston, 51-38. Isaiah Thomas led the Celtics with 26 points.WESTBROOK A REBOUND SHORT Russell Westbrook fell a rebound short of a historic triple-double, but he scored 45 points, making a late 3-pointer that helped seal the Oklahoma City Thunder’s 103-100 victory over the Grizzlies in Memphis. Westbrook had 10 assists and nine rebounds, leaving him tied with Oscar Robertson’s 55-year-old record for triple-doubles in a season with 41.AdvertisementWestbrook’s 3-pointer — his eighth — with 14 seconds left and his two free throws in the final second gave the Thunder their second win in a row as they solidified their hold on the Western Conference’s sixth seed.AdvertisementWith Luis Suárez and Lionel Messi in top form, Barcelona needed less than 10 minutes to take care of Sevilla at Camp Nou and keep the pressure on Real Madrid in the Spanish league. Suárez scored with a bicycle kick, and Messi struck twice within the next eight minutes as Barcelona eased to a 3-0 victory in its pursuit of a third straight league title. Despite missing Cristiano Ronaldo and several other regular starters, Madrid also won, by 4-2 at Leganés, to maintain a 2-point lead over Barcelona.Get the big sports news, highlights and analysis from Times journalists, with distinctive takes on games and some behind-the-scenes surprises, delivered to your inbox every week.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.Alex Ovechkin and Evgeny Kuznetsov scored, and the Capitals clinched their second consecutive Presidents’ Trophy with a 2-0 victory over the Rangers in Washington.As Metropolitan Division champions, the top seed in the Eastern Conference and the team with the most points in the N.H.L., the Capitals wrapped up home-ice advantage throughout the playoffs.The best home team in the league beat the best road team thanks to a 24-save shutout from the Vezina Trophy contender Braden Holtby. Henrik Lundqvist was also in playoff form, making 23 saves for the Rangers.Sandy Leon hit a three-run homer in the 12th inning — his third hit of the game — and Chris Sale pitched seven dominant innings in his Red Sox debut to lead Boston to a 3-0 victory over visiting the Pittsburgh Pirates.AROUND THE MAJORS Dylan Bundy struck out eight over seven impressive innings, and the Orioles used home runs by Adam Jones and Chris Davis to beat the Toronto Blue Jays, 3-1, in Baltimore.  Bryce Harper had two R.B.I. and an impressive ninth-inning catch, Ryan Zimmerman homered, and Tanner Roark recovered from a shaky start to go six innings, leading the Washington Nationals past the Marlins, 6-4, in Miami.Laura Siegemund of Germany beat Venus Williams, 6-4, 6-7 (3), 7-5, to win her second three-set match in three days and move on to the third round at the Volvo Car Open in Charleston, S.C. Facing a match point in the second set, Williams broke Siegemund and rallied to easily win the ensuing tiebreaker, setting up the decisive third set. Williams was poised to complete the comeback, but Siegemund twice pulled back from a break and saved two match points as Williams served for the victory at 5-4.A national basketball powerhouse in New Jersey is closing: St. Anthony’s, the school that bears the stamp of the Hall of Fame coach Bob Hurley, will shut its doors in June. St. Anthony’s had been fighting declining attendance and rising costs for decades. St. Anthony’s has won 28 New Jersey state titles and four national championships.A version of this article appears in print on April 6, 2017, on Page B14 of the New York edition with the headline: Pro Basketball; Cavaliers Rout Celtics to Retake First in East.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.