By RICHARD SANDOMIRJAN. 1, 2016
Viewership for Thursday’s two College Football Playoff semifinal games was down drastically when compared with last season, a clear indication that ESPN paid a price for the games’ move to New Year’s Eve.ESPN had hoped to turn New Year’s Eve into a new sports holiday to showcase the semifinal games, much as Thanksgiving has become for the N.F.L. and Christmas Day for the N.B.A. The network aggressively marketed the advent of the semifinals in a promotional campaign, but the effort apparently did not succeed.The disappointing ratings for the Orange and Cotton Bowls — each of which turned into blowouts in the second half — suggested that the semifinals are better off on New Year’s Day, as they were last year. More people watch television on New Year’s Day than a day earlier, when many are working or celebrating. Still, seven of the next 10 years’ semifinal games are scheduled for New Year’s Eve. ESPN was rebuffed in its request to move the games to Saturday this season, when a larger audience would be available. Last year, on Saturday, Jan. 3, about 15 million more people were watching their televisions than on New Year’s Eve.Get the big sports news, highlights and analysis from Times journalists, with distinctive takes on games and some behind-the-scenes surprises, delivered to your inbox every week.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.Clemson’s 37-17 victory over Oklahoma in the Orange Bowl, which started at 4 p.m. Eastern, was seen by an average of 15.6 million viewers, a 45 percent decrease from the 28.2 million for the 2015 Rose Bowl, the semifinal game played in the comparable time slot on Jan. 1.AdvertisementThe second semifinal, Alabama’s 38-0 rout of Michigan State, averaged almost 18.6 million viewers in prime time, down 34 percent from the nearly 28.3 million for the Sugar Bowl last season.AdvertisementESPN tried to make the best of the performance of the semifinals by comparing them (and the Peach Bowl, which started at noon Eastern on Thursday) to the three bowls played on Dec. 31, 2014. That allowed the network to boast of a 79 percent overnight ratings boost, although none of those bowls (the Peach, Fiesta and Orange) were a part of the semifinals last season.Despite lower viewership of the semifinals on TV, ESPN said streaming of the first game was up 158 percent from last year and up 24 percent for the second game, based on average minute impressions.While viewership was down for the semifinals, the prime-time audience held steady for “Dick Clark’s New Year’s Rockin’ Eve With Ryan Seacrest” on ABC, ESPN’s broadcast sibling at the Walt Disney Company. That program’s audience rose 2 percent to 9.8 million.An article on Saturday about the disappointing ratings for the college football semifinals on Dec. 31 misstated the ratings for “Dick Clark’s New Year’s Rockin’ Eve With Ryan Seacrest” on ABC. Its prime-time audience increased 2 percent; it did not fall 23.4 percent and did not see “significantly lower viewership” as the college football semifinals did.A version of this article appears in print on January 2, 2016, on Page D3 of the New York edition with the headline: Before Ball Dropped, So Did Viewership of the Semifinals .  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.