By BILL PENNINGTONSEPT. 27, 2017
For nearly a decade, Lindsey Vonn has wanted to race against men, and her requests have been bluntly denied by international ski racing officials. But next week, Vonn may get her best, and likely last, chance to enter a men’s World Cup Alpine race.F.I.S., the sport’s global governing body, said on Wednesday that it would consider a proposal to allow Vonn to be included in the field of a men’s downhill race at its Oct. 5 meeting in Zurich.Vonn regularly trains with men from various national ski teams on downhill courses. According to the unofficial times kept of those runs, Vonn often finishes ahead of some of her male colleagues. But that is different than taking on the full field of the world’s top-ranked male skiers at a World Cup race, something that skiing historians believe has never happened.Vonn has admitted she doesn’t know exactly how she would fare.“That’s part of why I want to do it,” she said in an interview in March. “And the male racers I talk with agree that it would bring a lot of attention to ski racing. So why not try it?”AdvertisementThe United States Ski and Snowboard Association is submitting Vonn’s request to enter the men’s downhill event in late 2018 at the Canadian resort of Lake Louise, where Vonn has won 18 races on the women’s circuit.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.A spokesman for the U.S.S.A. said it was not asking for a change in F.I.S. rules or bylaws but rather for “a one-time opportunity” for Vonn, who has won more World Cup races than any other woman.AdvertisementIn the past, top F.I.S. officials have publicly opposed mixed-gender competitions. The organization could also weigh Vonn’s proposal next week without voting on it.As F.I.S. stated on Wednesday: “Further details are still unknown, but this is certainly an anticipated topic that divides the F.I.S. officials.”Vonn, 33, has said that the 2018-19 ski racing season will most likely be her last.The news of the Vonn proposal as part of the Oct. 5 meeting was first reported by NBC Sports.A version of this article appears in print on September 28, 2017, on Page B10 of the New York edition with the headline: Vonn, Who Often Has Asked to Compete in a Men’s Downhill, May Finally Get Her Wish.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.