AdvertisementSupported byBy Kevin DraperNielsen’s television ratings are traditionally an industry metric, used by networks and advertisers to buy and sell commercial time. But on this Monday, and every Monday for the next four months, the N.F.L. ratings will be dissected far and wide in search of broader meaning.Amid recent protests during the national anthem against police brutality and loud accusations of liberal bias against ESPN, the war over television ratings has become explicitly political, too. They have even attracted the attention of President Trump.“NFL attendance and ratings are WAY DOWN,” he tweeted on Sunday. “Boring games yes, but many stay away because they love our country. League should back U.S.”...NFL attendance and ratings are WAY DOWN. Boring games yes, but many stay away because they love our country. League should back U.S.Ratings have always been relevant beyond commercial transactions, of course. Networks use them — sometimes engaging in tortured arithmetic to make the figures look better — to declare victories over their competition, to justify hirings and firings and to measure what is popular.But live sports, and particularly the N.F.L., have become increasingly defined by their television ratings. For the past decade, ratings across television have fallen because of expanding cable packages, competition from streaming services and DVRs, and the ubiquity of smartphones.Live sports have proved mostly immune from this trend. Until now.The N.F.L.’s regular season ratings fell by about 8 percent from 2015 to 2016, a drop that has been subject to all manner of explanation. Some believed news coverage of the polarizing presidential race siphoned off viewership, pointing out that ratings improved after the election. Others cited a dearth of stars on the field — a consequence of Peyton Manning’s retirement and Tom Brady’s suspension — and a lack of compelling games. Increased awareness of concussions and of the physical toll of football, high-profile cases of domestic abuse by players and disgust over protests during the national anthem all have been blamed, too.The unsatisfying truth is that N.F.L. ratings are a Rorschach test, often revealing more about the test taker than the subject.Ratings for the first week of this season dropped by 12 percent from last year, but those games were played the day Hurricane Irma landed in Florida, when millions of viewers were tuned to coverage of the storm instead of football. Ratings for Week 2 were down by 15 percent — but only by 4 percent if one factors in that the Thursday night game was only broadcast on the N.F.L. Network, while last year it was on both the N.F.L. Network and CBS, which has a wider reach.Then, on Friday night, during a rally in Alabama, President Trump said owners of N.F.L. teams should fire any player that kneels during the national anthem. He went on to say that N.F.L. ratings were “down massively, massively,” and implored fans to leave the stadium if any player kneels during the anthem.League executives were cautiously optimistic that Trump’s comments would boost ratings for Week 3 games on Sunday, and they might have been right. The unofficial overnight ratings for Sunday’s games were down by about 4 percent, but it is likely that the overall Week 3 ratings will rise with strong viewership for the Dallas Cowboys on Monday night, coupled with high numbers from last Thursday’s game.In an interesting wrinkle, while ratings for the games themselves were incomplete, CBS said ratings for its pregame show rose by 33 percent, while Fox’s two pregame shows were up by 30 percent (from 11 a.m. to noon Eastern) and 9 percent (from noon until the 1 p.m. kickoffs).On Tuesday morning, Trump raised the topic again on Twitter, saying, “Ratings for NFL football are way down except before game starts, when people tune in to see whether or not our country will be disrespected!”The N.F.L. is still by far the most popular sport in the United States, and its games the most popular live sports events on television, but viewership is clearly trending down. Trying to parse out why is difficult.This summer, a J.D. Power survey of sports fans reported that 26 percent of fans who said they watched fewer N.F.L. games did so because of protests during the national anthem, according to an ESPN report. But only 12 percent of sports fans said they watched fewer N.F.L. games — meaning only 3 percent of respondents over all said they watched fewer games because of protests — and 27 percent of fans surveyed said they actually watched more games than they had the previous year.According to Mike Mulvihill, Fox Sports’s head of research, nearly 203 million people watched some part of the N.F.L. regular season in 2016, a 5 percent increase from the previous year. “The declines were about a growing pool of fans spending less time with the games each week,” he told SportsBusiness Journal. That suggests the ratings decline was the result of hard-core fans becoming casual ones rather than viewers tuning out altogether.The 8 percent drop in ratings between 2015 and 2016 amounted to about 1.4 million fewer people watching each N.F.L. game on average, though ascribing a single motivation to that many people is folly. All of the above reasons, and more, are factors, and it is extraordinarily difficult to understand how important any one of them is on the overall numbers.Across all live sports, though, it is likely that ratings will continue to drop. Viewers are continuing to abandon their cable packages, or refusing to sign up in the first place. And as more and more games become available, watching any single one loses importance. Games will continue to shift from network television to cable to internet streaming services, which are available to a smaller customer base.The end result is that, for all manner of reasons, fans simply will watch more or fewer games.But by next Monday afternoon, when the Week 4 N.F.L. ratings will be revealed, political preference will be read into them yet again.Follow Kevin Draper on Twitter: @kevinmdraper.Advertisement