By ADAM BAIDAWISEPT. 27, 2017
MELBOURNE, Australia — With more and more N.F.L. players kneeling during the national anthem in protest of police killings of African-Americans, a familiar cry has resurfaced: Politics has no place in sport. But of course, politics has an unmistakable place in sporting history, and there is perhaps no more obvious example than the 1968 Olympics, when two African-American medalists raised their fists, eliciting outrage not just at the Americans but also at the Australian standing with them at the podium.Peter Norman, the Australian runner, knew in advance what the two other athletes — Tommie Smith and John Carlos — would be doing, and he was ostracized in Australia for years.Ray Weinberg, his coach, now says that watching the way Colin Kaepernick has been similarly pushed aside shows the lessons of tolerance and respect for dissent have yet to be learned.Advertisement“I would suggest to you that they haven’t been learned at all,” Mr. Weinberg said in an interview on Wednesday. ”I don’t have a simple answer to it.”Australian athletes are paying close attention to the fierce conflict that Donald Trump has stirred up by repeatedly criticizing football players taking a knee and denying N.B.A. champions an invitation to the White House. Though the two countries’ histories are very different, they note, there are enough similarities when it comes to race and the backlash against protest for the situation in the United States to reignite this country’s own debate about sport, race and protest.“The way that people in the positions of leadership respond says a lot,” said Heritier Lumumba, a former Australian Football League player who has spoken out frequently about racism in Australian football. “Did you see Gregg Popovich speak?” he said, referring to the San Antonio Spurs coach’s comments earlier this week. “To me, that should be the norm.”In Australia, sport and progressive issues have long been intertwined. That has regularly played out in the A.F.L., where an on-field protest by Aboriginal player Nicky Winmar led to the league instituting a code of conduct prohibiting racial vilification in the ’90s.Last week, that league again rocked political waters when it temporarily changed the three-lettered logo at its headquarters to “YES” — indicating support for same-sex marriage in an ongoing government survey of Australians.AdvertisementAnd in other sports too, the discussion in the United States is rippling through. On Monday, much-maligned Australian tennis player Nick Kyrgios briefly took a knee before a match against Roger Federer.He later brushed off suggestions that it had any link to N.F.L. protests, and his agent said it was a tribute to Kyrgios’s late grandparents. But others noted that Kyrgios had previously worn an anti-Trump T-shirt and that his agent also represents Mr. Kaepernick.
            Nick Kyrgios took the knee before his #LaverCup2017 clash with Roger Federer, but says it was no NFL-style protest https://t.co/siIq17qYEb pic.twitter.com/wma3OKWlo8 Other Australian athletes are following the United States debate quietly — like cricketer Peter Siddle, who liked LeBron James’s tweet directed at Mr. Trump, and another showing N.F.L. players taking a knee.But the story of Peter Norman, and its long-term impact, remains one of the country’s most discussed examples of athletes intersecting with social causes.After winning the 200-meter silver medal, Norman was approached by the first- and third-place finishers, African-Americans Tommie Smith and John Carlos. The pair asked Norman if he believed in human rights, and told him that they would be staging a protest. “I’ll stand with you,” Norman responded.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.The photograph of the three men on the Olympic podium — Smith and Carlos raising fists to the sky; Norman bowing his head solemnly — is one of the lasting sporting images of the 20th century.Mr. Weinberg, his coach, said “Peter had established a connection with them — they were going through more than many of us could understand at the time.”The punishment for the two Americans was swift: They were barred from further competition and removed from the Olympic Village.For Norman, though, the consequences were more insidious. He was made a pariah by Australian media and reprimanded by the head of the Australian Olympic Committee. The A.O.C. did not send him to the 1972 Olympics, effectively ending his athletics career (his silver-medal-winning 200-meter time is still an Australian record). Decades later, he did not receive an invitation to the Sydney 2000 Olympics — his story scrubbed from the country’s sporting history.AdvertisementWhen Norman died in 2006, Smith and Carlos flew to Melbourne to be his pallbearers. It was only six years later that Australia’s parliament passed a motion to formally apologize to Norman, and to recognize the “powerful role” his actions played.“It’s a great Australian story that deserves to be better known,” said Andrew Leigh, the Australian minister who led the motion. “It struck me as what Barack Obama might like to call a ‘teachable moment.’”Mr. Weinberg, now 90, still ponders how and why Norman was so shunned upon his return to Australia. He cites Norman as an example of how outspoken sporting figures, however towering they may seem, can face a lifetime of negative consequences for their political actions, often from forces they cannot see.“I think that Peter was badly treated by powers that be, and I’m unable to name them,” Mr. Weinberg said. ”I don’t know who they were.”As for whether politics has a place in sports, Mr. Weinberg said the question itself is irrelevant. “Nobody can seem to keep it out,” he said.Follow Adam Baidawi on Twitter: @ads_b.A version of this article appears in print on September 28, 2017, on Page B11 of the New York edition with the headline: Protests Draw Attention, and Comparisons, in Australia.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.