By AMANDA DUCKWORTHSEPT. 29, 2017
The Prix de l’Arc de Triomphe is one of the most respected horse races in the world, and it anchors the biggest weekend of racing in France. More than 200 horses will compete in 16 races worth 9.4 million euros in prize money on Saturday and Sunday, and attending is more affordable than you might think.For the second and final time, Chantilly will host this year’s Arc while its regular home, Longchamp in Paris, is  renovated. Last year, Chantilly proved itself a worthy host, and its backdrop of the Château de Chantilly and the Grandes Écuries, or Great Stables, is a unique setting in sports.The move to Chantilly was the first time the Arc was held outside of Paris since it was inaugurated in 1920. The only previous interruptions to the race’s tenure at Longchamp happened during World War II. It was canceled in 1939 and 1940, and after a bombing happened during a race in April 1943, the Arc was held at nearby, and now defunct, Le Tremblay that October as well as in 1944.The renovated Longchamp, which will be rechristened ParisLongchamp, is scheduled to reopen in April 2018.AdvertisementAlthough many of the top sporting events around the world, including horse races, come with a hefty price tag to attend, tickets to the Arc start at €8, or about $10, and the entrance fee is waived for anyone under 18. Comparatively, a general admission ticket to the Kentucky Derby costs $40 six months out and $60 on the day.AdvertisementTo encourage people to make the trip to the Arc, France Galop, French thoroughbred racing’s national regulatory body, has also organized extra trains between Gare du Nord in Paris and Chantilly, which is a 30-minute ride. From there, patrons can take free shuttles to the track or walk through the famed Chantilly forest for about 10 minutes before arriving at the racecourse.Hats and fancy dress are encouraged but not required. Chantilly offers a range of ticket options ranging from the very simple to V.I.P., but as a smaller venue, it is likely luxury seating will be sold out in advance of the race.The Arc is open to colts, fillies and mares who are 3 years old and up. Because it was originally designed to serve as a showcase for French thoroughbred breeding, geldings were forbidden from running and that rule remains.Fillies and mares have won six of the last 10 races, and another, Enable, is favored to win this year.One of the most important female winners to date was Urban Sea in 1993. Although her victory was a surprise, going off at odds of 37-to-1, she went on to become an impressive broodmare. Today her son Galileo — who was retired after his championship season in 2001 and who sired last year’s Arc winner, Found — is widely regarded as the best stallion in the world, while another, Sea the Stars, won the Arc in 2009 and was named Europe’s Horse of the Year. Both won the Epsom Derby.Because the Arc is an event that draws people who are simply there for the spectacle and less so for the horses, educational opportunities will be available in the Arc Village. Racing experts will help explain the various races as well as the best ways to enjoy the day, whether you are a first-time racegoer or an aficionado.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.In the racing experience hub, guests can climb into the saddle and use a simulator to learn how to ride like a jockey. While urging on their mechanical horse, participants can gallop at full speed around the virtual racetrack.Arc weekend is easily the most international two days on the French racing calendar in terms of both equine participants and spectators. It typically attracts visitors from England, Ireland, Germany, Japan and the Middle East, among others, and is broadcast in 50 countries.AdvertisementLast year’s winner, Found, is Irish-bred and Irish-based, while Golden Horn, the 2015 winner, is from England. Trêve, the 2013 and 2014 winner, is French, but her owner is Sheikh Joaan al-Thani of Qatar. Solemia, the 2012 winner, is owned by Wertheimer et Frère, the brothers who are also the owners of the House of Chanel. Both she and Trêve defeated Orfevre, Japan’s Triple Crown winner who ran second two years in a row. In 2011, Danedream became the first German-bred, German-trained horse to win the acclaimed race.The French are known for their cuisine, and Arc weekend is no exception. Options range from simple takeout sandwiches and ice cream to the Panoramic restaurant’s foie gras and roasted sea bass. The restaurant is already fully booked for Sunday.Traditional French items like crepes are easy to find, but organizers are making a point to offer a variety of food choices. The infield will have food trucks that aim to please the international crowd, with options ranging from fish and chips to dim sum.Champagne is the featured beverage of the weekend, and several of the bars around the course will only offer France’s signature drink. It is not uncommon for the bubbly to be gone by the end of the day. Other bars will serve wine and beer, while soft drinks, smoothies and coffee will also be available.A version of this article appears in print on September 30, 2017, in The International New York Times.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.See More »