By TALYA MINSBERGSEPT. 26, 2017
PARK CITY, Utah — The protesting of racism and police brutality by American athletes started with W.N.B.A. players at a news conference in July 2016 and soon spread to the playing fields of the N.F.L. and the hardwood courts of the N.B.A. In less than five months, the Winter Games in Pyeongchang, South Korea, will present a far larger stage for demonstration: an Olympic podium.Kehri Jones, an Olympic hopeful in bobsledding, was among those at an athlete summit here this week who said that athlete activism was something she had been thinking about and discussing with teammates as the Pyeongchang Games approach. The matter intensified last weekend after President Trump disparaged N.F.L. players who had chosen to kneel during the national anthem in protest of police violence.“I am an African-American woman and my family is all African-American,” said Jones, who is from Fort Hood, Tex. “I worry about my family and my siblings and my father going out and ending up in some of these awful situations,” she added, speaking of police brutality.“It’s a really fine line I’m walking because my dad is in the military and I want to represent our country well,” Jones continued. Her father is scheduled to be deployed during the Winter Games. “But I also want to represent all the social injustice that has been going on.”AdvertisementOlympics officials and sponsors oppose political demonstrations in any form at the Games, but that has not stopped some athletes. Perhaps the most well-known instance of a political statement by American athletes was when the sprinters Tommie Smith and John Carlos raised their fists in a Black Power salute at the 1968 Mexico City Games.AdvertisementLast summer, at the Rio Games, the Ethiopian marathoner Feyisa Lilesa crossed his arms over his head at the finish line to protest Ethiopia’s treatment of his ethnic group, the Oromo people. He has been in exile since.Join a deep and provocative exploration of race with a diverse group of New York Times journalists.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.“At the Olympic Games themselves, there is a prohibition on all forms of demonstration, political or otherwise,” said Scott Blackmun, chief executive of the United States Olympic Committee, referring to a rule in the Olympic Charter. “We have a little bit different state of play when it comes to the Olympic Games. But we certainly recognize the importance of athletes being able to express themselves.”The American figure skater Adam Rippon is among the more outspoken Olympic hopefuls in terms of politics, commonly sharing his views on Instagram and Twitter. Over the weekend, after President Trump said Stephen Curry and the Golden State Warriors were no longer invited to the White House, Rippon retweeted a statement from the Warriors, calling the team “champions on and off the court.”“As athletes, we have a very unique opportunity to speak up about things that we believe in and to be that voice for people who are not being heard,” Rippon said.When asked if he would make some kind of statement at the Olympics if he makes the podium, he hesitated. “I hope by the time the Olympics comes around the atmosphere and tensions of the political climate are different,” he said, adding that he would support teammates should they express their views.Elana Meyers Taylor, a two-time Olympic bobsledder, said athletes were pushing for social change more than ever before. “I think the hardest thing is that all of us would love to just stick to sports — but if you want us to be role models to kids then you need to stand for more than just sports.”“At the end of the day,” she added, “the only time we hear the national anthem is when we win a gold medal. So we have to get to the Olympics, then win a gold medal and then see what kind of social impact we can have there.”While some athletes left open the possibility of making a political statement at the Winter Games, others said it was out of the question.Advertisement“You won’t see me taking a knee at the national anthem, especially at an event like the Olympics,” said Troy Terry, a hockey player hoping to make the United States team for Pyeongchang.Tara Parker Pope contributed reporting. A version of this article appears in print on September 27, 2017, on Page B12 of the New York edition with the headline: How Far to Carry ‘Unique Opportunity to Speak Up’ .  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.See More »