By KATE WALKERNOV. 24, 2017
For most Formula One fans, experiencing the thrill of racing at 200 miles per hour can be achieved only through video games.There are also large online communities of race fans who for years have been taking part in simulations of races and seasons covering series that include Nascar and IndyCar.But not Formula One, and it wants to change that.“First and foremost, we want to go from being either followers — or to some degree not present in some of these key markets — to leading,” said Frank Arthofer, global head of digital and new business with Formula One Management. “We looked at esports, which is an incredibly fast-growing market.“We looked at racing, and we said, ‘Of all the sports games in the market, racing is actually the most authentic to a video game environment.’ I can sit in a simulator, I can put on headphones, I can drive a wheel; that’s a pretty authentic experience. What makes esports great is authenticity. As great as playing Madden and FIFA are — and I love those games — you’re still doing it on a controller.”AdvertisementWhile Formula One has long licensed an official game, the sport has otherwise stayed away from the gaming market. This year, however, Formula One has seen two pushes into the esports market, with the start of an official Formula One Esports Series and the McLaren F1 team’s World’s Fastest Gamer competition.AdvertisementWorking with the game developer Codemasters and the esports event organizer Gfinity, Formula One created a global online championship with almost 64,000 participants.Entrants raced throughout September, and the gamers were pared to 40 finalists from countries including Brazil, Chile, Denmark, Finland, Germany, Britain, Italy, the Netherlands, Poland, and Turkey. Those gamers were invited to London for the semifinals in October, and the 20 finalists will compete to become the Formula One Esports World Champion this weekend at the Abu Dhabi Grand Prix.Cem Bolukbasi, 19, a finalist from Turkey, said his goal is to become a Formula One driver.“It feels amazing to be one of the finalists and to take part in the F1 Esports Series finals on the same weekend as the real-life F1 Abu Dhabi Grand Prix,” he said. “It means the world to me to have a chance to see my greatest idols in action and maybe even get a tip or two in person.”Bolukbasi’s goal is not out of the question.“In racing you have the ability to really simulate, and I think at some point in the future there will come a time when an esports driver is in an F2 car,” Arthofer said. “I think it is a training ground. Obviously, there are other elements — physical being a big one — that aren’t tested in esports in the same way they are in real life.”In October, Neilsen Sports released the results of a study of esports fans in the Britain, the United States, France and Germany, and found that the audience is predominantly male, 71 percent, and young, with an average age of 26.“There are sports — and motorsport in particular — that are naturally related to esports and gaming,” said Samantha Lamberti, head of motorsports for Europe for Nielsen Sports. “If Formula One as a governing body, or teams like McLaren, get involved with esports and build competitions — as they are doing — it is a good thing for the sport as a whole.“We have been saying for a few years now that the general motorsport audience, and the F1 audience, has an older demographic. The new generation, the youngest fans, play games and are into motorsport gaming. The strategy to use esports to attract them, to make the fan base a little bit younger, is a very good move: It shows that the sport understands the trends and understands when and how to embrace them.”AdvertisementArthofer has big plans for the esports series, which he sees as integral to Formula One’s future digital offerings.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.“We look at the return on investment in Year 1 as building the brand F1 Esports, building the fan base and building the player base, and we feel like ‘check, check, check,’” Arthofer said.“Next year we’ll probably go through a tender process for TV broadcasts and/or digital broadcast partner,” he said, referring to the esports championship. “We’ve already got a lot of sponsors at the table to come in and do the presenting for next year, so it’s about finding the right strategic one who can help us grow it. But big brands like Monster, who have been a part of this business for a long time, I think will be at the table with us hopefully for next year.”The teams are also beginning to look to esports to engage with new fans. In May, McLaren announced the start of an esports competition with a top prize of a role with the team, working as a development driver on the official simulator. In addition to racing, the four finalists will be assessed for their engineering knowledge, mental and physical capabilities for the role, and their ability to work in a team.“The contest isn’t limited to one platform or one game,” said Zak Brown, executive director of the McLaren Technology Group. “We’re very keen not to restrict access or entry for people, but rather welcome the worldwide gaming community, whether that’s on mobile or on high-end simulator platforms.“The winner will be offered a one-year contract with McLaren to work in an official capacity as a simulator driver. They will work with engineers at the McLaren Technology Center and at grand prix circuits across the world to develop and improve the machinery driven in the real world by the team’s drivers.”Response to McLaren’s effort has been overwhelmingly positive, Brown said.“I think Formula One fans, McLaren fans, they see it as something new in the sport,” he said. “Sim racing has coexisted alongside motorsport for a very long time, but this is the first time there’s really been a crossover with Formula One, and I think people are really keen to see just what happens when the stakes are so high.“I think people want to see exactly what’s possible for a sim racer. Let’s face it, we all think we’re quick, and these games are a really tantalizing way of peering over the precipice and imagining just what might be if we could actually drive a Formula One car.”While McLaren has developed its own esports initiative this year, Arthofer says that the teams have been asking to get involved in the Formula One Esports Series in the future.“Some of the teams are already calling and saying, ‘We’d like to participate next year, let’s figure out how to do this together,’” he said. “For us it’s important that all the teams participate, because I think that makes it even more authentic. But I also feel that there’s such a big community of gamers and gaming teams out there, that this can probably be a big success.”A version of this article appears in print on November 25, 2017, in The International New York Times.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.See More »