AdvertisementSupported bySports BriefingBy The Associated PressCam Atkinson scored twice, and the visiting Columbus Blue Jackets extended their winning streak to 15 games by stopping Minnesota’s 12-game run with a 4-2 victory over the Wild on Saturday.Never in N.H.L. history had two teams taken such long winning streaks into a game. With the victory, the Blue Jackets matched the second-longest winning streak in league history; they would equal Pittsburgh’s record run from 1993 with two more victories.“We’ve got the right group of guys to do it with,” right wing Josh Anderson said. “Everybody’s positive in the room. We’re all having a bunch of fun.”Columbus goaltender Sergei Bobrovsky made 29 saves, yielding two or fewer goals for the 10th time during the remarkable streak, and defensemen Jack Johnson and Seth Jones each had goals assisted by Brandon Saad in a frenetic second period.Minnesota’s Devan Dubnyk stopped 21 shots but surrendered four goals for the second straight game, after allowing three or fewer in his first 27 appearances.The Blue Jackets’ last loss came in overtime at Florida on Nov. 26. The Wild had not lost since Dec. 2 at Calgary.MANAGING A CHANCE The Carolina Hurricanes signed their equipment manager Jorge Alves to a professional tryout contract to be the backup goaltender for their 3-1 loss at Tampa Bay. Eddie Lack, the regular backup to goaltender Cam Ward, was ill.Alves, 37, did not enter the game. He has been one of Carolina’s full-time equipment managers since the 2012-13 season and practices with the team regularly. He played on North Carolina State’s club hockey team for two years and had several short stints in the professional minor leagues.RANGERS ROLL Chris Kreider got his second career hat trick, J. T. Miller added two goals, and the visiting Rangers beat the Colorado Avalanche, 6-2.Derek Stepan and Mats Zuccarello each had two assists for the Rangers, who have won three straight and nine of their last 12. Henrik Lundqvist returned after missing two games with the flu and stopped 25 shots.Colorado has lost eight of its last nine.AROUND THE N.H.L. John Tavares and Ryan Strome each had a goal and an assist to help the visiting Islanders beat the Winnipeg Jets, 6-2, and climb to .500, at 15-15-6. Devils defenseman John Moore was taken off the ice on a stretcher after being hit from behind during a 6-2 loss to the visiting Washington Capitals. He was taken to a hospital for evaluation, but Coach John Hynes said Moore would not have to stay.U.S. TOPS CANADA Colin White and Jordan Greenway scored power-play goals, and Joseph Woll had 25 saves to help the United States beat Canada, 3-1, to win Group B at the world junior hockey championship in Toronto. The United States will play Switzerland in the quarterfinals Monday.North Carolina’s big four — No. 5 Duke, No. 9 North Carolina, Wake Forest and North Carolina State — all lost on Saturday, the first time in three years that the state, a hotbed of college hoops, had had such a difficult day in men’s basketball.The Blue Devils fell at Virginia Tech, 89-75, and the Tar Heels lost at Georgia Tech, 75-63. Clemson rallied past the host Demon Deacons, 73-68, and the Wolfpack then capped the state’s 0-for-4 day by losing at Miami, 81-63.The Hokies ended a nine-game losing streak against Duke, which played without Grayson Allen, a preseason all-American who was suspended indefinitely for tripping an Elon player on Dec. 21.Georgia Tech beat the Tar Heels three days after struggling to beat one of their less glamorous neighbors: North Carolina A&T.The last time all four programs lost on the same day was Jan. 11, 2014.VILLANOVA STAYS HOT Jalen Brunson scored a career-high 27 points, and No. 1 Villanova extended its team-record winning streak to 20 games with an 80-70 victory at No. 10 Creighton.Russell Westbrook had 17 points, 14 assists and 12 rebounds for his N.B.A.-leading 16th triple-double of the season, leading the host Oklahoma City Thunder over the Los Angeles Clippers, 114-88.Westbrook played just 28 minutes as Oklahoma City built a 69-40 halftime lead.The Clippers played without Chris Paul, who was sidelined by a hamstring injury, and Blake Griffin, who is recovering from a right knee operation.AROUND THE N.B.A. LeBron James scored 17 of his 32 points in the first quarter, and Cleveland, playing without Kyrie Irving, won at Charlotte, 121-109. Giannis Antetokounmpo scored 35 points, Jabari Parker added 27, and visiting Milwaukee beat Chicago, 116-96.Derrius Guice rushed for 138 yards, including a 70-yard touchdown run, and caught a scoring pass as No. 19 Louisiana State beat No. 15 Louisville and the season’s Heisman Trophy winner, Lamar Jackson, by 29-9 in the Citrus Bowl in Orlando, Fla.The Tigers’ defense completely shut down Jackson, sacking him eight times, including once for a safety in the second quarter. He completed just 10 of 27 passes for 153 yards, and although he led the Cardinals in rushing, he had only 33 yards on 26 carries.Guice stepped in for Leonard Fournette, who skipped the game in preparation for the N.F.L. draft.TAXSLAYER BOWL Dedrick Mills ran for a career-high 169 yards and a touchdown as Georgia Tech beat Kentucky, 33-18, in Jacksonville, Fla. Georgia Tech’s P. J. Davis returned a fumble for a touchdown on the game’s opening drive.Willian scored twice as Chelsea overcame visiting Stoke, 4-2, to equal the Premier League record of 13 straight wins in a single season. The last team to win 13 matches in a row in a season was Arsenal in 2002. (REUTERS)Rafael Nadal ended his injury-plagued season on a high note by winning the Mubadala World Tennis Championship title in Abu Dhabi, United Arab Emirates, for a fourth time. Nadal defeated 11th-ranked David Goffin of Belgium, 6-4, 7-6 (7-5). (AGENCE FRANCE-PRESSE)All news by The Associated Press unless noted.Advertisement