By BRIAN PINELLIFEB. 9, 2017
ST. MORITZ, Switzerland — Recovering from a broken arm and racing without any feeling in her right hand, Lindsey Vonn still says that she is the one to beat in the downhill at the Alpine World Ski Championships on Sunday.Asked who is the favorite for the signature women’s race, Vonn replied candidly with a smile and laugh: “Me. I don’t know what else you want me to say.”But as has often been the case throughout her 16-year World Cup career, Vonn, 32, is battling through an injury. She sustained a broken right arm in a preseason training crash at Copper Mountain, Colo., in November. She still has not regained complete motor coordination in her right hand.In the super-G on Tuesday, Vonn struggled to grip her ski pole, lost focus and skied off course. To combat the lack of feeling, Vonn used duct tape to allow her to hold the pole in Thursday’s final downhill training run.Advertisement“I taped my hand and I also have a different pair of gloves on — Reusch sent me some really thin old-school gloves,” Vonn said after finishing fourth in training, 0.83 seconds behind Ilka Stuhec of Slovenia. “I think it’s going to help and now I can focus hopefully on my racing and not whether my pole is in my hand.”AdvertisementVonn is racing at her seventh world championships this week, seeking to add to her six career medals at the two-week event that is contested every two years. A four-time overall World Cup champion, Vonn won gold medals in the downhill and the super-G at the 2009 championships in Val d’Isere, France.While she has prospered at the world championships, she has also had various injuries, crashes and unexpected mishaps over the years. In 2009, she sliced her finger opening a champagne bottle during a victory celebration. In 2011 in Germany, she won a downhill silver medal while racing with a concussion against doctor’s orders. In a nasty crash in the 2013 championships in Austria, she tore knee ligaments that prevented her from competing at the 2014 Sochi Olympics.“It’s definitely been up and down for me at world championships,” Vonn said. “I love the world championships — it’s different from the Olympics and obviously different from the World Cup. I always thought February was tough, and when I was doing five events, I was running out of gas and maybe that’s the reason I was always getting hurt. Now that I’m only doing two events, it’s pretty nice.”Vonn displayed her ability to bounce back quickly from injury, winning a downhill race in Garmisch-Partenkirchen, Germany, on Jan. 21. It was her second race back after recovering from her broken arm.A U.S. Ski Team assistant, Chris Knight, said Vonn’s tenacity in overcoming setbacks no longer surprised him.“It doesn’t cease to amaze me — it was a pretty impressive effort,” Knight said of Vonn’s recent victory in Germany.Vonn also had two crashes leading to the world championship at races in Cortina d’Ampezzo, Italy, in late January.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.“She’s had a lot of injuries, and you’ve got to try and keep her wrapped in cotton wool as much as you can because she is such a great racer and you want to try and eliminate risks,” Knight said, “but you can’t say to a racer whose job is to go fast to take it easy.”AdvertisementIn addition to Sunday’s downhill, Vonn is also racing Friday’s Alpine combined, which consists of a morning downhill run and an afternoon slalom.Vonn said the 2,633-meter Engiadina downhill piste, with its blind turns and rolling terrain, was a good hill for her.“It’s fast, there are some good technical parts and really big jumps,” she said. “I know I can risk a lot here and I’m prepared to do that. World championships are all about the medals, and that’s what I’m going for.”Her competitors know better than to count Vonn out even after yet another injury.“She surprises me every time still, but at the same time, you don’t expect anything else from here,” said Tina Weirather of Liechtenstein. “She’s crazy in those regards — I told her yesterday that I have the biggest respect for her, it’s very cool and inspiring.”Vonn may even have extra motivation over the coming days. At 18, she was left off the United States squad in favor of Julia Mancuso the last time the world championships were staged in St. Moritz in 2003.“I think that was one of the most disappointing moments — that’s very vivid in my mind,” Vonn said. “I was really mad and they took Julia, they didn’t take me. The coaches didn’t think I was fast enough. Now I can have my revenge.”A version of this article appears in print on February 10, 2017, on Page B11 of the New York edition with the headline: Injured Vonn Holds Hopes Together With Confidence and Duct Tape.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.