By THE ASSOCIATED PRESSJAN. 8, 2017
HOUSTON — Oakland’s first trip to the playoffs in 14 seasons was short-circuited in large part by injuries that wrecked its once-prolific offense.Connor Cook, a rookie and a third-string quarterback, was no match for the Houston Texans in a 27-14 loss in a wild-card playoff game on Saturday.Cook threw three interceptions and completed only 18 of 45 passes for 161 yards with one touchdown.The Raiders’ starter, Derek Carr, who was considered a contender for the Most Valuable Player Award, broke his leg two weeks ago, and the backup, Matt McGloin, then injured his left shoulder — on his nonthrowing arm — last weekend. That left Cook to become the first quarterback in N.F.L. history to make his first start in a playoff game.McGloin was available to play against the Texans, but Coach Jack Del Rio never brought him off the bench.AdvertisementDel Rio said he had asked his staff at halftime if he should bring McGloin in for the second half.“The coaches really felt that there were other things that were kind of contributing and that there wasn’t going to be a big change based on changing the quarterback, so we stayed the course with it,” Del Rio said. “He did some good things, and then he did some things he’ll certainly learn from.”The Raiders last made the playoffs in the 2002 season, when they went to the Super Bowl.“We got off to such a great start,” Del Rio said. “Winning 12 games isn’t easy to do. Just came to an abrupt end. The last two weeks, we weren’t able to do enough as a team to carry on and continue.”The Raiders were also missing their star left tackle, Donald Penn, whose streak of 160 straight starts ended because of a knee injury. Penn’s absence put Cook at a further disadvantage.Get the big sports news, highlights and analysis from Times journalists, with distinctive takes on games and some behind-the-scenes surprises, delivered to your inbox every week.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.“I had high expectations for myself,” Cook said, “and to come in and play like that, it’s not a good feeling.”Del Rio said: “It was his first start, on the road, in a playoff game, against the No. 1-ranked defense. It was a tough draw for him. We had hopes that we would be able to do enough around him so he wouldn’t have to do as much.”AdvertisementDefensive end Khalil Mack said it had been difficult to play without Carr.“When you lose an M.V.P., it takes a toll,” he said. “We wanted to rally and focus back in, but you could tell it was a big hit for us.”Carr threw for 3,937 yards with 28 touchdowns and just six interceptions this season before his leg was broken on a sack in a win over Indianapolis on Dec. 24. McGloin started last week, but the injury to his shoulder pushed Cook into action.Mack said he was disappointed that he and the rest of the team had not been able to do more to help their young quarterback succeed on Saturday.“We should have stepped up defensively and carried this team, but we couldn’t do it,” he said. “We weren’t able to help our offense, and that’s my fault. I’ll take the blame for that.”We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.