AdvertisementSupported byBy Victor MatherWhen the N.H.L. playoffs begin in April, the Detroit Red Wings won’t be there for the first time since 1990. But for the first time since 2006, the Edmonton Oilers will.The Wings had held the longest current streak in hockey and indeed in major North American sports — 25 consecutive seasons in the playoffs — while the Oilers had the longest streak outside the postseason — 10 seasons.The Wings’ streak was also the third longest in the N.H.L., trailing the Boston Bruins from 1968 to 1996 and the Chicago Blackhawks from 1970 to 1997.The new leader is not even close: The Pittsburgh Penguins will make their 11th straight appearance this spring. On the negative side, the Carolina Hurricanes have missed the playoffs seven straight times. Sitting in 11th place in their conference, they will probably do so again, although they still have a fighting chance.The Red Wings have slipped since their Stanley Cup championship in 2008. In the last three seasons, they lost in the first round of the playoffs. Still, as recently as two seasons ago, they managed 100 points in the regular season. This season, they are on a pace for 80.Last year’s decent-enough team had a balanced offense with six 40-point players. This season, it has relied heavily on Henrik Zetterberg, who has 63 points but is getting little support. The team misses Pavel Datsyuk, its second leading point-scorer last season, who elected to return to Russia at age 38.On the goaltending side, Petr Mrazek’s goals-against average has slipped to 2.99 from 2.33. The backup Jimmy Howard’s numbers are better, but he missed almost three months in the heart of the season with a knee injury.Understandably, the resurgent Oilers’ numbers look better. In his second season, Connor McDavid, 20, leads the league in assists and points. Another youngster, Leon Draisaitl, 21, is not too far behind. The ironman Cam Talbot, traded away by the Rangers, has played 68 games and leads the league in saves.The closest current pursuers of the Wings’ 25-season mark are the San Antonio Spurs, who will be contesting their 20th consecutive N.B.A. playoffs this spring. In other sports, no team comes close. The current leaders are the New England Patriots and the Green Bay Packers in the N.F.L., eight seasons; the Los Angeles Galaxy and Seattle Sounders in M.L.S., eight; and the Los Angeles Dodgers in Major League Baseball, four.Among the more impressive streaks from around the world are Real Madrid’s and Arsenal’s in qualifying for the Champions League. Real has done so 20 straight times, and Arsenal 19. Real is set for No. 21 next year, but like the Wings’, Arsenal’s streak is under threat. The top four in the Premier League normally qualify, but Arsenal currently stands in sixth place.Advertisement