By VICTOR MATHERMARCH 28, 2017
Lionel Messi was barred for Argentina’s next four games after he used “insulting words” with an official, FIFA ruled on Tuesday.The length of the suspension was a surprise: Many commentators and soccer figures were expecting a one- or two-game ban, at most.The ban began immediately: Messi did not play in Tuesday’s World Cup qualifier against Bolivia. Without its star striker, Argentina fell, 2-0.He was also fined 10,000 Swiss francs, or about $10,200. The suspension does not apply to games for his club, Barcelona.Advertisement“The federation will appeal, as it should,” the team secretary Jorge Miadosqui told Agence France-Presse. “We feel powerless, surprised.”AdvertisementThe loss to Bolivia was costly for Argentina, which slipped from third to fifth in the South American qualifying standings after Tuesday’s games. Four teams advance automatically from the region, while the fifth faces a playoff against a team from the Oceania region. With four games remaining, Argentina is a point out of fourth place.Get the big sports news, highlights and analysis from Times journalists, with distinctive takes on games and some behind-the-scenes surprises, delivered to your inbox every week.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.Messi was called for a foul by the assistant referee Emerson Carvalho in the second half of Thursday’s game against Chile. He strongly disagreed with the ruling and waved his arms and shouted at Carvalho, a Brazilian. He did not get a yellow or red card for his actions at the time.After the game, he shook the hands of two officials, then pointedly did not shake Carvalho’s hand. Argentina won, 1-0, with Messi scoring the lone goal on a penalty.Messi has been the star of Argentina for years. He has four goals in qualifiers so far, the most on the team.At least one Argentine official was not expecting a suspension. “I think Messi is going to play,” Armando Pérez of the Argentine federation told TyC Sports, a sports channel in Argentina. “I do not see many arguments. FIFA is very punctilious.”Argentina has been on a run of strong but ultimately disappointing results in major tournaments. The team was the runner-up in the 2014 World Cup and the Copa América in 2015 and 2016.Barring a successful appeal, Messi will also miss games at Uruguay in August, versus Venezuela in September and versus Peru in October. He could return for Argentina’s final qualifier, in Ecuador on Oct. 10.The suspension could almost be a blessing for Messi’s Barcelona career: He will now get the summer off, and if his absence means Argentina misses the 2018 World Cup, he will get next summer off, too.AdvertisementThat will be little consolation to Argentina, which has not missed a World Cup since 1970.An article on Wednesday about Lionel Messi’s four-game suspension for using insulting words with an official misstated the location of Argentina’s game against Chile where the incident took place. It was in Argentina, not Chile.A version of this article appears in print on March 29, 2017, on Page B11 of the New York edition with the headline: Messi’s Suspension Is a Blow to Argentina’s World Cup Hopes.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.