By SETH BERKMANMARCH 28, 2017
Meghan Duggan understood the risk. So did her 22 teammates on the United States women’s national hockey team. They put their careers on the line when they announced March 15 that they would boycott the coming world championship if U.S.A. Hockey, the sport’s national governing body, did not increase wages and support for the women.Many players had no financial cushion to fall back on. Hockey as a full-time occupation produced barely enough to cover their basic needs, like rent. U.S.A. Hockey had shown little inclination to acquiesce to their demands for support equal to what the men’s national team received and for better youth development programs for girls.That risk paid off on Tuesday when the women’s team reached an agreement with U.S.A. Hockey and ended the standoff. The four-year deal includes the formation of a Women’s High Performance Advisory Group to advance women’s and girls’ hockey at youth levels.The deal provides the female players with travel and insurance provisions that equal what the men’s national team receives, according to a person with direct knowledge of the negotiations who requested anonymity because the financial details of the contracts were not publicly disclosed. The women’s team will also receive a pool of prize money to be split each year. Each player will be guaranteed a $2,000 training stipend per month, year-round, from the United States Olympic Committee, and the players will receive larger performance bonuses for winning medals.Advertisement“It is absolutely an iconic moment in women’s sports,” said Mary Jo Kane, the director of the Tucker Center for Research on Girls and Women in Sport at the University of Minnesota. “It’s not just because of the women’s team themselves; it’s how people, women in particular, understood what it was they were doing and why they were doing it.”AdvertisementIn a statement released by U.S.A. Hockey, Dave Ogrean, the organization’s executive director, said, “This process has, in the end, made us better.”The women’s team is expected to arrive in Plymouth, Mich., on Wednesday morning to prepare for the world championship.The team’s effort garnered support from across the sporting landscape and beyond, even from members of the United States Senate. Six days after the boycott announcement, whatever fears Duggan might have had were eased when she received a phone call from Billie Jean King.“She said she believes in us,” Duggan, the team’s captain, said. “She was willing to help in any way she could. Unfortunately, it’s something she knows too much about. But her belief in us goes a long way.”For decades, King fought for pay equality in sports; today, women’s tennis players not only receive equal purses with the men at many top tournaments but also routinely dominate lists of the highest-paid female athletes.Get the big sports news, highlights and analysis from Times journalists, with distinctive takes on games and some behind-the-scenes surprises, delivered to your inbox every week.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.In contrast, women’s hockey usually draws significant news media attention only once every four years, during the Olympics. But over the course of two weeks, the women’s team was thrust into the forefront of a fight over gender equity in sports.The women’s hockey players received support over that period from a wide range of professional athletes and players’ unions — from not only the National Women’s Hockey League but also the N.H.L., the N.B.A., the W.N.B.A., the N.F.L., Major League Baseball and the United States women’s soccer team. Twenty United States senators  wrote a letter to U.S.A. Hockey supporting the players.AdvertisementBut U.S.A. Hockey maintained that it did not employ athletes, asserting that it had provided ample opportunities for the women to make livable wages.The men’s national team is largely made up of N.H.L. players who make seven-figure salaries and do not rely on U.S.A. Hockey for financial or training support. The N.H.L. also provides $9 million annually to U.S.A. Hockey, much of which goes to the National Team Development Program for top under-18 boys.As the women’s boycott continued and the national team players’ participation in the championship began to appear doubtful, U.S.A. Hockey approached junior players; players from pro leagues; college players from the Division I, Division III and club levels; and even recreation players to ask if they would be replacements.The national team players did not waver in their stance. They recalled poor experiences from the past, like waiting months for medical reimbursements from U.S.A. Hockey and receiving their 2015 world championship rings in 2017.“We’re very strong, powerful women,” said Hilary Knight, a veteran of the national team. “But it’s tough. Some of the comments were tough. Standing for what you believe in isn’t always the easiest thing.”The American women have won a medal in each Olympic Games since women’s hockey became an official event in 1998. They have finished either first or second at every world championship contested since 1990. U.S.A. Hockey’s registration rates for girls rise annually, almost 5 percent last year.“We’ll now move forward together knowing we’ll look back on this day as one of the most positive in the history of U.S.A. Hockey,” said Jim Smith, the organization’s president.Female players will now receive maternity support as part of the deal.“There’s now a feeling, women can chase their dreams, have a family and do both without having a financial burden,” said Jocelyne Lamoureux-Davidson, a forward on the national team.She added: “I feel like a ton of bricks has been lifted off our shoulders. It’s a release. I think today is going to be a day that goes down in history for women’s hockey in the U.S. and the world.”A version of this article appears in print on March 29, 2017, on Page B11 of the New York edition with the headline: National Women’s Team Prevails in Its Face-Off Against U.S.A. Hockey.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.