By TAL PINCHEVSKYFEB. 16, 2016
The calls came to John Slaney for more than two decades, typically right before Christmas. Canadian sports media outlets would request interviews, asking Slaney to wax nostalgic about what remains the highlight of his hockey career: his dramatic goal against the Soviet Union on Jan. 4, 1991, which earned Canada a gold medal at the world junior hockey championships.The goal created high N.H.L. expectations for Slaney, an 18-year-old defenseman who had been the ninth overall pick by the Washington Capitals in the draft six months earlier.But Slaney never had an N.H.L. moment to surpass his junior triumph. Now 44, he is finally enjoying his first full N.H.L. season — as an assistant coach for the Arizona Coyotes.“This really is the first year I didn’t do any interviews about it, to be honest with you,” Slaney said. “Still, today, when people see me or talk to me, they still talk about that goal.”AdvertisementThe goal remains one of Canada’s most replayed international hockey highlights. Slaney beat the Soviet goaltender Sergei Zvyagin from the point to give Canada a 3-2 lead with 5 minutes 13 seconds remaining in the deciding round-robin game, causing the crowd in Saskatoon, Saskatchewan, to erupt. The winner gave Canada its first world junior title on home soil.Advertisement“He was legendary in Canada,” Coyotes Coach Dave Tippett said. “I remember it was awful exciting. That’s a long time ago.”The goal was immediately stitched in Canadian hockey history. Slaney was mobbed by teammates before raising his arms as he approached his celebrating bench. But Slaney was also in the right place at the right time.The 1991 event was the first time that TSN, the Canadian national cable sports network, broadcast the tournament, which features the world’s best teenage hockey players. Pavel Bure led the Soviet team, and Eric Lindros dominated viewers’ attention and was named the tournament’s top forward. But Slaney was the breakout star.“I remember having cameras all over the place, people following us around,” he said. “I guess they were trying to get the greatest moments. There were just cameras around all the time. It was different for us.”Slaney’s goal helped turn TSN’s world junior broadcast into a national institution. Today, TSN broadcasts every game of the tournament, which has become a Canadian holiday tradition. According to Bell Media, TSN’s parent company, more than 19.4 million unique Canadian viewers watched part of the 2015 tournament, which Canada again won on home soil. That figure represents more than half of Canada’s population.Slaney appeared poised for N.H.L. stardom in 1991. He was first called up in December 1993, and was on the Capitals team that shocked the heavily favored Pittsburgh Penguins, who had Mario Lemieux, Ron Francis and Jaromir Jagr, in the first round of the 1994 playoffs. Washington went on to lose to the Rangers, the eventual champions.“My time in Washington, right away I was told to play against Lemieux and Francis and Jagr in the playoffs,” Slaney said. “That was one of my challenges there, and it was unbelievable. As time went on, new players come into the league and you still have to perform all the time at the top level. At the same time, I was getting hurt every year. When I look back at my career, being hurt didn’t help.”AdvertisementSlaney’s second season in Washington was derailed by an ankle injury, and he was traded that summer to the Colorado Avalanche, a championship-caliber team boasting one of the N.H.L.’s deepest defensive groups. Hampered by injuries, Slaney played 268 games for seven N.H.L. teams over parts of nine seasons.Despite being encouraged to take his game to Europe, Slaney spent much of his career in the American Hockey League, where he became a star. In 2002, he became the third player to win the Eddie Shore Award, as the league’s top defenseman, in consecutive seasons. A five-time A.H.L. All-Star, he was the first defenseman in league history to collect 500 career points.Get the big sports news, highlights and analysis from Times journalists, with distinctive takes on games and some behind-the-scenes surprises, delivered to your inbox every week.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.He won the Calder Cup championship in 2005. With the N.H.L. season lost that year to a work stoppage, Slaney anchored a Philadelphia Phantoms team featuring the future N.H.L. stars Patrick Sharp, Jeff Carter and Mike Richards. He was inducted into the A.H.L. Hall of Fame in 2014.“For my career, are there a lot of things I would have changed?” Slaney said. “Maybe a couple. I wanted to play in the National Hockey League as much as I could, there is no question. I moved around to certain teams. You always want to stay around up top as much as you can. At the same time, there are not too many guys in today’s game who played until they’re 39 years old.”Slaney spent his last four seasons playing in Europe before retiring in 2011. By then, he played in relative obscurity, except for when Canadian reporters called, still asking about his golden goal.Named an assistant coach with the Coyotes’ A.H.L. affiliate in Portland, Me., shortly after retiring, Slaney’s nomadic playing career was a key consideration in the hire.“It’s a huge asset,” Tippett said. “When the coach has been through a lot of those situations, the players respect that. He has a good feel for what the players are going through at different times. All those experiences, any coach who has gone through it, it’s beneficial to you.”In June, 25 years after being drafted and more than a decade removed from his last N.H.L. shift, Slaney was promoted to the Coyotes’ coaching staff.He is still happy to discuss the moment that defined him for a generation of Canadian hockey fans. But he is also content focusing on this long-awaited opportunity.Advertisement“Would I want to play in the national league forever?” Slaney said, referring to the N.H.L. “Yeah, but unfortunately I had some bumps in the road. But I can never dwell on that. Hopefully I have a great career in coaching.”A version of this article appears in print on February 17, 2016, on Page B14 of the New York edition with the headline: New Shot at Glory, 25 Years After His Moment .  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.