By BILLY WITZMAY 7, 2016
TAMPA, Fla. —  The routine for Aroldis Chapman was the same most every day. Drive one of his four cars — a Range Rover, a Rolls-Royce, a Lamborghini or a Porsche — to the Yankees’ squat, cinder-block minor league complex about 9 a.m., do some running, weight lifting, conditioning and throwing. Chat in Spanish with some of the other players, almost all of them teenagers, and several times a week pitch in early-afternoon games against another team’s youngest prospects, who are awaiting the start of rookie leagues and low Class A ball next month.There might be no more than a handful of fans at these extended spring training games, which are open to the public at no charge. This is where Chapman, baseball’s hardest-throwing pitcher and one of its best relievers, was marooned for the last five weeks.It was his penance for firing eight shots from a gun into his garage wall after an argument in Davie, Fla., with his girlfriend, Cristina Barnea, last October, a confrontation in which, Barnea said, Chapman had put his hands around her neck. Although the police declined to arrest Chapman and prosecutors decided not to file charges, in part because Barnea and other witnesses refused to cooperate, Chapman was suspended for 30 games under Major League Baseball’s new domestic violence policy.Chapman pitched his final game here Friday, traveled to New York on Saturday and planned to be in uniform and eligible to pitch Monday, when the Yankees open a series at home against the defending World Series champion Kansas City Royals.Advertisement“I’m happy and anxious about helping the team,” Chapman said in an interview here Tuesday, speaking through an interpreter.AdvertisementAs giddy as Chapman seemed to be about returning to the Yankees, who acquired him in December to fortify an already formidable bullpen, they are eager for his return as well. While the Yankees’ dithering start to the season can be ascribed to many factors — feeble hitting and erratic starting pitching among them — it cannot hurt to add an A-list talent to the roster.“There’s 25 guys in here all the time, and the best 25 guys is what we want,” said Andrew Miller, who has not allowed a run and has six saves but will cede the closer’s role to Chapman. “He’s been in I don’t know how many All-Star Games; he’s one of the best pitchers in baseball — you absolutely want him. We need all the pieces we can get.”Chapman has largely been out of sight and out of mind in the Yankees’ clubhouse, just as if he were injured. But as he went about his daily routine in Florida, Chapman kept close tabs on the Yankees, often watching games on his television or his iPad as the team sank to last place in the American League East.“The team has not come together yet,” Chapman said. “Days they pitch, they don’t hit. Days they hit, they don’t pitch. They still don’t put the two together.”The Yankees have begun to show a few signs of life in recent days, even as Alex Rodriguez and then C. C. Sabathia headed to the disabled list, and Chapman said he hoped his return would provide a lift as well.“The toughest part was not being able to start the season with the team,” he said. “Otherwise, I tried to remain positive and focused and no negative thoughts — just remained positive. I just accepted the suspension and waited.”While the suspension, which is costing Chapman $1,856,777 — about one sixth of his $11.3 million salary this season — is the most attention-getting aspect of baseball’s sanctions against him, Chapman is also awaiting entry into a counseling program.AdvertisementHe has met twice with psychiatrists, each with an expertise in a different area of domestic violence counseling, according to a person who has been briefed on Chapman’s case but is not authorized to publicly discuss it. A counseling program is being formulated for Chapman, and he will be required to participate.Chapman, though, remains adamant that he did nothing wrong, continuing a stance that he has more or less maintained since the start of spring training.“I’ve never hurt anybody, never in my life,” he initially told reporters in February. “That’s not my character or who I am.”When, a week later, he agreed to accept the 30-game suspension, he issued a statement that said he did not “in any way” harm his girlfriend but “should have exercised better judgment with respect to my actions.”That statement was issued two months ago. Asked Tuesday if the suspension had given him time to reflect on what happened and consider changes to his behavior, Chapman shook his head.“I didn’t do anything,” he said. “People are thinking that it’s something serious; I have not put my hands on anyone, didn’t put anyone in danger. Since I didn’t do anything like that, I’m not thinking about it. If I didn’t do anything, why should I think about it? That is in the past. Now, I’m thinking about more important things: my family, kids, my career.”Asked if his girlfriend’s calling 911 last October while hiding in the bushes because she was terrified was a problem, Chapman said: “It was just an argument with your partner that everyone has. I’ve even argued with my mother. When you are not in agreement with someone, we Latin people are loud when we argue.”Get the big sports news, highlights and analysis from Times journalists, with distinctive takes on games and some behind-the-scenes surprises, delivered to your inbox every week.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.He added, “I do not have a problem.”Chapman said Latino ballplayers were a target because of the money they made and because they were not familiar with the norms and laws of the United States.AdvertisementAll four players who have been investigated under baseball’s nascent domestic violence program, which was implemented last August after it was developed in conjunction with the players’ union, are Latinos. Three of them — Chapman, the Los Angeles Dodgers’ Yasiel Puig and the Atlanta Braves’ Hector Olivera — are Cuban. The other player, Colorado’s Jose Reyes, is Dominican. (Olivera and Reyes are on paid leave while their cases remain under investigation; Puig was not penalized.)“Unfortunately, that is the way it is,” Chapman said. “We make a lot of money, everyone wants a piece of it, and we end up looking bad. When I had the problem, everyone thinks I did something wrong; in social media, people are saying I hit my girlfriend.”He added: “Sometimes people talk too much. We have to be careful about that. We are not from this country, and people want to harm us. It’s easier to hurt someone who is not from here than someone who is. People think we don’t know what the laws are, and they try to hurt you. Many people want money. We have to take care of ourselves.”Speaking at a news conference at Yankee Stadium on Sunday, Chapman sought to clarify his comments suggesting that Latino players who were being investigated for domestic violence could be a target.  “I was not talking about the league or the suspension,” he said.  “I’m talking what I meant in general.”In response to Chapman’s original comments about Latino players being a target, Major League Baseball issued a statement saying that all of its players receive professional training in English and Spanish with respect to issues of domestic violence, and that the joint policy with the union makes clear how seriously the sport feels about the subject.“All personnel are held accountable for their conduct irrespective of where they were born,” the statement said.The players’ union declined to comment.Cindy Southworth, the executive vice president of the National Network to End Domestic Violence, an advocacy group, said: “Domestic violence occurs at almost equal rates in race, ethnicity, class, education, profession and religion in any country. I am sympathetic that our criminal justice system struggles with race bias, but this is not the criminal justice system. This is a suspension by a professional association that said this is not behavior we want our players to do.”Chapman said he was not sure how fans would welcome him Monday at Yankee Stadium, whether they would be reticent to embrace him because of the domestic violence case or whether his reception would be based on how he performed.But he said he felt well prepared to pitch. Though he was not permitted to play in minor league games, he seemed to have embraced the overall experience. He signed autographs and posed for photos with his temporary teammates, treated them to a few spreads from his favorite Cuban restaurant and paid for the players’ clubhouse dues, a tab that ran to several thousand dollars.Advertisement“It has not been boring,” Chapman said, smiling. “I didn’t want to be here, but I had to be here a month, and that was something good. It’s a little different pitching here than there, but I feel good. I have prepared myself very well.”A version of this article appears in print on May 9, 2016, on Page D1 of the New York edition with the headline: Exile Over, He’s Eager to Help .  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.