By THE ASSOCIATED PRESSMAY 7, 2016
CHARLOTTE, N.C. —  Rickie Fowler is looking to jump-start his season at a course where he first won on the PGA Tour.Fowler shot a four-under-par 68 on Saturday to take the third-round lead at the Wells Fargo Championship.Fowler, who broke through at Quail Hollow Club in 2012 for his first tour title, had a one-stroke lead over Roberto Castro, with Justin Rose and James Hahn two strokes back.Fowler won the Players Championship and the Deutsche Bank Championship last year and took a European Tour event in Abu Dhabi, United Arab Emirates, early this year. Although he blew a late lead and lost the Phoenix Open in a playoff this season, he seems to have the confidence to handle pressure situations in the final round.Castro was atop the leaderboard for most of the day but bogeyed the 18th hole for a 71.Winless on the tour, he said he was looking forward to playing with Fowler in the final group Sunday.“If you want to win a tournament out here and really win a marquee event like this one, you’re going to have to grab your hat and play with one of the top-five players in the world, probably, the final round,” Castro said. “So that’s what I’ve got tomorrow, so I’m excited about it.”Fowler parred the first seven holes before heating up with three straight birdies on Nos. 8, 9 and 10. He appeared to be starting to crumble after bogeys on 11 and 13 but came back strong with three straight birdies starting on No. 14 to pull into a tie for the lead.Get the big sports news, highlights and analysis from Times journalists, with distinctive takes on games and some behind-the-scenes surprises, delivered to your inbox every week.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.He had a little luck along the way.Fowler avoided potential trouble on the 18th hole when his ball held up in the high grass instead of rolling into the creek along the left side of the fairway. Playing with the ball well above his feet, Fowler ripped an iron onto the green and saved par.Phil Mickelson and Rory McIlroy, the defending champion, struggled, dropping to eight shots behind Fowler.Mickelson, looking for his first win at the Quail Hollow Club in 13 starts, was in contention until a quadruple-bogey 8 on his old nemesis, the 18th hole. He finished with a 76.A version of this article appears in print on May 8, 2016, on Page SP9 of the New York edition with the headline: Fowler, Looking to Duplicate His First Win, Takes the Lead.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.