AdvertisementSupported byYankees 8, Red Sox 2By Zach SchonbrunAs Yankees third baseman Chase Headley slid safely into home against the Boston Red Sox on Saturday, the ball hit him in the arm, and the catcher’s glove smacked him in the face. Headley had to wonder what forces were conspiring to keep his offense at bay.“I’m not going there,” Headley said. “No pity party for me.”But it has certainly been rough going for Headley, who is batting .169 and has two R.B.I. through 88 plate appearances.So after sitting the two previous nights — one benching intentional, the other a mix-up by Manager Joe Girardi — Headley was eager to wipe clean his slate. He made a good start on Saturday, notching two hits and two runs in the Yankees’ 8-2 win at Yankee Stadium. The seven-through-nine hitters — Headley, shortstop Didi Gregorius and catcher Austin Romine — carried the afternoon for the Yankees’ offense, which had not scored this many runs since April 9. Every starter reached base, and the Yankees pounded Red Sox starter David Price for six runs and seven hits in four and two-thirds innings.“We haven’t had a lot of offensive explosions,” Girardi said. “To get eight runs today was really nice. Everyone contributed, which was even better.”The pressure has particularly intensified around Headley, who is in the second year of a four-year, $52 million deal. He is the only regular starter in baseball who has yet to record an extra-base hit this season, and his batting average entering Saturday’s game was the lowest among qualified starters (.151). After he batted .259 last year, Headley’s poor start this season has been somewhat perplexing. He said he glanced at some of his advanced statistics while in Texas — things like line-drive percentage and exit velocity — and saw that many of the numbers matched up with his career figures.“I know what type of player I’ve been my whole career,” Headley said. “I’ve got to get back to that.”Saturday’s game could be a springboard. Headley singled twice and scored twice on doubles by Romine, in the third inning and the eighth. The Yankees broke a 1-1 tie in the fourth on a big hit by Gregorius off Price, who struggled putting away hitters. Gregorius used more of a half-swing, like a bump-and-run chip shot from just off the green, when faced with an 0-2 count and the bases loaded. He dropped the bat head low to meet an 84-mile-per-hour changeup and poked it down the right-field line for a double.That cleared the bases, putting the Yankees ahead, 4-1. In the next inning, Carlos Beltran doubled in two more runs with two strikes and two outs, ending Price’s afternoon.Price, a veteran left-hander, had won four straight games against the Yankees, a familiar foe after his seven seasons with the Tampa Bay Rays and parts of two with the Detroit Tigers. But his early results with Boston — which committed $217 million this off-season to sign him — have not been great. The loss dropped his record to 4-1, but he has an E.R.A. of 6.75 after allowing at least five runs in four of his seven starts. The Yankees needed length from their starter, Nathan Eovaldi, to make up for a bullpen that had neither Dellin Betances nor Andrew Miller, the back-end stoppers, available to pitch because of their recent heavy workloads. Eovaldi stepped up, tossing eight innings, his longest outing since Aug. 24. “I felt really good,” Eovaldi said. “I thought the biggest key for me today was just locating the fastball, able to work it inside and outside. When I was able to do that, I was able to get quicker outs.”Eovaldi made 107 pitches, 77 for strikes, and no walks. In one stretch, he threw first-pitch strikes to 16 straight batters, and he finished with six strikeouts.After a solo homer by Jackie Bradley Jr. in the fifth gave Boston its second run, Eovaldi allowed a leadoff single by Xander Bogaerts in the sixth to bring designated hitter David Ortiz to the plate amid a chorus of boos. The moment seemed ripe for a dramatic swing by Ortiz, the longtime Yankees’ foil. Eovaldi’s fifth pitch registered 100 m.p.h., and Ortiz swatted it away foul. But with the count full, Eovaldi kept his splitter low enough for Ortiz to roll over it and ground to first for a double play. “It seems like any time he gets a hit, the entire team starts swinging well,” Eovaldi said. “So it was 3-2 — I was able to locate a good splitter.”INSIDE PITCHJacoby Ellsbury (hip) did not play Saturday. Manager Joe Girardi said Ellsbury was sore but listed as day to day. Advertisement