By JOHN BRANCHFEB. 23, 2016
A fledgling rodeo circuit with many of the country’s top riders and ropers dropped its antitrust lawsuit against the Pro Rodeo Cowboys Association on Tuesday, a move that promises to leave the sport divided this season by competing factions.Elite Rodeo Athletes, a group of roughly 80 of the most-recognized and most-rewarded rodeo athletes, led by the 23-time P.R.C.A. champion Trevor Brazile, plans to start a nine-stop season tour in March. The P.R.C.A., the sport’s de facto governing body, sees the move as treasonous and has vowed to keep the athletes from competing in its rodeos and earning points toward its long-held championships.The P.R.C.A. sanctions hundreds of rodeos each season, featuring thousands of participants. Those who earn the most money during the year, generally traveling to roughly 100 rodeos across the continent in search of paychecks, are eligible to compete in the National Finals Rodeo in December, when so-called world champions are named in events like bareback riding, bull riding and calf roping.Get the big sports news, highlights and analysis from Times journalists, with distinctive takes on games and some behind-the-scenes surprises, delivered to your inbox every week.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.Brazile and others representing the E.R.A. “are pleased that a court recognized the allegations against the P.R.C.A. are serious and authorized the lawsuit to proceed,” the E.R.A said in a statement, but they “have concluded that it is better for them, the E.R.A. Tour and the sport of rodeo to avoid the distraction of an expensive and long legal battle with the P.R.C.A. for now.”AdvertisementThe E.R.A.’s first of nine events is scheduled for March 25 and 26 in Redmond, Ore. The season will end in November with a “world championship” in Dallas.The P.R.C.A. season, with several rodeos a week, is in full swing, although many of its biggest rodeos are missing several big names that usually attend.Advertisement“Today, the efforts of the P.R.C.A. to protect its members and the association were vindicated,” the P.R.C.A. said in a brief statement.A version of this article appears in print on February 24, 2016, on Page B13 of the New York edition with the headline: A Divisive Season Is Expected.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.