By SETH BERKMANJUNE 15, 2016
Noah Syndergaard fell short of a shutout but still pitched strongly enough to strike out 11, and the Mets amassed a season-high 19 hits for a thorough 11-2 victory over the Pittsburgh Pirates on Wednesday at Citi Field.Syndergaard registered one out in the ninth inning before allowing a double by David Freese that scored John Jaso, who had three of the Pirates’ five hits off Syndergaard.“He deserved to go out there in the ninth inning and see if he could get the shutout,” Manager Terry Collins said.After throwing 115 pitches, Syndergaard was pulled for Jeurys Familia, who recorded the final two outs as the Mets ended a three-game losing streak.AdvertisementSyndergaard’s eight and one-third innings were a career high, and he has allowed two or fewer earned runs in each of his last eight starts.Get the big sports news, highlights and analysis from Times journalists, with distinctive takes on games and some behind-the-scenes surprises, delivered to your inbox every week.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.The Mets’ offensive frenzy came after another unexpected lineup shuffle by Collins. The original plan was to have Juan Lagares lead off on Wednesday, but in keeping with recent trends for the Mets, an injury necessitated a change.AdvertisementAn hour before the game, Lagares was scratched, unable to play because of lingering pain from the torn ligament in his left thumb. After hitting in the batting cage, Lagares rested for about 20 minutes and then began to feel soreness and stiffness in his left hand. Lagares put on his glove, could not squeeze it and notified Collins.“I want to get it checked tomorrow to make sure, but I don’t know what’s going to happen,” said Lagares, who did not feel much pain after the game and was able to close his fingers while he talked to reporters.While Lagares’s prognosis is uncertain, the Mets received positive news on the status of Neil Walker. Collins had hoped to have Walker back at second base for Wednesday’s game, but Walker texted the team’s trainers in the morning to notify them that because of persistent back pain, he did not feel able to play.Walker saw a doctor Wednesday afternoon, received medication and told Collins Wednesday night that he wanted to play Thursday.Without Lagares and Walker, Matt Reynolds played second base, Curtis Granderson moved to the top spot in the order, and Kelly Johnson started in left field, bumping Yoenis Cespedes to center field. The last-minute switch provided a spark: Granderson led off the bottom of the first with a single and scored the game’s first run, and in the third inning Johnson hit his first home run with the Mets this season.Johnson finished 3 for 5 with two runs scored and two R.B.I. Wilmer Flores drove in four runs, and Cespedes scored three times. Each starting position player for the Mets scored or drove in a run, including Reynolds, who notched three hits and two R.B.I.A version of this article appears in print on June 16, 2016, on Page B14 of the New York edition with the headline: Baseball; Syndergaard Shines in Win but Loses the Shutout Late.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.