By ALLAN KREDAFEB. 22, 2016
SYOSSET, N.Y. — The Islanders started their seven-game trip, the longest of their season, with a shutout of the Devils, but now the real road work begins.The Islanders (31-19-7) play 15 of their remaining 25 games on the road as they chase the second-place Rangers and try to stay ahead of Pittsburgh and the Devils in a tight Metropolitan Division race. The Islanders meet the Wild in Minnesota on Tuesday, then head to Canada for four games before facing the Rangers at Madison Square Garden on March 6.For a team that has failed to win a postseason series since 1993, steady production from all four lines is required. That has been a mantra espoused by Jack Capuano since he became the team’s coach in November 2010.Among the revelations this season has been the emergence of Brock Nelson as a scoring forward to complement John Tavares, who perennially leads the team in points.AdvertisementNelson, 24, has a career-high 21 goals, one behind Tavares, with more than six weeks of the regular season remaining. Nelson’s breakthrough season helps alleviate pressure on veterans like Frans Nielsen, the longest-tenured member of the Islanders. Nielsen, 31, is impressed with the progress of the 6-foot-3 Nelson, a first-round draft pick for the Islanders in 2010 who is in his third full season with the team.Advertisement“Brock has made great strides,” said Nielsen, who has 16 goals and 36 points this season. “He’s got size and is a really good skater for being that tall and big. I think his all-around game is improving. He has great confidence. It’s great to see him develop.”Capuano spoke highly of Nelson’s work ethic while encouraging greater results.“Anyone who works at his game the way Brock does, you want to see them have success,” said Capuano, a believer in having young players hone skills in the minors before joining the Islanders. “That’s what he’s done. He comes to the rink every day and wants to get better. It’s also what you do before and after practice. You get rewarded for that.”Nelson, a native of Warroad, Minn., uses his long reach to surprise opposing goaltenders with a quick shot. That is appreciated by another mentor and teammate, his fellow Minnesotan Kyle Okposo, who trains with Nelson during summers back home.“You see his release, and he keeps going,” Okposo said. “The tempo and system we play definitely helps him in the middle. We talk a lot. He’s matured a lot as a player this season.”Nelson, who has primarily centered a line between Josh Bailey and Anders Lee, preferred to focus on steady improvement and would rather deflect accolades and credit teammates for his success.“I’m just trying to be confident, shoot the puck and find openings,” Nelson said. “I think I’ve been able to do that. It’s a matter of work, moving your feet. My linemates, Anders and Josh, have been great. They are both skilled and create space. We’ve done some good things.”Get the big sports news, highlights and analysis from Times journalists, with distinctive takes on games and some behind-the-scenes surprises, delivered to your inbox every week.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.The Islanders will have another fresh face joining them on the trip. They recalled the highly praised defenseman Ryan Pulock from Bridgeport of the American Hockey League to replace Calvin de Haan, who is out with a lower-body injury. Center Mikhail Grabovski will also miss at least the beginning of the trip because of an upper-body injury.AdvertisementPulock, 21, was the team’s first-round pick in 2013 and has been with Bridgeport the past two seasons. He has a laser shot from the point and could make his N.H.L. debut on the trip.“I come here with an open mind, ready to work and waiting for that opportunity,” said Pulock, who is from Dauphin, Manitoba, about 200 miles northwest of Winnipeg.Capuano emphasized that defensive play remained a priority for Pulock, who had seven goals in 51 games for Bridgeport this season after scoring 17 goals last year.“We need to take a look at him and see what he can do,” Capuano said. “He’s got a good attitude, and he’s improved his game in a lot of areas we talked about in training camp. He has to play without the puck and play physical.”A version of this article appears in print on February 23, 2016, on Page B10 of the New York edition with the headline: Forward Eases the Islanders’ Burden.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.