By VICTOR MATHERFEB. 23, 2016
A three-day cruise to the Bahamas full of Patriots fans, with the fun-loving Rob Gronkowski as the star attraction. Who thought this was a good idea?Apparently, the ship returned to port on Monday none the worse for wear. What happens on a cruise ship doesn’t stay on a cruise ship in the age of social media, and passengers and Gronkowski himself sent out running updates of the high jinks:
            Insanity times this weekend on the cruise. Appreciate everyone for coming out!        
            Appreciate the artist and DJ's for coming on and making this the most turnt up event ever. pic.twitter.com/NxwYLEu9mR (For those not in the know, “turnt” is a good thing.)The ship was the Norwegian Pearl, a 965-footer with a spa, casino, bowling alley and, perhaps most important, 13 bars and lounges. The Gronk Cruise left Miami on Friday for the Bahamas with 2,300 passengers, 700 as part of the Gronk cruise and the other 1,600 apparently in for more than they bargained for.Some reporters with indulgent editors were also on board. A comprehensive report in The Boston Globe — the paper that also brought you the Pulitzer Prize-winning series that turned into the film “Spotlight” — noted, “Festivities hit booze-addled, fist-pumping heights and carried on till nearly 4 a.m. each day.”“Am I having a good time? Oh my God, yes! Although I kind of don’t remember last night. I might have blacked out,” The Globe quoted a woman who declined to be identified: “There’s absolutely no way I’m telling you my name.” Gronkowski posted several photos to Instagram, including one of him busting a move shirtless on stage as an appreciative crowd looked on.AdvertisementStill photos not enough? Then enjoy a video. The cruise was run by the Atlanta company Sixthman, which will be offering excursions with Kid Rock, KISS and Pitbull in the near future. Neil Genzlinger of The New York Times took a Rock Cruise with the company in 2014 and gave it an enthusiastic write-up. Several of Gronkowski’s brothers made the Gronk Cruise even Gronkier, and at least one other celeb turned up.
            Something I never expected to say: It's 2:30 in the morning, and I'm partying with LMFAO's Redfoo & Rob Gronkowski. pic.twitter.com/lhnMC2huUK In the end, the ribaldry seemed to stay all in good fun, revelers reported. The Globe said, “At press time, the fun never seemed to be excessive, nor was the ship turned upside down or trashed by rabid fans.”And all good things must come to an end, which even Gronkowski knows:
            And for now, it's bed time for a while and then start hitting them weights and getting right! ✌✌        We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.See More »