By KAREN CROUSEFEB. 21, 2016
LOS ANGELES —  The Northern Trust Open trophy belonged to Bubba Watson, but for the 31st year, Riviera Country Club came out on top. Led by Watson, the deepest field of 2016, as determined by the Official World Golf Rankings, could not challenge the tournament record, 20 under par.Watson shot four rounds in the 60s, made five birdies on Sunday and still came up short, with a final round of three-under 68 and a 72-hole total of 15-under 269. He finished one stroke ahead of Adam Scott (67) and Jason Kokrak (68). Dustin Johnson, the runner-up each of the past two years, closed with a 69 to finish fourth, two shots behind Watson.“Nobody’s looking at records,” Watson, 37, said. “All we’re looking at is trophies.”After the award ceremony, Watson became separated from the winner’s silver chalice. When he was reunited with it during the news conference, he stopped in the middle of an answer.“Hold on a second,” he said, sounding as excited as a 12-year-old. “My trophy is coming.”The record was set in 1985 by Lanny Wadkins using equipment consigned to history’s dustbins.Advertisement“It’s pretty amazing, because when I shot that score, I was using a wooden driver and a balata golf ball,” said Wadkins, who posted scores of 63-70-67-64 to shave six strokes off Johnny Miller’s 4-year-old mark. In the years since, only nine winners have broken 270. Fred Couples and Watson, who also won in 2014, have done it twice.Advertisement“The golf I played at Riviera in ’85 was probably the best I played for a week in my life,” said Wadkins, a World Golf Hall of Fame member whose 21 P.G.A. Tour victories included the 1977 P.G.A. Championship.Wadkins’s had no 5s on his final-day scorecard, which had been his goal going into the round. Even as his lead stretched from two strokes at the start of the round to seven, he continued to grind.“I was still trying to accomplish my goal,” he said in telephone interview. “It wasn’t easy. I had to birdie 17 and par 18 to do it.”The Los Angeles Times columnist Jim Murray admired Wadkins’s ability to conquer the beast. “The course was about as important as the bull,” Murray wrote. “Lanny got the ears, tail, horns and whatever else they could cut.”Scott, in search of his first tour victory since 2014, did the equivalent of throwing red numbers at Riviera by making an eagle on No. 1 and playing the first four holes in four under. After a birdie at No. 6, he arrived at the seventh tee at 15 under and in sole possession of the lead.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.Just when it looked as if Scott had a dagger in Riviera’s side, the course sent him staggering. His tee shot at No. 8 found a hazard in the fairway that resembles a dry creek bed overrun by gnarly grass; his next shot came out hot and sailed the green. Scott walked off the green with a double-bogey 6, dropping to third behind Kokrak and K. J. Choi.Choi, who was making his 16th tournament appearance, more than Scott, Kokrak and Rory McIlroy combined, made four birdies in a bogey-free front nine.Ben Hogan, who won this tournament three times, described the fourth hole as the toughest par 3 in the United States in the wind. He would not get an argument from McIlroy, who had a 14-foot birdie putt and walked off with a bogey. McIlroy, who was two shots off the lead after the third round, had another three-putt on the front nine and wobbled to a 75 to finish six under.AdvertisementChoi tripped up at No. 12, a 474-yard par 4 with a green as small as Riviera’s heart — and a left pin placement on Sunday that was diabolical. After driving into the rough, Choi hit his approach over the green, chipped to 13 feet and missed the putt.Kokrak, winless on the PGA Tour in 111 starts dating to 2007, held a two-stroke lead over a group that included Watson after making a birdie to Watson’s bogey at 13.The 15th was where the course bit him. Kokrak’s 309-yard drive found the fairway, but he flew the green with his approach, hit to eight feet and missed the putt on a green that Murray once described as “like putting in a bathtub where the hole is on the side.”On 18, Kokrak had a 15-foot birdie putt to tie Watson, but his effort slid a foot past. Watson then calmly two-putted from 14 feet for the win. It was his ninth victory on the tour since 2010, second only to McIlroy’s 11. Watson said his career goal was to get to 10 wins “because I think that’s a big steppingstone on today’s PGA Tour.”Unlike Wadkins in 1985, Watson had two 5s on his final-round scorecard. But after his second, on 13, he showed Riviera his teeth instead of the other way around, finishing birdie-birdie-par.“I just held it together,” Watson said, adding, “I love the history, and I love the challenge of the golf course.”A version of this article appears in print on February 22, 2016, on Page D7 of the New York edition with the headline: Event’s Record Holds as Watson Outplays Strong Field .  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.