By THE ASSOCIATED PRESSMAY 7, 2016
COLLEGE STATION, Tex. —  The five-star quarterbacks are gone, replaced at Texas A&M by a graduate transfer student looking for a second chance. The hotshot young coordinator is out. A seasoned veteran assistant is now running Texas A&M’s offense.On the recruiting trail, yet another five-star passer has taken a pass on the Aggies, and the reaction one A&M assistant had to the news last week only made matters worse for Coach Kevin Sumlin’s program.The Aggies have lost some of the swagger that followed when Johnny Manziel took the Southeastern Conference by storm, Sumlin became a $5 million-per-year head coach and Texas A&M looked as if it could be a perennial threat to Alabama.Maybe that is good for a program and a coach in need of a trajectory change after three straight seasons of not being able to break .500 in conference play. Expectations will be modest for the Aggies in 2016, and that, more than anything else, might be what is needed in College Station.Advertisement“Whatever that perception is, what is it compared to?” Sumlin said. “Because 36 in four years is the most anybody’s won here in 20 years. From a sheer numbers standpoint, the things that you quantify where your program’s headed, by the numbers, there’s no questions this program’s in better shape than when I took over.Advertisement“Is it where we want it to be? No. But is it better based on the fact that we’re winning right at 70 percent of our games, and from 2000 to 2012 it was 50 percent?”Wins and losses seemed to be the least of Sumlin’s problems last December.In a matter of weeks, two former elite quarterback recruits — Kyle Allen and Kyler Murray — decided to transfer. Add in Kenny Hill, who left after the 2014 season, and three likely starting quarterbacks transferred out of A&M in less than a year.“We’re not in the business of trying to run people out of here,” Sumlin said.The Aggies had to play a third-string quarterback, Jake Hubenak, in a loss to Louisville in the Music City Bowl. A few days later, the offensive coordinator and quarterbacks coach Jake Spavital was fired. Spavital was 27 when Sumlin hired him in 2013.It seemed as if a tempest was sweeping through Texas A&M football.On a warm, overcast April day in College Station, between meetings and spring practice, Sumlin said the winter upheaval had not been nearly as sudden as it had appeared from the outside. “The assessment of the program internally is probably different than what some people have,” Sumlin said. “And it’s always been that way here. Whether it’s the first year that I got here or this year.”High-powered offenses have followed Sumlin as he climbed the career ladder from co-offensive coordinator at Oklahoma to head coach at Houston and then Texas A&M.In 2012, Sumlin’s first season, the Aggies were second in the Football Bowl Subdivision in yards per play with Manziel, the Heisman Trophy winner, at quarterback. The next season, Texas A&M ranked fourth in the F.B.S. in yards per play.Manziel left after the 2013 season. The next season, A&M was 27th in yards per play, and last season, it ranked 69th.AdvertisementSumlin turned to an old friend to help turn things around, hiring the U.C.L.A. offensive coordinator Noel Mazzone.Mazzone, 59, and Sumlin had worked together at Minnesota in the 1990s. Sumlin also brought back the offensive-line coach Jim Turner for a second stint at A&M.Sumlin used the word “experience” eight times when explaining why he had chosen Mazzone and Turner.“Better experience than old,” Mazzone said. “Kevin and I really grew up in this one-back world, and then he was the one that really turned me on to that tempo stuff. There was no doubt that it was an easy transition for him and I to be on the same page as far as what we want to be offensively.”Get the big sports news, highlights and analysis from Times journalists, with distinctive takes on games and some behind-the-scenes surprises, delivered to your inbox every week.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.Sumlin wants a more efficient and consistent running game. And he needs Trevor Knight, an Oklahoma transfer, to fill the void at quarterback.Knight looked like a potential star when he led the Sooners to a Sugar Bowl victory over Alabama in 2014. But he never had sustained success, throwing 17 interceptions in 490 career passes.Knight showed Sumlin and Mazzone enough in the spring to be named the starting quarterback over Hubenak.“Trevor, who has been a very mature guy, came in and really defused any notion about we’re in a so-called quarterback crisis,” Mazzone said.AdvertisementBut the quarterback drama never seems to end at Texas A&M. The latest social media storm came last week when Tate Martell, a highly regarded recruit from Las Vegas, announced that he was backing away from a verbal commitment to the Aggies. What followed was a series of tweets from the A&M receivers coach Aaron Moorehead about a lack of loyalty and accountability that did not mention Martell but still prompted an apology the next day.Sumlin still even finds himself answering for his handling of Manziel as the quarterback deals with legal and personal problems as a pro.“All I know is that personally, and as a university and as a program, we did a lot to help Johnny Manziel,” Sumlin said.The 2016 Aggies will very likely be pegged to finish near the bottom of the SEC West.A 36-16 record does not bring much job security in the SEC, and some Aggies fans are wondering if the university was too quick after the 2013 season to hand Sumlin a six-year contract that pays him $5 million annually.Sumlin dismisses the idea that this is pivotal season for him.“He who listens to the fans soon sits with them,” he said, smiling.A version of this article appears in print on May 8, 2016, on Page SP4 of the New York edition with the headline: Amid a Storm, Texas A&M; Manage Expectations.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.