AdvertisementSupported byBy Zach SchonbrunWhen the Jets made a change at quarterback last week, Bryce Petty knew the job would not come his way. He understands the waiting game. His career stalled for 1,700 days before he finally became the starting quarterback at Baylor.“86,” Petty said, correcting. “1,786.”The excruciating delay — four years 10 months and a little over three weeks — between his final high school start and his first in college, in 2013, became part of what made his instant Heisman Trophy campaign so gratifying. (He finished seventh in the voting that year, far behind the winner, Jameis Winston, and just ahead of Derek Carr, who is now the starter for the Oakland Raiders.)When the Jets took Petty in the fourth round of the 2015 draft, Petty rewound his personal play clock all over again.Back to the bench Petty went. As of Sunday, it is 662 days and counting since his last collegiate appearance. Petty may still represent a work in progress as a quarterback, but he has mastered the art of patience.As the Jets (1-5) host the Baltimore Ravens (3-3) on Sunday, Geno Smith will make his first start of the season at quarterback and the 30th of his N.F.L. career. Smith had been getting “antsy,” he told ESPN, as he languished on the bench behind the incumbent, Ryan Fitzpatrick.Smith, who was the Jets’ primary starter for two seasons before being beaten out by Fitzpatrick in 2015, did not exactly hide his frustration in his role as the backup. But coaches and teammates say he has become a different player in the last year.These player rankings from the Sablich brothers are for standard scoring formats and will be updated each week.“What Geno needed to learn, and which he did, had nothing to do with football,” wide receiver Brandon Marshall said. “It’s about coming into work every day and being consistent.”Chan Gailey, the offensive coordinator, said: “There’s no substitute for playing. But at the same time, I think he’s gained a great measure in the last couple of years evaluating every day, rather than ‘Go do it.’”Now consider the restlessness of Petty, who graduated from high school in 2009, the same year as Smith. Petty, who lost some practice time after bruising his right shoulder in early September, might not have been a better option than Smith this weekend. But Coach Todd Bowles recently said for the first time that Petty’s opportunity might be coming soon.Until then, Petty, backup to the backup, will keep quietly waiting.“There’s a plan and a purpose for everything,” Petty said.Patience, he said, is not always an easy thing for a quarterback.“When you’ve been a starter since you were a seventh grader, and now you’re in a locker room with guys who are in their 30s who have been in this league for a while, it’s tough to handle that mental aspect of it — not being the guy,” Petty said.This is a topic he often discusses with the rookie Christian Hackenberg, who started as a true freshman at Penn State, playing his first college game at MetLife Stadium. Now Hackenberg is the last-string quarterback for the only team in the N.F.L. with four quarterbacks on its active roster.Petty has learned, too, how to channel his frustration into a desire to learn as much about the position as possible. At Baylor, Petty redshirted, then grayshirted, then became mired behind Robert Griffin III and Nick Florence for two seasons. When it was finally his turn, Petty took off. He threw for at least 300 yards in his first seven games, with 18 touchdowns and only one interception.“There was an appetite there that maybe if I had started as a sophomore or freshman might not have been there,” Petty said.When he saw that Fitzpatrick arrived to the Jets’ complex at 5:30 each morning, Petty started doing the same.“He’s got five kids at home and a wife,” Petty said of Fitzpatrick. “My girlfriend’s back in Texas; I ain’t got nothing to do. What in the world am I doing at home when I could be up here?”Petty’s learning curve has been steep. The simplified offense at Baylor, where players never used a playbook and quarterbacks focused on only half the field at a time, is nothing like the complex system favored by Gailey.Petty is not afraid to ask questions. He is willing to learn something from anybody.“Today I was talking to Gilly,” Petty said, referring to safety Marcus Gilchrist, “and found out there’s a difference between two-man and quarters-man coverage. I had never heard of quarters-man before.”Bowles would not put a timetable on when he thought Petty could be ready to take over, saying only that he needed more practice time. But if the Jets make another quarterback change soon, Petty said, he hopes his countdown could finally be finished.“I think patience is a virtue,” Petty said. “It teaches you a lot about yourself — who you want to be when no one’s looking. Because when you’re the starter, everyone is watching.”Advertisement