By SCOTT CACCIOLAJUNE 15, 2016
CLEVELAND — Draymond Green, fresh off his one-game suspension, returned to Quicken Loans Arena on Wednesday afternoon, and he had some things he wanted to say.So Green, the emotional leader of the Golden State Warriors and a vital cog in their pursuit of a second straight N.B.A. championship, took a seat at the center of a scrum of 50-odd reporters and listened to the first question, which was a two-parter: Would it be difficult for him to move past the suspension, and what sort of reaction would he expect from the crowd when the Warriors faced the Cavaliers on Thursday night in Game 6 of the N.B.A. finals?What followed was a 482-word monologue in which Green touched on topics that included his emotional state (“I let my teammates down”), the justice that the league had meted out (“Everybody’s going to have their opinion on it”), his distant view of Game 5 from a luxury suite at a baseball game (“I thank the people over at the A’s for having me”) and his regrettable absence as the Warriors lost without him.“I have a strong belief that if I play in Game 5, we win,” he said.Green, whose larynx was as strong as ever, was suspended for a collection of flagrant fouls that included a general failure to avoid punching and kicking opponents in the groin. He will presumably return to the starting lineup on Thursday as the Warriors seek to close out the Cavaliers. Golden State has a three-games-to-two lead in the best-of-seven series.Advertisement“I learned a lot,” said Green, whose flagrant foul on the Cavaliers’ LeBron James in Game 4 brought about an automatic suspension. “You can’t put yourself in certain positions. One thing that I’ve already been kind of teaching myself and trying to learn how to do is control my emotions.”Get the big sports news, highlights and analysis from Times journalists, with distinctive takes on games and some behind-the-scenes surprises, delivered to your inbox every week.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.Green said he felt like a “bad teammate” for not being available to play. “I take pride in being a good teammate,” he said.The league barred Green from attending Game 5 at Oracle Arena on Monday, so he made arrangements to watch the game on television at the Oakland Coliseum, where the Athletics were hosting the Texas Rangers. He was joined by Bob Myers, the Warriors’ general manager, whose presence, Green said, helped soften a tough situation.Advertisement“It was brutal,” Green said. “Just the entire day knowing I can’t go out there and help my guys. I can’t even be around. It’s one thing if you’re out with an injury. It’s another thing if you’re out because of suspension. It’s a brutal day.”The Warriors’ Stephen Curry said he had visions of Green sprinting across the parking lot and bursting into Oracle to celebrate with his teammates — had they won, of course. Instead, the Cavaliers extended the series with a 112-97 victory that underscored Green’s importance. James, who scored 41 points, found his path to the basket unimpeded.“It wasn’t an ideal situation to not have him out there,” Curry said. “Hopefully, he’s not put in that situation again where he’s putting his playing status in jeopardy.”The Warriors need Green now more than ever. Andrew Bogut, the team’s starting center, was ruled out for the rest of the series after sustaining bone bruises to his left knee in Game 5. The Warriors said in a statement that the injury would not require surgery but that Bogut would need six to eight weeks to recover.“It’s bad news for our team,” Coach Steve Kerr said. “He’s a defensive presence at the rim and rebounder, and a great passer. So we’ll miss the minutes that he’s giving us.”The Warriors will probably not have much of a choice but to go small with Green at center, which tends to be their most effective lineup anyway — but typically in short bursts.At least the situation will feel vaguely familiar to the Warriors, who clinched last year’s championship in Game 6 — in Cleveland.“It’s an amazing feeling when you can quiet 20,000 screaming fans and celebrate on their floor,” Green said. “It’s hard. That’s what makes it feel even better, because it’s so much harder. We know the formula. We know the blueprint.”A big part of which involves Green actually being in the building.A version of this article appears in print on June 16, 2016, on Page B14 of the New York edition with the headline: Contrite Yet Chatty, Green Returns to Warriors.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.