By HARVEY ARATONMARCH 8, 2016
JUPITER, Fla. —  C. C. Sabathia had never been to Roger Dean Stadium, the shared home of the Miami Marlins and the St. Louis Cardinals, until he stepped off a four-hour bus ride on Tuesday morning.“First and last time,” said Sabathia, whose 15-year career has located him across the state of Florida, in Winter Haven and Tampa, and whose star privilege has excused him from wearing bus travel.But with the Yankees on a trip along Florida’s east coast, and Sabathia now a fading 35-year-old veteran competing for a position in the starting rotation, here he was, making his spring training debut in a 1-0 defeat to Manager Don Mattingly’s Marlins.It was an encouraging start, with the 305-pound Sabathia tossing two shutout innings, allowing no hits, striking out two and walking one. He threw 25 pitches, 16 for strikes. He did not blow out any radar guns, throwing 85 to 89 miles an hour, but velocity, he said, was not the day’s takeaway.Advertisement“Got some quick outs, quick swings, threw everything — it felt good,” Sabathia said, adding that he had “no problem” landing on his degenerative right knee for which he wears a supportive brace. “That’s why I’m a little ahead of where I was last year at this time.”AdvertisementLast season began with questions about Sabathia’s health, peaked with a late-season stretch of quality starts and finished with a 6-10 record and a 4.73 E.R.A. In addition, he made a stunning departure from the Yankees on the final day of the regular season for a 30-day stay in a rehabilitation clinic for alcohol abuse.Sabathia missed the Yankees’ one-game postseason, a wild-card loss to the Houston Astros, saying recently that he had been “tired of bingeing.”Get the big sports news, highlights and analysis from Times journalists, with distinctive takes on games and some behind-the-scenes surprises, delivered to your inbox every week.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.He called this month “the most anticipated spring training for me in a long time,” though he played down the significance of his debut on Tuesday as “just spring training in general.”Sabathia is due to earn $25 million this season and another $25 million in 2017 provided his left shoulder remains healthy. He still could become a very expensive relief pitcher depending on whom Manager Joe Girardi chooses for his five-man rotation from the six candidates.“It’s just kind of what it is,” Sabathia said. “I’m just trying to get work in and help the team win.”His longstanding reputation as a good teammate, typically willing to sacrifice for the collective effort, makes him a sentimental favorite to persevere, especially after his personal problems surfaced last season. One prominent fan, the Marlins’ hitting coach, Barry Bonds, left the Miami dugout to shake Sabathia’s hand as he walked across the field.“Growing up in the Bay Area, I was always a big fan of Barry’s,” Sabathia said. “He was just checking up on me. Told me, keep going, stay healthy.”AdvertisementThe Marlins on Tuesday had their own staff concerns to consider, announcing that reliever Carter Capps was done for the season, scheduled for Tommy John surgery by Dr. James Andrews. Capps struck out 58 hitters in 31 innings last season as a setup man and was considered a challenger to the incumbent closer, A. J. Ramos.“It’s definitely a loss,” Mattingly said. “Carter, when he was in there, was as dominant as it gets last year.”As for opposing pitching, Mattingly said he would be more concerned with what the Mets will offer than the Yankees. He is in the Mets’ division now, after losing to them in the playoffs with the Dodgers last season, a defeat that preceded Mattingly’s departure from the Dodgers.“Those guys weren’t just chucking — they were using their pitches, secondary stuff,” he said of the Mets’ power arms and, while making no intentional reference, the once-upon-a-time days of Sabathia.A version of this article appears in print on March 9, 2016, on Page B13 of the New York edition with the headline: Sabathia Joins Yanks’ Trip and Flashes Some Spark.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.