AdvertisementSupported byBy Richard SandomirFearing that a continuing dispute will prevent 900,000 local Comcast customers from watching regular-season Yankee games, the Yes Network is beginning a campaign Wednesday to try to persuade affected fans to switch to providers like Verizon Fios and DirecTV.“We’re telling people that this isn’t going to settle,” Tracy Dolgin, the president of the YES Network, said in a telephone interview. “Hope is not a strategy. You have to find another provider.”Comcast dropped YES from systems in New Jersey, southern Connecticut and Scranton, Pa., in mid-November, depriving customers of Brooklyn Nets games and various Yankee and Nets programs. But with the baseball season a month away, YES said it was appropriate to put pressure on Comcast with television, radio, outdoor, transit and print ads and messages on social media. Other networks have adopted a similar strategy during an impasse. YES has set up a website to argue its case and suggest alternate providers.“We’re already into spring training,” Dolgin said. “There’s a real chance of missing both opening day and the season. To me this is a huge thing.”He added that YES and Comcast operated without a contract for much of last year, and that Comcast had agreed to a price to continue carrying the network, then dropped it.“They paid it until the dead of night in November, then took it off,” he said.Comcast tells a different but familiar story. YES is much too expensive, a price that is not justified, Comcast said, “given the network’s minimal viewership.”YES’s monthly subscriber fee last year was $5.93, but it has dropped this year to $5.36, according to SNL Kagan, a media research firm.“The real chutzpah here is that they’re wrapping themselves in protecting the consumer,” Dolgin said.Comcast also said that 21st Century Fox, which owns 80 percent of YES, was trying to use the talks over YES to add subscribers to other Fox networks like FS1, FS2 and Fox Business.“Fox is using YES Network to benefit its other networks at the expense of Yankee fans and our customers nationwide,” said John Demming, a Comcast spokesman.YES faced a major battle at its inception in 2002 with Cablevision, which had previously televised Yankee games on its MSG Network. Cablevision refused to carry YES for a full year, claiming it would pay a subscriber fee of only 55 cents a month, less than one-quarter of what YES was seeking. The impasse was resolved through intervention by Eliot Spitzer, then New York’s attorney general.“I’ve been here since 2004 and we haven’t been off the air with any operators since I’ve been here until this dispute,” Dolgin said. “And how we got here leads me to believe it won’t be settled.”An even more extended fight is taking place in Los Angeles where, for what could be a third season, the network created by Time Warner Cable to carry Dodgers games is not available in most of the market. The continuing impasse will deprive many fans of seeing Vin Scully in what is apparently his final season as the voice of the Dodgers.Advertisement