By THE ASSOCIATED PRESSAUG. 12, 2016
In a stunning mid-August shake-up, Patrick Roy has stepped down as the Colorado Avalanche’s coach and vice president for hockey operations, citing disagreements with the organization.“I have thought long and hard over the course of the summer about how I might improve this team to give it the depth it needs and bring it to a higher level,” Roy said in a statement. “To achieve this, the vision of the coach and V.P.-hockey operations needs to be perfectly aligned with that of the organization. He must also have a say in the decisions that impact the team’s performance. These conditions are not currently met.”Colorado went 130-92-24 in three seasons under Roy, who won the Jack Adams Award as coach of the year in 2013-14. It made the playoffs in Roy’s first year as coach.The Brewers scored in every inning in which they batted as they beat the Atlanta Braves, 11-3, in Milwaukee. It was just the eighth time since 1961 that a team did so a nine-inning game, according to Elias Sports Bureau, and the first time in franchise history.AdvertisementAROUND THE MAJORS Mark Trumbo hit a grand slam for his major-league-leading 32nd homer as the visiting Baltimore Orioles beat the Oakland Athletics, 9-6.  Marwin Gonzalez and Jose Altuve, the major league batting leader, each recorded four hits to help send the visiting Houston Astros past the Minnesota Twins, 15-7.  The rookie Jameson Taillon pitched three-hit ball for eight innings as the host Pittsburgh Pirates beat the San Diego Padres, 4-0.AdvertisementLeBron James will sign a new contract to remain with his hometown Cleveland Cavaliers for the next three seasons, agreeing to the deal less than two months after he led the franchise to its first N.B.A. championship.“I can’t be more excited than this opportunity once again, man, to defend our crown, defend our title,” James said in a video posted on the website Uninterrupted.James’s agent, Rich Paul, told ESPN that the three-year contract is worth $100 million.  (REUTERS)Leicester Manager Claudio Ranieri said it would be “impossible” for his team to retain the Premier League title after producing one of the greatest underdog stories in sports. Leicester opens the season Saturday at Hull.Leicester, which won the league at preseason odds of 5,000 to 1, retained all of its major players except midfielder N’Golo Kante, who joined Chelsea. Even so, Ranieri said the odds on his team this season should be “6,000 to 1.”Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.“It’s more difficult than last season — it’s easier that E.T. comes to Piccadilly Circus,” said Ranieri, referring to the alien from the 1982 movie.AROUND SOCCER Villarreal hired Fran Escribá as its coach after firing Marcelino García Toral less than a week before it hosts a Champions League playoff match.  Russia named Stanislav Cherchesov its coach after a disastrous European Championship ended Leonid Slutsky’s tenure.San Diego Chargers wide receiver Stevie Johnson will miss the season with a knee injury, Coach Mike McCoy said. Johnson, a nine-year pro, hurt his right knee during the second practice of training camp while getting up to run downfield after making a diving catch.The two-time major champion Zach Johnson shot a six-under-par 65 for a share of the John Deere Classic clubhouse lead with Patrick Rodgers and Ryan Moore in Silvis, Ill. Andrew Loupe was eight under through 14 holes in a first round suspended by rain.AdvertisementSINGH TAKES LEAD Vijay Singh birdied the final hole to shoot a four-under 66 and take a two-stroke lead at the United States Senior Open in Upper Arlington, Ohio.A new N.C.A.A. rule change is catching some recruits by surprise while causing coaches to debate how much time they should spend on social media.Under the change that took effect last week, athletic department staff members are allowed to share or show their approval of social media posts made by recruits. The policy change has been nicknamed “Click, Don’t Type” because coaches still are not allowed to add any sort of comment.A version of this article appears in print on August 12, 2016, on Page B15 of the New York edition with the headline: In His Fenway Park Finale, Rodriguez Fizzles.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.