AdvertisementSupported bySports BriefingBy The Associated PressThe Chicago Cubs rallied for three runs in the bottom of the ninth inning — with a bases-loaded walk tying the score and a wild pitch sending home the winning run — for a 5-4 victory over the visiting Miami Marlins on Wednesday, sweeping their three-game series.Ben Zobrist drew the critical walk. With Willson Contreras at the plate, Marlins closer A. J. Ramos (1-1) threw a wild pitch to allow Matt Szczur to score the winning run from third base.Jeff Mathis hit a two-run homer, Christian Yelich homered and drove in two runs, and Tom Koehler tossed six strong innings to give the Marlins a 4-1 lead heading into the bottom of the eighth.AROUND THE MAJORS Max Scherzer struck out 11 in eight innings and had a two-run single in Washington’s 8-3 victory over host Arizona. • Edwin Jackson pitched seven scoreless innings and had a run-scoring double, and Jabari Blash hit his first major league home run, helping the Padres rout the Milwaukee Brewers, 12-3, in San Diego. • Kevin Gausman outpitched Cole Hamels, and the host Baltimore Orioles rode a three-run first inning to a 3-2 victory over the Texas Rangers.Nike is dropping its golf equipment business to focus on shoes and apparel. The company said it would no longer make clubs, balls or bags.“We’re committed to being the undisputed leader in golf footwear and apparel,” Trevor Edwards, the Nike brand president, said in a statement.Nike said it would work with more of the world’s best golfers. Tiger Woods, Rory McIlroy and Michelle Wie have deals with the company.Tony Stewart said his car’s paint scheme for the Southern 500 on Sept. 4 would mirror that of Bobby Allison’s when he won at Darlington Raceway in South Carolina in 1971 and 1972.Stewart has won 49 races on Nascar’s top series but none at Darlington. He said he was hoping that replicating Allison’s paint scheme on his No. 14 Coca-Cola Chevrolet would change that.“This is one race that it is a crown jewel that I haven’t got yet,” Stewart said.Stewart’s throwback look will feature Coca-Cola’s “The Real Thing” tagline from the 1970s.Advertisement