By BILL PENNINGTONJUNE 14, 2016
OAKMONT, Pa. — With his gait wobbly, his eyes struggling to focus and his head spinning so quickly he eventually collapsed to the ground, Jason Day would be forgiven if he remembered last year’s United States Open as a house of horrors.A persistent case of vertigo had left Day lying on his back as he struggled to complete the final hole of his second round. A day later, rubbing his eyes and trying not to make any sudden head movements, Day shot a 68 to improbably share the tournament lead.It was a brief respite. In the final round, the vertigo returned and sent him reeling down the leaderboard until he finished tied for ninth. For Day, the disappointment might have seemed overpowering because he had contended at five previous major championships and had always come up short.But Tuesday, when asked to summarize his memories of last year’s Open, Day answered, “It was great; it was a good experience.”AdvertisementPerhaps no other comment better exemplifies how Day not only overcame a troubling few days, but used the events as a springboard to new achievement. Because on Tuesday, Day prepared for this year’s Open as the world’s top-ranked golfer and the favorite to win the tournament, which begins Thursday.AdvertisementLast August he recovered to win the P.G.A. Championship, and he has two tournament victories this season. When he reminisces about last year’s United States Open, he smiles — although Day smiles easily anyway. He makes the case that his setback a year ago forged all the success that has come afterward.“When you have certain things like that going on, it helped me to learn that you’ve just got to keep pushing — just keep pushing,” the 28-year-old Day said. “To be able to know that I can push myself a little further than you think you can was so important. And that it’s a mental barrier more than anything. You can break through it.”Day conceded that he nearly withdrew from last year’s Open.“There were a few spots out there where I thought I was going to quit,” he said. “Because I can’t handle it anymore, because I felt like I was going to throw up and just felt ill. But that’s why I call it a good experience.”He did not say it was an enjoyable experience. He would call it, in the end, a fruitful one.“I had been getting close to winning a major and was putting myself in position there,” Day said. “But the most important part is believing you can win one. If you don’t believe in yourself, somewhere or another, you sabotage yourself.”In the oddest of ways, being able to contend at last year’s Open despite his sometimes blurred vision, his occasionally wavering balance and a stomach in turmoil gave Day the confidence to aggressively chase his dream of a major championship title.“It’s O.K. to fail,” he said. “Just keep putting yourself there. Once I started saying that and really believing that, over time, it just gradually gave me confidence.”It is a lesson for Dustin Johnson, who is still chasing his first major victory after finishing tied for second at the Open last year. Day had a close-up view of Johnson’s three-putt on the final hole, the one that handed the championship to Jordan Spieth.Advertisement“I putted out first on the last green, trying to give him the opportunity and the glory to fist-pump or do whatever he wanted to if he holed that putt to win the U.S. Open,” Day said of the first of Johnson’s three putts last year. “The scenery was there — the grandstands and everything; it was just set up for it to finish like that, with him holing the putt.“Not, obviously, three-putting.”Get the big sports news, highlights and analysis from Times journalists, with distinctive takes on games and some behind-the-scenes surprises, delivered to your inbox every week.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.Day, who a year ago was one of the best pro golfers yet to win a major, offered a bit of advice to Johnson: He should embrace what went wrong last time. In the same situation, he might try to make the championship-winning putt, but also “try to mosey it down there some way.”“You’ve got to learn from it,” Day said, “try to get better for the next time.”Day, meanwhile, is chasing his first United States Open victory. He called the week so far the most stress he had endured in his life. And it has given him a cold.“Sometime your immune system gets a little heated, and you’re more susceptible to getting some illnesses that way,” he said. “But, I mean, this shouldn’t be news and noteworthy that I’m battling a cold.”He has endured worse in the event, something not far from his mind.“I’m fine; it’s not an excuse,” Day said. “I’m going to be ready for the start Thursday.”A version of this article appears in print on June 15, 2016, on Page B15 of the New York edition with the headline: Day Says He’s Better for His 2015 Bout of Vertigo.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.