JULY 9, 2016
Serbia and Croatia are headed for Brazil, while France or Canada will claim the final spot in Olympic basketball.Serbia claimed its first Olympic appearance as an independent nation by crushing Puerto Rico, 108-77, on Saturday in the championship game of the Olympic qualifying tournament it hosted in Belgrade. Bogdan Bogdanovic had 26 points and 8 assists, while the tournament’s most valuable player, Nikola Jokic of the Denver Nuggets, added 23 points, 8 rebounds and 6 assists.Croatia had a much tougher time, outlasting Italy, 84-78, in overtime in Turin. Bojan Bogdanovic of the Nets scored 26 points, the former Philadelphia 76ers lottery pick Dario Saric added 18 points and 13 rebounds, and the Croatians qualified for the Olympics for the first time since 2008.In Manila, fifth-ranked France eliminated eighth-ranked Turkey, 75-63, in a semifinal despite relatively quiet nights from most of its N.B.A. stars, including Tony Parker, Boris Diaw and Nicolas Batum.AdvertisementDiaw, who had 4 points, 7 rebounds and 2 assists, said France must overcome its habit of starting slowly.Advertisement“Young guys came in to give us a lift for us to be able to win,” he said.Canada defeated New Zealand, 78-72, and will play France in Sunday’s final.Jonathan Schoop scored the tying run on a seventh-inning balk and delivered a decisive run-scoring single in the eighth inning to propel host Baltimore past the Los Angeles Angels, 3-2. The victory assured the Orioles of sole possession of first place in the American League East at the All-Star break.Mark Trumbo hit his major-league-leading 28th home run for Baltimore, a solo shot in the second inning. It was the Orioles’ 135th homer of the season, their most before the break.PIRATES CRUSH CUBS Josh Bell hit a grand slam in his second major league at-bat, one of four homers by host Pittsburgh in a 12-6 victory over Chicago.Bell slugged a 1-1 pitch from Adam Warren over the seats above the 21-foot wall in right field during his second pinch-hit opportunity in two games since being recalled from Class AAA on Friday. Jordy Mercer, Andrew McCutchen and Sean Rodriguez also homered for the Pirates, who have won nine of 10.GIANTS IMPROVE TO 56-33 Brandon Belt hit a run-scoring triple, Grant Green homered for the first time this season and San Francisco got a big lift from its bullpen in a 4-2 victory over the visiting Arizona Diamondbacks. Angel Pagan added two hits and Ruben Tejada doubled in a run for the Giants, who are 56-33, the best record in the major leagues.CARDINALS’ BARRAGE SINKS BREWERS Jhonny Peralta, Tommy Pham and Aledmys Diaz homered, helping Carlos Martinez and visiting St. Louis rout Milwaukee, 8-1. Peralta hit a leadoff drive in the second inning off Chase Anderson. During the Cardinals’ five-run ninth, Pham connected on a solo shot and Diaz belted a three-run homer.AdvertisementBLUE JAYS’ WINNING STREAK ENDS AT SEVEN Victor Martinez hit a tiebreaking home run in the eighth inning, and the visiting Detroit Tigers halted Toronto’s seven-game winning streak, 3-2.Alex Noren of Sweden birdied the final two holes to extend his lead to two shots at the Scottish Open in Inverness after a third round that ended in heavy rain at the Castle Stuart links.Noren shot a four-under-par 68 to move to 12-under 204, two strokes ahead of Tyrrell Hatton of England (66) and Matteo Manassero of Italy (68).The top 15 players are separated by six shots in the final event before the British Open at Royal Troon, which begins on Thursday.Get the big sports news, highlights and analysis from Times journalists, with distinctive takes on games and some behind-the-scenes surprises, delivered to your inbox every week.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.Noren, the second-round leader by a shot, defied the blustery conditions by hitting a 219-yard tee shot to 3 feet on No. 17 and then getting up and down at the par-5 18th for another birdie.TWO TIED FOR FIRST AT CHAMPIONS TOUR EVENT Paul Goydos shot a six-under-par 66 to forge a tie for the lead with John Riegger after two rounds of the Dick’s Sporting Goods Open in Endicott, N.Y.Goydos made an eagle at the par-4 16th hole, and he followed with a birdie at No. 17 to finish at 11-under 133 with Riegger, who shot a 67.The first-round leader, Scott Dunlap, shot a 70 and was alone in second place, one shot behind.Brad Keselowski became the first three-time winner at Kentucky Speedway, overtaking Kevin Harvick on Lap 201 and holding on for the Sprint Cup series victory in Sparta.AdvertisementMatt Kenseth grabbed the lead with six laps remaining but pitted for fuel and handed the top spot back to Keselowski, who had just enough gasoline in reserve to edge Carl Edwards by 0.175 of a second in a tense finish. Keselowski’s tank eventually ran dry, and he needed a tow to victory lane.HAMILTON WINS POLE AT BRITISH GRAND PRIX Lewis Hamilton claimed the pole position for Sunday’s British Grand Prix in Silverstone, England, after a thrilling qualifying session. Hamilton outpaced his Mercedes teammate Nico Rosberg by three-tenths of a second on a late lap.PAGENAUD CLAIMS INDYCAR POLE Simon Pagenaud will start on the pole for the fifth time this season at Sunday’s IndyCar race at Iowa Speedway in Newton. Pagenaud, the series points leader, qualified with a two-lap time of 185.886 miles per hour.James Harden signed a four-year, $118 million contract extension with the Houston Rockets.Harden was scheduled to become an unrestricted free agent after the 2017-18 season.The move came after a frustrating season for the Rockets, who were ousted by the Golden State Warriors in the first round of the playoffs. They fired their coach, Kevin McHale, after a 4-7 start, and the interim coach, J. B. Bickerstaff, went 37-34 the rest of the way.A year ago, Houston reached the Western Conference finals, and Harden finished second in the voting for most valuable player.KNICKS SIGN LITHUANIAN FORWARD The Knicks signed the Lithuanian Mindaugas Kuzminskas. A 6-foot-9, 215-pound forward, Kuzminskas averaged 8.3 points and 2.9 rebounds in 221 games during seven seasons with the Lithuanian teams Siauliai and Zalgris and the Spanish club Malaga.MORE MOVES The Warriors announced that the free-agent forward David West signed his one-year contract. West agreed to the deal for the veteran’s minimum early last week.The Sacramento Kings announced the signings of the free-agent guards Arron Afflalo and Garrett Temple and the free-agent forwards Matt Barnes and Anthony Tolliver.AdvertisementA Spanish bullfighter became the first to die in the ring in three decades after being gored in front of horrified spectators in the eastern town of Teruel.Victor Barrio, 29, died of injuries to the chest after being struck by the horn of a bull weighing more than 1,100 pounds and tossed into the air.Other matadors rushed to the rescue, helping to distract the bull and lure him away while Barrio lay bleeding in the sand.Barrio, who made his bullfighting debut in 2008 and toured Spain, was pronounced dead at the scene, said Tauroemocion.His death was the first of a matador in the ring since 1985, Spanish news media reported.(AGENCE FRANCE-PRESSE)A version of this article appears in print on July 10, 2016, on Page SP6 of the New York edition with the headline: Serbia and Croatia Qualify; One Berth Is Left.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.