By THE ASSOCIATED PRESSDEC. 7, 2016
Novak Djokovic and his coach Boris Becker are splitting up after three seasons — and a half-dozen Grand Slam titles — as a pair.Djokovic, the No. 2-ranked player in the world, posted a statement on Facebook on Tuesday, saying the two “jointly decided to end our cooperation.”“The goals we set when we started working together have been completely fulfilled, and I want to thank him for the cooperation, teamwork, dedication and commitment,” Djokovic’s posting said. “On the other hand, my professional plans are now directed primarily to maintain a good level of play, and also to make a good schedule and new goals for the next season. In this regard I will make all future decisions.”Of Djokovic’s 12 career major singles trophies — among men, trailing only Roger Federer with 17, and Pete Sampras and Rafael Nadal with 14 apiece — half came while working with Becker.AdvertisementIn the only group where qualification for the Champions League knockout stages was still to be decided, Besiktas crumbled under the pressure, allowing Napoli and Benfica to progress.AdvertisementNapoli and Benfica had 8 points going into their Group B match, one more than Besiktas, which was playing at already eliminated Dynamo Kiev. However, Besiktas, a Turkish team, fell in a shocking 6-0 defeat in a match that saw it finish with nine men. Napoli won, 2-1, at Benfica to win a Champions League group for the first time.Elsewhere, Arsenal topped Group A after its 4-1 win at Basel when Paris St.-Germain could only draw, 2-2, at home to Ludogorets.Atlético Madrid had already secured first place in Group D, but lost its perfect record in a 1-0 defeat at Bayern Munich. The final positions in Group C had already been decided, and Barcelona beat Borussia Moenchengladbach, 4-0, while Manchester City drew, 1-1, against Celtic.Taylor Hall scored a goal, set up a go-ahead tally by Kyle Palmieri and delivered a crushing check that knocked Vancouver defenseman Philip Larsen out of the game to lift the Devils over the Canucks, 3-2, in Newark.Elfrid Payton scored 22 of his season-high 25 points in the first half, and the Orlando Magic overcame John Wall’s 52-point performance to beat the Wizards, 124-116, in Washington.SPURS 105, TIMBERWOLVES 91 Kawhi Leonard scored 31 points, and San Antonio improved to 13-0 on the road this season with a victory over Minnesota.Jalen Brunson scored 26 points and Josh Hart had 21 to help No. 1 Villanova hold off La Salle, 89-79, at the Palestra in Philadelphia.AdvertisementThe Wildcats, the defending national champions, failed to dominate in their first game of the season as the top-ranked team in the country. They led La Salle by only single digits late in the game and played little like the team that had steamrollered to the top.Get the big sports news, highlights and analysis from Times journalists, with distinctive takes on games and some behind-the-scenes surprises, delivered to your inbox every week.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.KANSAS 105, U.M.K.C. 62  Frank Mason scored 30 points to match his career high, Devonte Graham and Josh Jackson also had big games and No. 3 Kansas rolled to a road victory over Missouri-Kansas City to give Coach Bill Self career win No. 600.DUKE 84, FLORIDA 74 Amile Jefferson had career highs of 24 points and 15 rebounds to lead No. 5 Duke to a victory over No. 21 Florida in the Jimmy V Classic at Madison Square Garden. Luke Kennard scored 29 points and the freshman Jayson Tatum added 22 for the Blue Devils.PURDUE 97, ARIZONA STATE 64 Isaac Haas and Vincent Edwards each were 6 of 9 from the field and had 16 points as No. 18 Purdue dominated Arizona State in every phase of the game in the Jimmy V Classic at the Garden.BAYLOR 90, TEXAS STATE 24 In a women’s game, Natalie Chou, Kalani Brown and Alexis Prince each scored 15 points, and No. 3 Baylor routed visiting Texas State.MARYLAND 97, TOWSON 63 In another women’s game, Brionna Jones and Shatori Walker-Kimbrough each scored 19 points before leaving early during another blowout by No. 4 Maryland, which rolled to a home victory against in-state foe Towson.Some of his Giants teammates spoke as if the injured defensive end Jason Pierre-Paul had already been ruled out of the team’s coming game against the Dallas Cowboys.“His presence is going to be missed,” linebacker Jonathan Casillas said of Pierre-Paul, who missed most of Sunday’s game against the Pittsburgh Steelers after injuring his groin in the second quarter.AdvertisementUsing Pierre-Paul’s nickname, Casillas added, “We have guys who are going to step up, but no one is J.P.P.”The Giants issued no medical update on Pierre-Paul, who walked through the locker room without a limp but declined to talk to reporters. BILL PENNINGTONBOWLES SAYS HE DECIDED ON PETTY WEEKS AGO Jets Coach Todd Bowles said he decided about two to three weeks ago to play Bryce Petty at quarterback for the team’s final four games to get an extended look at him.Bowles announced after the Jets’ 41-10 loss to the Indianapolis Colts on Monday night that Petty, a second-year player, would start the rest of the season, sending Ryan Fitzpatrick to the sideline.Bowles acknowledged that he never directly told Fitzpatrick of the decision after he “got tied up with a few things.” The two will talk Wednesday, said Bowles, who added that he could have handled the situation better.Claire Smith is the first woman to win the J. G. Taylor Spink Award for meritorious contributions to baseball writing and will be honored during the Hall of Fame’s induction weekend next July in Cooperstown, N.Y.Smith, 62, covered the Yankees for The Hartford Courant for five years starting in 1983 and was a columnist for The New York Times from 1991 to 1998 and The Philadelphia Inquirer from 1998 to 2007. She is ESPN’s news editor of remote productions.A version of this article appears in print on December 7, 2016, on Page B14 of the New York edition with the headline: Djokovic Parts Ways With Becker, His Coach.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.