

 Benjamin Hoffman
 

KEEPING SCORE
JUNE 14, 2016
After combining for 82 points Monday night in Game 5 of the N.B.A. finals, LeBron James and Kyrie Irving of the Cleveland Cavaliers sat down to answer questions from members of the news media and seemed relaxed for the first time since James returned to Cleveland. They joked with each other, bantered with reporters and made the drama of the last few days seem like a distant memory.Of course, it is easy to be relaxed after stealing a road victory over the 73-win Golden State Warriors in one of the most hostile environments in professional basketball while also becoming the first teammates in N.B.A. finals history to score 40 or more points in the same game.“You tip your hat to them,” Stephen Curry said after the game. “They had a great night.”It would be difficult to decide which player was more effective. James had a line of 41 points, 16 rebounds and 7 assists. Irving also had 41 points — on only 24 field-goal attempts — and seemed to bury the Warriors with crucial shots each time the game grew close.James was effusive in praising Irving’s performance.“Just calm,” James said of Irving’s demeanor. “Just calm for 48 minutes. Obviously, he played 40 minutes, but even in the eight minutes that he was sitting down, he was just calm. Timely bucket after bucket that led our team.”AdvertisementSome will try to put an asterisk on the performance by the Cleveland stars because of the absence of Draymond Green, Golden State’s most important defensive player, but throughout the game, a Warriors team known for its depth could not come up with an effective solution to slow James or Irving. They were a combined 9 for 15 from 3-point range and seemed just as adept at getting to the hoop for easier baskets or setting up their teammates when the coverage tightened. The two scored or assisted on 97 of Cleveland’s 112 points, while the entire Golden State lineup combined to score 97.AdvertisementThere was a great deal of discussion about James’s and Irving’s dual 40-point games. The feat had been accomplished four times previously in the playoffs, but not in the finals. In fact, it is rare for teammates to have even 35 or more in a finals game. That has occurred only three other times since 1964, according to Basketball-Reference.com. The last pair to do it were Shaquille O’Neal and Kobe Bryant of the Los Angeles Lakers in Game 3 of the 2002 finals against the Nets.The most famous of those games is Game 6 of the 1980 finals, when Magic Johnson, a point guard, filled in at center for an injured Kareem Abdul-Jabbar and contributed 40 points and 15 rebounds in a series-clinching win over the Philadelphia 76ers. Jamaal Wilkes’s 37-point effort in the win was relegated to a footnote.The combined 82 points by James and Irving put them third on the list for scoring by a duo in a finals game. The top spot belongs to Jerry West and Elgin Baylor, who had 87 points (Baylor had 61) in Game 5 of the 1962 finals. Of the 17 pairs to combine for 70 or more points in a finals game since 1964, West has been a part of seven of them.Get the big sports news, highlights and analysis from Times journalists, with distinctive takes on games and some behind-the-scenes surprises, delivered to your inbox every week.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.The second-highest combined total is from a different golden era for the Warriors, with Rick Barry and Jim King combining for 83 points — Barry had 55 — in Game 3 of the 1967 finals.The Cavaliers will have to hope they can break a trend, as both the 1962 Lakers and the 1967 Warriors went on to lose the finals.“Well, we’re in the same place we were last year, up, 3-2, heading back to Cleveland. If you told me this before the series, I would have taken it. So we’re in a good spot.”Steve Kerr, the Warriors’ coach.  Golden State will travel to Cleveland for Game 6 on Thursday. None of the 32 teams to take a 3-to-1 series lead in a best-of-seven finals have failed to win the championship.A version of this article appears in print on June 15, 2016, on Page B14 of the New York edition with the headline: James and Irving Make It Look Easy.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.See More »