AdvertisementSupported bySports BriefingWayne Rooney surpassed Ruud van Nistelrooy as Manchester United’s career top scorer in European competitions on Thursday, leading the English club to a 4-0 win over visiting Feyenoord and keeping it alive in the Europa League.After scoring his 39th European goal in the 35th minute, Rooney unselfishly set up Juan Mata in the 69th, leaving United on its way to an easy victory and in a good position to advance to the knockout rounds.United got a third goal on the board with an own-goal by Feyenoord goalkeeper Brad Jones after an angled shot by Zlatan Ibrahimovic in the 75th.Jesse Lingard’s form shot added a fourth in injury time.United reached 9 points and is only one behind the Group A leader, Fenerbahce, which defeated the Ukrainian club Zorya Luhansk, 2-0, in Turkey.A road win against Zorya, which has already been eliminated, in the final round in December would be enough for United to advance and to help relieve some of the pressure on Manager José Mourinho.Rooney’s third goal of the season, and his first at Old Trafford since May, came after a well-timed pass by Ibrahimovic. Rooney calmly flicked the ball over Jones after receiving it behind the Feyenoord defenders inside the area.It was Rooney’s 248th goal for United, leaving him just one short of Bobby Charlton’s career record with the club.Rooney’s chances of tying the mark ended when he was substituted in the 82nd.INTER MILAN STUMBLES TO ELIMINATION Inter Milan could not hold on to a two-goal lead against the Israeli club Hapoel Beer-Sheva and was eliminated, 3-2, from the Europa League with one round still to be played.Inter, playing on the road, conceded three goals in the second half, including one in the third and final minute of stoppage time, as it lost for the fourth time in five games in Group K.Sparta Prague, which defeated Southampton, 1-0, at home, secured first place in the group with 12 points, 5 more than Hapoel and Southampton, which are set to meet in England in the final round. Inter had 3 points.The Italian club played with 10 men from the 69th minute as goalkeeper Samir Handanovic was sent off for a foul that prompted Hapoel’s equalizer on a penalty kick.Mauro Icardi scored his sixth goal in six games for Inter in the 13th, and Marcelo Brozovic added to the lead in the 25th. But the hosts got one back through Lúcio Maranhão in the 58th, and Anthony Nwakaeme converted the penalty after Handanovic’s red card.Striker Ben Sahar netted the late winner with a shot from inside the area after a fast breakaway that caught Inter’s defense off guard.AROUND THE LEAGUE Villarreal missed a chance to reach the top of a tightly fought Group L after conceding an 87th-minute equalizer to host F.C. Zurich, finishing in a 1-1 draw and leaving the group lead with the Turkish club Osmanlispor, which lost, 2-1, at Steaua Bucharest. Fiorentina lost, 3-2, at home to the Greek side PAOK but held a 3-point lead in Group J, while Zenit St. Petersburg maintained a perfect record after a 2-0 home win against Maccabi Tel Aviv in Group D. Zenit has a 10-point lead at the top. Schalke defeated visiting Nice, 2-0, to stay comfortably ahead in Group I, and the Group H leader Shakhtar Donetsk routed visiting Konyaspor, 4-0. Ajax stayed ahead in Group G with a 2-0 win at home over last-place Panathinaikos.Donovan Mitchell made two 3-pointers in the final four and a half minutes and scored 14 points to help No. 10 Louisville beat Wichita State, 62-52, for a spot in the Battle 4 Atlantis championship game in Paradise Islands, Bahamas.Quentin Snider also scored 14 points for the Cardinals (5-0). They will play Baylor for the title.Wichita State (5-1) shot just 32 percent for the game, while Louisville — which shot 37 percent — helped itself by making 17 of 23 free throws and taking a 46-to-33 rebounding advantage.Markis McDuffie and Shaquille Morris each scored 10 for the Shockers.BAYLOR BREEZES IN BAHAMAS Johnathan Motley scored 20 of his 26 points in the first half, and No. 20 Baylor beat No. 24 Michigan State, 73-58, to reach the Battle 4 Atlantis championship game.Jo Lual-Acuil Jr. added 14 points and 8 rebounds — nearly all in the second half — for the Bears (5-0). They sprinted out of the break with a 12-2 run and shot 55 percent in the second half.The freshman Miles Bridges had 15 points for the Spartans (3-3). They shot 39 percent in the second half, going 1 for 10 on 3-pointers.WEST VIRGINIA ADVANCES IN BROOKLYN Nathan Adrian had 13 points and 8 rebounds in No. 19 West Virginia’s 89-57 victory over Illinois in the N.I.T. Season Tip-Off at Barclays Center.Jevon Carter added 10 points, 6 rebounds, 6 steals and 5 assists for the Mountaineers (4-0). Esa Ahmad and Elijah Macon each had 9 points, and Teyvon Myers and Daxter Miles Jr. each added 8.Michael Finke led Illinois (4-2) with 13 points, and Mike Thorne Jr. had 12.The Vancouver Canucks signed defenseman Ben Hutton to a two-year, $5.6 million extension.Hutton, 23, is in his second N.H.L. season with Vancouver and has two goals and two assists in 20 games in 2016-17.Selected 147th over all at the 2012 draft, Hutton was one of the lone bright spots for the Canucks in his rookie season, seemingly coming out of nowhere to make the club out of training camp.Hutton, who played at the University of Maine, had one goal and 24 assists in 75 games in 2015-16 to lead all Vancouver defensemen in points.Hutton has struggled at times early this season while looking for chemistry with his partner, Erik Gudbranson. But he has played better of late as the Canucks have won four of their last seven after a nine-game losing streak.“Ben is developing into one of our young, emerging core players and is an important part of our future,” Canucks General Manager Jim Benning said in a statement. “We’re excited to see him further elevate his game and help this team compete for years to come.”Advertisement