AdvertisementSupported bySports BriefingBy The Associated PressThe rising teenage star Kylian Mbappe and the resurgent forward Radamel Falcao scored early goals as Monaco beat Borussia Dortmund, 3-1, to reach the Champions League semifinals Wednesday.Dortmund, which trailed, 3-2, from the first leg in Germany, allowed two goals inside 20 minutes — meaning it needed to score three times to have a chance. The attacking midfielder Marco Reus netted one in the 48th minute. But the substitute Valere Germain, just after replacing Mbappe, added Monaco’s third goal in the 81st minute to seal a 6-3 victory on aggregate.The home leg in Germany was overshadowed by an attack on the Dortmund team bus as it headed to the stadium. Before Wednesday’s game, Dortmund’s bus was held for 20 minutes by the police at the team hotel. Kickoff was briefly delayed.Dortmund made the worst possible start to the match, conceding a goal after just three minutes. Left back Bernard Mendy ran at the heart of Dortmund’s defense and hit a fierce shot that goalkeeper Roman Burki spilled. Mbappe slotted the loose ball into the bottom left corner for his 22nd goal. Falcao’s diving header, the 27th goal of his comeback season, made the score 2-0 in the 17th minute.TWO CLUBS DISCIPLINED The French club Lyon and Turkey’s Besiktas have been given suspended one-season bans from European competition after crowd trouble at their Europa League quarterfinal. UEFA said in a statement that both clubs would be excluded from the next competition for which they qualified — with the ban being deferred for a probationary period of two years.The clubs were also fined 100,000 euros ($107,000) each after fireworks were lit and missiles were thrown at Lyon’s stadium before the first-leg match on April 13. The trouble followed fighting among French and Turkish fans in the city earlier in the day.The defending champion Rafael Nadal withstood a determined comeback from Britain’s Kyle Edmund to win, 6-0, 5-7, 6-3, in the second round of the Monte Carlo Masters.The fourth-seeded Nadal is aiming for a 10th title in Monte Carlo and looked to be coasting until Edmund found his range with huge forehands. The third set was intense, with three straight breaks of serve from 2-2, until Nadal, the nine-time French Open champion, drew on his vastly superior experience on clay. Nadal is looking for this first title of the year after losing in three finals — including defeats to Roger Federer at the Australian Open and the Miami Open.Earlier, top-ranked Andy Murray returned from an elbow injury to beat Gilles Muller of Luxembourg, 7-5, 7-5.Dexter Fowler hit his first two home runs for the St. Louis Cardinals, who swept the visiting Pirates with their third straight 2-1 victory over Pittsburgh. Fowler had three of the Cardinals’ eight hits, including a third-inning drive into the right-field bullpen and a shot down the right-field line in the fifth, both off Gerrit Cole (1-2).ATHLETICS’ DAVIS HITS SEVENTH HOMER  Khris Davis hit his seventh home run, Yonder Alonso and Chad Pinder also went deep, and the Oakland Athletics routed the visiting Texas Rangers, 9-1.The killer of the retired New Orleans Saints star Will Smith was denied a new trial by a Louisiana judge, who then heard tearful, sometimes bitter “victim impact” testimony from Smith’s family and friends.Racquel Smith said her daughter fears the day Cardell Hayes gets out of prison. She said one of their sons is “lost” without his father. And with tears and anger, she lashed out at the man who shot her and killed her husband during a traffic dispute last year.“All I ask of you is to tell the truth,” she said, looking straight at Hayes and accusing him of lying at his December trial, where he said Smith punched him first.Judge Camille Buras is expected to announce the sentence no later than Friday.BRONCOS’ MILLER GETS HELMET BACK The Denver Broncos’ Von Miller has his Super Bowl 50 helmet back. The F.B.I. retrieved his helmet from Mexican authorities who also recovered two of Tom Brady’s Super Bowl jerseys in Mexico City last month. Special agents delivered the helmet to Miller.Lynn S. Whiting, who trained Lil E. Tee to an upset victory in the 1992 Kentucky Derby, has died. He was 77. He died Wednesday at his home in Louisville, Ky., after a struggle with cancer and a stroke he had during the winter in Arkansas, according to the Oaklawn Park spokeswoman Jennifer Hoyt.Advertisement