By THE ASSOCIATED PRESSAPRIL 19, 2017
Markus Nutivaara, William Karlsson and Boone Jenner each had a goal and an assist as the Columbus Blue Jackets beat the visiting Pittsburgh Penguins, 5-4, avoiding a sweep in the teams’ best-of-seven playoff series. Sergei Bobrovsky had 27 saves in the Blue Jackets’ first playoff win in three years and their first ever in regulation.Nigel Williams-Goss, who led Gonzaga to its first appearance in the Final Four, has decided to skip his senior season and declare for the N.B.A. draft. He will hire an agent, precluding his return to Gonzaga. Williams-Goss, a second-team all-American, led Gonzaga in scoring last year (16.8 points) as the top-seeded Zags advanced to the N.C.A.A. title game, which they lost to North Carolina.Back on court for the first time since the birth of his son, Jo-Wilfried Tsonga was upset by a qualifier in the second round of the Monte Carlo Masters. The seventh-seeded Tsonga lost to Adrian Mannarino, 6-7 (3), 6-2, 6-3.Novak Djokovic, playing his first match on clay since winning the French Open last year, was kept on court for more than two and a half hours by Gilles Simon. Back from an elbow injury, Djokovic looked a bit rusty and made a flurry of unforced errors, but the two-time champion prevailed, 6-3, 3-6, 7-5, to move into the third round.AdvertisementThe 90-minute funeral at St. Paul Cathedral celebrating Dan Rooney, the longtime Pittsburgh Steelers president and chairman, who died at 84 last Thursday, offered a glimpse into a man who turned a moribund franchise into a dynasty; helped refine the vision of the modern N.F.L.; and attempted to ease regional tensions as United States ambassador to Ireland. All the while remaining the guy from Pittsburgh’s North Side simply known as Dan.Advertisement“He was a Pittsburgher,” Cardinal Donald Wuerl said. “He was the best of us.”To the right in the massive sanctuary sat hundreds of current and ex-players: the Hall of Famers Joe Greene and Franco Harris, the current stars Ben Roethlisberger and Antonio Brown, and alums whose careers were far more modest but whom Rooney treated as surrogate sons and grandsons. Down in front sat former President Barack Obama and former Secretary of State John Kerry, there to pay tribute to Rooney’s legacy and offer comfort to what is considered the city’s first family.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.As Major League Baseball celebrates the 70th anniversary of Jackie Robinson’s breaking the color barrier, a diversity report finds that the league could do a better job of identifying and hiring minority and female candidates for top decision-making jobs.The annual report card released by the Institute for Diversity and Ethics in Sport at the University of Central Florida shows a drop-off from a year ago in M.L.B.’s racial and gender hiring practices. It received a B in racial hiring, a C for gender hiring and an overall C-plus grade this year.At the team level, M.L.B. received an F in racial hiring practices for managers. Out of 30 skippers, Dave Roberts of the Los Angeles Dodgers, Dusty Baker of the Washington Nationals and Rick Renteria of the Chicago White Sox are the only ones of color, down from a high of 10 minority managers as recently as 2009.BUCHHOLZ HAS SURGERY The Phillies right-hander Clay Buchholz had surgery to repair a torn flexor tendon in his right forearm, and could miss the rest of the season. The surgery was performed by Dr. James Andrews. Buchholz now faces an estimated recovery time of four to six months.Tiger Woods will design an 18-hole golf course south of Branson, Mo., that will be named after Payne Stewart, a Missouri native who won 11 PGA events before dying in a plane crash in 1999.A version of this article appears in print on April 19, 2017, on Page B10 of the New York edition with the headline: Hockey; Columbus Staves Off Elimination.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.