By JAMES WAGNERMAY 12, 2017
MILWAUKEE — Jeurys Familia, the Mets’ All-Star closer, was visiting the team’s training room before Wednesday’s game to receive what General Manager Sandy Alderson called routine maintenance to his arm and body. But as he did so, Familia mentioned something “in passing” to an athletic trainer about minor tingling in the ring finger on his throwing hand, Alderson said.About 48 hours later, Familia was in St. Louis undergoing an operation to remove a blood clot near his right shoulder, a procedure that will keep him out several months and put further strain on an already hobbled Mets roster.“It’s possible he’ll be back by the end of the year,” said Alderson, who was awaiting a full report on the procedure on Friday afternoon. “It’s possible he won’t. We just don’t know at this point.”Familia’s blood clot, which was discovered Thursday, is the latest blow to a Mets team that is already without the foundation of its lineup (Yoenis Cespedes), its rotation (Noah Syndergaard) and, now, its bullpen (Familia). Several other key Mets are also on the disabled list.Advertisement“They’re pretty painful injuries, and this is a big one,” Mets Manager Terry Collins said. “This guy was arguably one of the best closers in the game.”In Familia’s place, the Mets will turn back to the setup man Addison Reed, a former closer. Reed, who was arguably the Mets’ best reliever in 2016, was perfect in four save chances as the Mets’ closer during Familia’s 15-game domestic-abuse suspension earlier this season. Overall, Reed has a 3.00 E.R.A. in 18 innings.Collins said that he would mix and match relievers for other innings before putting Reed in and that the team’s young relievers would need to step up.Alderson said the Mets might consider going back to an eight-man bullpen, like the one they used earlier in the season, and would evaluate a handful of internal options before exploring outside aid.Pitchers Steven Matz and Seth Lugo could help if they return near the end of this month from their elbow injuries, as expected, but that is still weeks away, and there could be setbacks.AdvertisementIn the meantime, the Mets are left to deal with the loss of their bullpen bedrock.The Mets revealed Familia’s injury with a surprising announcement Thursday afternoon. The day before, Familia had allowed four runs, blowing his first save of the season in the Mets’ 6-5 loss to the San Francisco Giants. His previous five outings were clean, and he notched three saves.Familia’s velocity Wednesday was strong, in his usual range of the high 90s, but the location of his pitches was off. After the game, Familia told reporters that his body and arm felt good. He told Collins the same thing.“Do I think that affected his outing on Wednesday?” Collins said Friday. “I really don’t. I just think he lost command of his sinker.”Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.After reporting the unusual sensation in his finger, Familia was examined by the medical staff and was found to have a minor vascular symptom that required an additional, precautionary test later. Alderson said Familia had been cleared to pitch that day.But the follow-up test Thursday found a blood clot near Familia’s right armpit, Alderson said. Familia was in St. Louis by that evening and was given more tests the next day by Dr. Robert Thompson, who performed Matt Harvey’s thoracic outlet syndrome surgery last summer. Surgery was deemed necessary.The rush to treatment was related to the availability of the surgeon, not necessarily the seriousness of the clot, Alderson said.“It’s very disturbing to think that there was not more to it and this is as serious as it turned out,” Collins said.The Mets officially placed Familia on the disabled list Friday, making room for first baseman Lucas Duda to come off it. Duda had been out since April 20 with a hyperextended left elbow.Familia’s absence will undoubtedly give more work to a Mets bullpen already burdened with making up for the injuries and inconsistencies of the starting rotation. The starters have averaged 5.5 innings per start this season, just under the major league average.AdvertisementAlthough the Mets’ bullpen had thrown 126 innings entering Friday’s game, only the seventh most in baseball, their 134 total appearances in relief were the most in baseball, by 10, according to Baseball-Reference.com.Jerry Blevins, a left-handed reliever who does not usually pitch full innings, leads the major leagues with 20 outings. Reed and Fernando Salas were tied with 19, and Hansel Robles had 18. Despite that workload, the Mets’ bullpen, along with the improved offense, have been reasons for the team’s recent surge in the standings.Familia had only made 11 appearances before the announcement of his injury. But from 2014 to 2016, his All-Star season, he led baseball with 230 appearances. He posted a 2.20 E.R.A. in that span and logged at least 77 innings in each of those seasons, a model of consistency but also the bearer of a large workload.Then, in the span of two days this week, Familia went from a bad outing to the operating room.A version of this article appears in print on May 13, 2017, on Page D2 of the New York edition with the headline: Familia’s Surgery Has Mets Scrambling in the Bullpen.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.