AdvertisementSupported byBy Ben ShpigelFLORHAM PARK. N.J. — As Commissioner Roger Goodell responded to a fan question Monday about the link between football and degenerative brain disease by citing some of the N.F.L.’s efforts to improve player safety, one of those very players started shaking his head.The rookie safety Jamal Adams, sitting to Goodell’s right at a fan forum at the Jets’ headquarters, objected to some of the rule changes — many of which, he implied, protect offensive players.“I’m all about making the game safer, but as a defensive player, I’m not a big fan of it,” said Adams, 21, who was drafted sixth over all in April. “But I get it. I can speak for a lot of guys that play the game. We live and breathe. This is what we’re so passionate about.”Adams added, “Literally, I would — if I had a perfect place to die, I would die on the field.”Many in the crowd — though hardly all — cheered Adams.A neuropathologist has examined the brains of 111 N.F.L. players — and 110 were found to have C.T.E., the degenerative disease linked to repeated blows to the head.“And that’s not a lie,” Adams said. “There’s so much sacrifice that we go through as a team, and just connecting as one and winning ballgames. There’s nothing like playing the game of football. But again, I’m all about making the game safer, that’s all I can say.”The crowd’s reaction to Adams’s response created an uncomfortable moment just minutes after Goodell alluded to a changing culture of the N.F.L. — a league in which players self-report head injuries with greater frequency but also understand and embrace the risks of playing.When those words left Adams’s mouth, Goodell betrayed no emotion.Asked about Adams’s comments in a brief interview with reporters afterward, Goodell tried to play them down.“What he was really making the point of is how much he loves the game and how passionate he is of the game — that he loves playing it, and it’s just something that means a great deal to him,” Goodell said.Asked how he perceived the fans’ applause, Goodell said it reflected their enthusiasm for football.“I think the fans understood the emotion of what he was saying,” Goodell said.The forum Monday, which also included running back Matt Forte, was one of the commissioner’s first speaking engagements since last week’s release of a study published in The Journal of the American Medical Association revealing that 110 of 111 donated brains from N.F.L. players showed signs of chronic traumatic encephalopathy, a degenerative brain disease connected to repeated head trauma. The disease, also known as C.T.E., is associated with symptoms including depression, dementia and memory loss.One caveat of the study was that the brains came from families who were concerned that the player had exhibited signs of C.T.E., which diminished the randomness of the sample. Goodell did not address that particular study, instead reiterating previous statements that the league has made several rule changes to reduce risks and is investing millions of dollars into research, but he underplayed the general effectiveness of concussion studies.“I think the one thing everyone agrees on is there’s an awful lot more questions than there are answers at this point,” Goodell said.Advertisement