By JAMES WAGNERJULY 27, 2017
SAN DIEGO — Earlier this week, Chris Flexen was with the Mets’ Class AA affiliate Binghamton in Akron, Ohio, when the team’s manager, Luis Rojas, called him into his office. Flexen was unsure what to expect.Flexen, a right-hander, had been pitching well. After recovering from knee surgery that cut short his first big league spring training this year, Flexen was dominating opponents, posting a 1.66 earned run average with 50 strikeouts over seven starts.Despite the success, it still seemed Flexen would need to pass through Class AAA Las Vegas to reach the majors. But the Mets, in the midst of a disappointing season and yet another injury to a starting pitcher, Zack Wheeler, dipped deeper into their farm system and summoned Flexen to the big leagues.And in a 7-5 loss to the San Diego Padres on Thursday, Flexen, 23, made his major league debut with nearly 40 family members and friends in attendance.Advertisement“I wasn’t expecting it this soon,” Flexen said, standing in front of his locker in the Mets’ clubhouse at Petco Park this week, still with a look of disbelief on his face. “I hoped to be up here whenever it happened. But it was pretty shocking. I was pretty stunned.”AdvertisementThe start was rockier than Flexen had hoped it would be. His command uneven, Flexen allowed four runs (three earned) on five hits and walked four.“A tough outing to swallow,” he said. “But I’m still living the dream here and my ultimate goal is to stay here and learn from those mistakes.”He was relieved by Tyler Pill, who surrendered three runs. The Mets rallied late behind Jay Bruce’s 26th home run of the season, yet it was not enough.“He’s got a good arm,” Manager Terry Collins said of Flexen. “He’s going to pitch a long time in this league. But you’ve got to command the strike zone.”Before the season, the Mets had high hopes in large part because of a talented and deep starting rotation. But injuries and poor performances quickly eroded those expectations.And now the Mets have turned to Flexen, who becomes the first starting pitcher in the organization to be promoted from Class AA to the majors since Mike Pelfrey in 2006.“It’s overwhelming, exciting, nerve-racking, all of the above,’’ Flexen said. “But most of all, I’m mostly excited.”Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.Over the years, the Mets have excelled at unearthing and developing starting pitching talent from the middle rounds of the draft. Jacob deGrom was a ninth-round pick in 2010 who has now become one of the best starters in the National League.AdvertisementRobert Gsellman (a 13th-round pick in 2011) and Seth Lugo (a 34th-round pick the same year) also turned into credible major league pitchers for the Mets. Could Flexen follow the same path?He was drafted out of Newark Memorial High in Newark, Calif., in the Bay Area, in the 14th round of the 2012 draft. The Mets lured him away from his commitment to Arizona State University with a signing bonus of $375,000.Flexen was also the quarterback on his high school team, but he loved baseball. He starred for his school’s team, playing second or third base on days he did not pitch. His most eye-catching attribute was his size: he was 6 foot 3 inches by the time he was 17.“He’s still got that baby face to him, but he’s got that frame. You can’t coach that,” said Phil Castellanos, Flexen’s high school baseball coach, adding: “I never had a kid go through the program work as hard as him. That’s why he is where he is today.”Flexen made the varsity team as a freshman in high school. By his sophomore year, he was the team’s ace. Two years later, the Mets drafted him.Like several pitchers in the Mets’ organization, Flexen has undergone Tommy John surgery. He had his operation in 2014 and in his first full season back, he posted a 3.56 earned run average with Class A St. Lucie.“He always had good stuff,” said Castellanos, who was planning to be in San Diego along with Flexen’s parents and grandparents on Thursday. “It was just a matter of staying healthy.”To protect Flexen from the Rule 5 draft, the Mets added him to the 40-man roster last winter. Flexen, who had already undergone off-season knee surgery, was scheduled to make his first big league spring training start in February but was scratched with right knee soreness. A bone chip was later removed.“I bounced back and I’m here,” he said. “This is the ultimate goal.”At Binghamton, Flexen excelled with strong command and an aggressive approach on the mound. His fastball velocity sat in the low-to-mid 90s. And in the ratings compiled by Baseball America, he went from being the 22nd-best prospect in the Mets’ farm system to No. 10.AdvertisementAnd on Thursday night he became a major leaguer, quicker than anyone might have thought.A version of this article appears in print on July 28, 2017, on Page B9 of the New York edition with the headline: A Mets Pitcher’s Call-Up From Class AA Is a Surprise to Him.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.