By THE ASSOCIATED PRESSJULY 1, 2017
Katie Ledecky led from start to finish in the 400-meter freestyle Friday night for her third title of the week at the United States National Championships in Indianapolis.Ledecky broke her own United States Open record with a time of 3 minutes 58.44 seconds. Leah Smith was second in 4:03.77 — the third time this week the two swimmers finished first and second. Ledecky has qualified in four individual events for this month’s world championships.Scott Feldman held Chicago’s depleted lineup to two singles over seven innings, Adam Duvall hit a three-run homer, and the Reds thumped the Cubs, 5-0, in Cincinnati.Feldman (7-5) did not allow a hit until Ian Happ singled with two outs in the sixth inning. Addison Russell singled in the seventh. Feldman struck out seven and walked two.AdvertisementAROUND THE MAJORS Adeiny Hechavarria hit a tying single in the ninth inning and Steven Souza followed with a three-run homer in the 10th to carry the Tampa Bay Rays past the Orioles, 6-4, in Baltimore.  Jason Vargas picked up his American League-leading 12th victory, Eric Hosmer hit a three-run homer and the Kansas City Royals defeated the visiting Minnesota Twins, 8-1.AdvertisementNovak Djokovic advanced to his third final of 2017 by beating Daniil Medvedev, 6-4, 6-4, at England’s Eastbourne International.The top-seeded Djokovic will meet second-seeded Gaël Monfils in the championship match.In the women’s tournament, Caroline Wozniacki played through an abdominal injury to beat Heather Watson, 6-2, 3-6, 7-5, in a semifinal. In the final she will face Karolina Pliskova, who advanced after Johanna Konta pulled out of their semifinal because of a spine injury.Washington re-signed defenseman Dmitry Orlov to a six-year, $30.6 million deal.Orlov will count $5.1 million against the salary cap through the 2022-23 season. General Manager Brian MacLellan announced the deal.Orlov, a 25-year-old Russian, was the Capitals’ most-improved player last season. He scored six goals and had a career-high 27 assists and 33 points in 82 games.TAMPA BAY ZEROS IN ON GIRARDI The Lightning and defenseman Dan Girardi are negotiating, and a deal appeared to be imminent, multiple news media outlets reported. Girardi, 33, had his contract bought out by the Rangers.David Lingmerth of Sweden shot his second straight five-under-par 65 at the PGA Tour’s Quicken Loans National to extend his lead to two shots over Australia’s Geoff Ogilvy in Potomac, Md. Ogilvy also shot a 65.Lingmerth used his reliable fade off the tee to avoid trouble and set up birdie opportunities. He has gone 34 straight holes without a bogey.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.IN THE HUNT FOR HER FIRST TITLE Danielle Kang, 24, who has never won a tournament during her six years as a pro, earned a share of the second-round lead at the KPMG Women’s PGA Championship in Olympia Fields, Ill. Sei Young Kim, the L.P.G.A. Tour’s 2015 rookie of the year and a six-time winner on tour, was tied for the lead. Kang and Kim each shot five-under 66s to reach seven-under 135.AdvertisementTWO ON TOP AT U.S. SENIOR OPEN Kenny Perry shot a six-under 64 at the PGA Tour Champions’ United States Senior Open to share the lead with Kirk Triplett at a record 11-under through two rounds in Peabody, Mass.PAIR TIED FOR LEAD IN FRANCE Alexander Bjork of Sweden and Adrian Otaegui of Spain shared the lead at eight-under at the European Tour’s French Open before play was suspended by rain in Guyancourt. Otaegui shot a five-under 66 after making six birdies. Bjork joined him at the top of the leaderboard after making up three shots in 13 holes.Oakland agreed to a five-year extension to keep guard Gabe Jackson under contract through the 2022 season, according to multiple news media reports.The deal was reportedly worth $56 million.Jackson has been a key part of the Raiders’ offensive line since being drafted in the third round in 2014. According to Pro Football Focus, he did not allow a sack in 628 pass-block snaps last season, the best rate for any guard in the league.RAVENS TIGHT END SUSPENDED AGAIN Baltimore tight end Darren Waller was suspended without pay for at least one year for violating the N.F.L.’s substance-abuse policy. It was the second time Waller has been suspended by the league for substance abuse.A second Florida greyhound trainer had his license suspended after state officials said dogs had tested positive for cocaine.Documents from the Florida Department of Business and Professional Regulation indicated that at least 12 animals in the care of the trainer Charles McClellan tested positive for the drug. The dogs raced at Bestbet Orange Park near Jacksonville.In a statement, the park said it supported the swift action taken by the state in suspending McClellan’s license.In May, the state revoked the license of a St. Petersburg trainer after dogs were found with cocaine in their systems.A version of this article appears in print on July 1, 2017, on Page D6 of the New York edition with the headline: Swimming; Ledecky Wins a Third Title, in Record Time.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.