By JAMES WAGNERJULY 24, 2017
SAN DIEGO — Injuries have come to define this lost season for the Mets, and Monday brought another installment.Before Jacob deGrom continued his dominant run in a 5-3 victory over the San Diego Padres on Monday, the Mets announced that Zack Wheeler, who has a history of arm trouble, would be placed on the disabled list with a stress injury to his right arm. They later explained that the injury was in the humerus, the upper arm bone, and that the issue had been bothering Wheeler off and on recently.“It’s soreness,” Wheeler said. “Bone soreness. It kind of aches.”Since he returned from a stint on the disabled list with biceps tendinitis on July 1, Wheeler has allowed 11 earned runs and walked 11 over 20 innings. In a 6-5 win over the Oakland Athletics on Saturday, he gave up five runs while walking four and striking out six over five innings.“Last start, it was bothering me a good bit, and I was able to pitch through it,” he said. “I’m not going to be dumb and try and pitch with something that will hurt me after missing two full seasons.”AdvertisementWheeler said his shoulder and his elbow, on which he had Tommy John surgery two years ago, felt “great.” But a recent CT scan showed irritation, though no fractures, in the bone.AdvertisementWith his second trip to the D.L. this season, Wheeler joined a majority of the Mets’ opening day rotation: Noah Syndergaard (latissimus tear), Matt Harvey (stress injury to his shoulder) and Robert Gsellman (hamstring strain).Steven Matz and Seth Lugo, both in the rotation now, missed the first two months of the season with elbow injuries. DeGrom is the only one of the Mets’ original seven potential starters from spring training who has not been on the disabled list.DeGrom (12-3) has been the Mets’ best pitcher this season thanks to a brilliant stretch this summer. He became the first Mets pitcher to win eight consecutive starts since Bobby Jones in 1997. In that span, deGrom has a 1.61 E.R.A.DeGrom struck out eight Padres and allowed two runs over eight innings, marking the fifth time over the past eight starts that he has thrown at least that many innings.“The thing that stands out the most is his competitiveness,” Manager Terry Collins said of deGrom. “This guy just doesn’t give in.”Get the big sports news, highlights and analysis from Times journalists, with distinctive takes on games and some behind-the-scenes surprises, delivered to your inbox every week.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.Thanks to an offense powered by two potential trade chips — infielder Asdrubal Cabrera (three hits) and outfielder Jay Bruce (two runs driven in) — deGrom had enough run support to win. Closer Addison Reed, who may be the Mets’ most desired trade asset, came within inches of coughing up a game-ending three-run homer to Jabari Blash, but the ball sailed just wide of the right-field foul pole, and Reed regrouped to strike him out before notching his 17th save of the season.Nevertheless, on days when deGrom has not pitched, the Mets have struggled to stay afloat. Their rotation’s 4.86 E.R.A. was the eighth worst in the major leagues entering Monday, and the team’s slide in the standings makes it a likely seller ahead of the July 31 nonwaiver trade deadline.AdvertisementWheeler is not expected to go anywhere. The Mets were built around their starting rotation, and a healthy Wheeler will most likely be crucial if they hope to be competitive next season.Wheeler refused to blame the arm soreness for his recent struggles but admitted it could have been a factor. He said the discomfort receded after it bothered him in the first inning of his most recent start.“I do have the feel of the pitch and the ball, so I should be able to command,” he said.There was no immediate timetable for Wheeler’s return. Collins said Wheeler would rest for a few days and then be re-evaluated.To fill in for Wheeler, the Mets will dig deep into their farm system. Chris Flexen, 23, a Mets 14th-round pick from the 2012 draft, will be called up from Class AA Binghamton, where he has posted a 1.85 E.R.A. in seven starts.The Mets bypassed Tyler Pill, who has been underwhelming as a spot starter at times this season. Pill took Wheeler’s place on the active roster on Monday but will pitch out of the bullpen this week.The time off may essentially end the Mets’ need to cap Wheeler’s innings this season. Because of the time away and the major surgery, the Mets were considering limiting Wheeler to about 125 innings this season. He was an early surprise this year with his good health and his consistent pitching.But with recent pitching struggles and two stints on the disabled list, Wheeler has thrown only 86 ⅓ innings.“There’s not really a plan for a two-year absence,” Wheeler said. “So we knew there was going to be some speed bumps, but we didn’t know what to expect.”INSIDE PITCHNearing a return, second baseman Neil Walker (hamstring) went 1 for 4 on Monday in his third minor league rehabilitation game with Class AAA Las Vegas. … Brandon Nimmo (partly collapsed lung) began a minor league rehabilitation assignment with Las Vegas. … Mets shortstop Jose Reyes stole his 500th career base on Monday. He is second among active players, trailing only the Marlins’ Ichiro Suzuki (508).A version of this article appears in print on July 25, 2017, on Page B11 of the New York edition with the headline: Mets’ Wheeler Lands on the D.L. With a Stress Injury.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.