AdvertisementSupported byBy Wallace MatthewsFor the most part, Aaron Judge has avoided the injury bug that has burdened the Yankees this summer. But on Friday, he did require some medical attention — from the dentist.After Brett Gardner hit a game-winning home run in the Yankees’ 6-5, 11-inning win over the Tampa Bay Rays on Thursday night, Judge jumped into a raucous victory celebration that proved costly when Gardner’s helmet hit him in the mouth, knocking out half of his front left tooth.But after a visit to a dentist the next morning, Judge showed up for the game on Friday night with his smile newly restored by a temporary cap on the tooth.“It’s all good,” Judge said in the Yankees’ clubhouse. “I had to sit and stare at it all night, but it’s fixed now, and we’re good to go.”Judge’s injury came about because he was concerned that one of his teammates would be injured by accidentally stepping on Gardner’s helmet, which he had tossed to the ground after crossing home plate.“The helmet kind of rolled in the middle of everybody, and I didn’t want anybody jumping on it and breaking an ankle,” Judge said. “So I just picked it up, and with everyone jumping up and down, I think I just hit it on someone’s back.”The helmet had come to rest on the back of Yankees catcher Austin Romine, who jumped just as Judge, behind him, bent his head forward.“It got me pretty good,” Judge said. “It kind of shocked me at first. I thought both my teeth got knocked in, so I was trying to cover up as best I can and get out of there. I tried to rush off the field before anyone could notice, but there were a lot of cameras around.”Much to Judge’s chagrin, the incident was captured on video and spread quickly on social media.“While I was in the back trying to figure out how to get it fixed, everyone was coming up to me and said, ‘Look what’s on Twitter,’” he said. “Unbelievable. But it’s over with now.”Judge’s injury was not the first time a baseball player has been injured during a celebration at home plate. In May 2010, Kendrys Morales of the Los Angeles Angels fractured an ankle by jumping on home plate after hitting a game-winning home run against the Seattle Mariners, an injury that cost him the rest of that season and much of the following season.“We’re very relieved,” said Joe Girardi, the Yankees’ manager. “I’m sure it was an uncomfortable night for him last night, but he’s back in the lineup. I’m sure the ribbing from his teammates will continue for a few days.”The chipped tooth was Judge’s latest hardship since the All-Star break, after which little has gone right for him. Judge won the Home Run Derby the night before the All-Star Game, but since the break, he has batted .180, with just three home runs — including one Friday night — and nine hits in 50 at-bats. Over the 14 games since the break, Judge’s batting average has dropped by 18 points, to .308, and his slugging average has plummeted by 40 points, to .644. He still leads the American League with 33 home runs and is second in R.B.I. with 74.Judge, who was playing right field and batting third in the lineup on Friday, accepted the dental misadventure with customary good humor. ”Next time I pick up a helmet,” he said, “I’m tossing it.”Advertisement