By TIM CASEYFEB. 21, 2017
Several times this season, Northeastern forward Alex Murphy and Oregon guard Dylan Ennis have exchanged text messages and chatted via social media. After Ennis posted a highlights video of himself on Twitter last month, Murphy sent him a reply.“Keep killin’ and leading bro!” Murphy wrote. “Great to see you back out there doing your thing.”Despite going to colleges more than 3,000 miles apart and having started conversing only last summer, Murphy and Ennis have become friendly because of their shared experiences. Murphy, 24, and Ennis, 25, are both competing for their third colleges, are healthy after dealing with injuries last season and are rare players for whom the N.C.A.A. has granted a sixth year of eligibility.The N.C.A.A. allows Division I athletes to have five calendar years to play four seasons of competition, giving them a cushion in case they sustain an injury to have a redshirt year. The organization is strict about granting sixth years and does so only when colleges can prove players lost two seasons of participation because of reasons beyond their control, like injury or illness. The N.C.A.A. said it could not provide a tally for the total number of athletes who have received a sixth year.Shortly after Ennis found out he was cleared for a sixth year on June 30, Murphy reached out to him and asked for advice on how to navigate the long process of applying for a sixth year. Ennis had followed a similar path, sending a message via Instagram to Northwestern State guard Jalan West after the N.C.A.A. granted West a sixth year in May. Ennis said West helped him deal with the uncertainty of waiting for the N.C.A.A. to make its decision, so he in turn wanted to encourage Murphy to have a positive attitude and submit the required paperwork in a detailed and timely manner.Advertisement“I knew how hard it is to not know what your future holds,” Ennis said. “If he knew, ‘I just want to go pro,’ then that would have been great. But he knew he wanted to come back, but it was out of his control. I just wanted to do everything I could do to help him in that situation.”AdvertisementMurphy, a versatile 6-foot-8 forward, began his college career at Duke in 2011 as one of the top prospects in his class. But that fall, he sustained a concussion during a practice. When Murphy took a while to recover, the Blue Devils redshirted him.The next season, Murphy averaged only 6.3 minutes a game and played a total of four minutes in Duke’s three N.C.A.A. tournament games. His role remained limited early in the 2013-14 season, so he transferred after five games.“A lot of people now look back and they ask me, ‘Do you regret going to Duke or do you wish you would’ve done things differently?’” Murphy said. “I say, ‘Absolutely not.’”He added: “I think I grew up a lot during my two and a half years there. The things that I learned there definitely helped prepare me for what was coming in the future.”In December 2013, Murphy enrolled at Florida, where his older brother, Erik, had played. Per N.C.A.A. rules, Murphy had to sit out a year, so he could not return until the second semester of the 2014-15 season. By then, the Gators had their roles set, and Murphy averaged only 5.1 points in 14.2 minutes per game.Murphy expected to play more last season, but he injured his right foot during Florida’s first exhibition game. He later played briefly in three regular season games before injuring the foot again in early January and missing the rest of the season.Instead of pursuing a professional career overseas, Murphy decided to apply for a sixth year and transfer to Northeastern, which is about 80 miles from his family’s home in Rhode Island. He also had a close relationship with Northeastern Coach Bill Coen, a longtime friend of Murphy’s father.AdvertisementStill, there was no guarantee Murphy would ever play for Northeastern. He had seen other players be denied a sixth year. When the N.C.A.A. finally cleared Murphy in mid-September, he knew he was fortunate.Get the big sports news, highlights and analysis from Times journalists, with distinctive takes on games and some behind-the-scenes surprises, delivered to your inbox every week.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.“I appreciate every day when I step in here, the fact that I’m healthy, the fact that I can play this game,” said Murphy, who is averaging 14.2 points and a team-high 5.9 rebounds per game. “You can’t take that for granted at all.”Ennis, a 6-foot-2 point guard, is also grateful to still play in college. After spending his freshman season at Rice, Ennis transferred to Villanova. During the 2014-15 season, his second with the Wildcats, Ennis started all 36 games for a team that finished 33-3. Still, he decided to transfer to Oregon, where he was immediately eligible.At Oregon, Ennis sustained a foot injury during a Ducks practice in October 2015, spent several weeks rehabilitating and returned to play briefly in three games before breaking his foot against Oregon State in early January of last year.Ennis contemplated leaving school and starting his professional career. But eight days later, after watching Alabama defeat Clemson in the 2016 college football national title game, Ennis changed his mind. He yearned to be in that spotlight, competing for a national championship.“After that game, there was something in me that said I wanted to come back,” Ennis said. “A lot of guys go play professional basketball and they realize they don’t enjoy the game like they did in college. I said, ‘If I got one more year and I could do it, why not?’”Still, applying for a sixth year wasn’t easy for Ennis, who had to complete paperwork and wait patiently for months as the N.C.A.A. did its due diligence. In late June, Ennis was in Canada at his sister’s high school graduation party when he received a text message from Bill Clever, Oregon’s assistant athletic director for compliance.“I remember just yelling. I was like, ‘I got my year back!’” Ennis said. “All my family members, they all jumped on me. Everybody was happy.”AdvertisementSo far this season, Ennis is averaging a career-high 11.1 points a game and has started all 28 games for No. 6 Oregon (24-4), which is considered an N.C.A.A. tournament title contender.Murphy, meanwhile, is hoping to extend his career and play in the postseason, too. Northeastern is only 14-14 over all and 7-9 in the Colonial Athletic Association, but the conference tournament champion gets an automatic bid in the N.C.A.A. tournament.No matter how their careers end, Murphy and Ennis are enjoying being injury-free and playing major roles. They are also happy to have formed an unlikely friendship.“We joke with each other that we’re the old guys on the team now,” Murphy said.A version of this article appears in print on February 22, 2017, on Page B7 of the New York edition with the headline: Granted Bonus Year, 2 Players Forge Bond.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.