

 Michael Powell
 

SPORTS OF THE TIMES
MARCH 12, 2017
NEW BRUNSWICK, N.J. — Ah, how grandness beckoned. When Rutgers officials announced in 2012 that their university would join the Big Ten, one of the nation’s premier athletic conferences, the sun itself seemed to burn brighter.Teams from Rutgers, New Jersey’s state university, would battle mighty Ohio State and Michigan. High school seniors would forward applications by the truckload. And the money from those gilded television contracts — oh, good God, that money would pour in.“It’s a transformative day for Rutgers University,” Tim Pernetti, the athletic director then, told reporters.I recently placed a call to Mark Killingsworth, a Rutgers economics professor and football fan, and asked about that transformation. He sighed. He had led a faculty revolt against Rutgers’s money loser of an athletic department, which continues to siphon off tens of millions of dollars intended for academics.AdvertisementRutgers is a fine school, but David Hughes, an anthropology professor and the president of the faculty union, noted that 30 percent of the curriculum is taught by contract teachers, many of them paid like piecework seamstresses. And Rutgers’s tuition costs rank high nationally.“It’s not rocket science; this program is a mess,” Killingsworth said of the athletic program. “We are not champions at much, but our deficit is the biggest in the Big Ten.”AdvertisementThe faculty council is set to vote on a motion deploring this state of affairs. The athletic department has run an annual deficit of at least $20 million since 2006; its current deficit is slightly larger than the sum of all the deficits in every other Big Ten athletic department.All of which brings us to the athletic department’s 2016 financial report to the N.C.A.A. The Star-Ledger obtained this document recently; it showed a blood-red deficit of $28.6 million. The 64-page report had a one-line notation: “Other Operating Revenue: $10,495,912.”It turned out that the university bank quietly lent $10.5 million to the athletic department to keep it afloat and pay severance costs for expensive and failed coaches. That loan came weighted with an interest rate of 5.75 percent; the cost of repaying it will run north of $18 million, according to university documents.Rutgers also diverted $11 million in student fees and $17.1 million from its general fund to cover the athletic shortfall. The average undergraduate now pays more than $300 in activities fees exclusively for the university’s N.C.A.A. teams.This is the section of this column I customarily would set aside for Rutgers officials to respond. They could slice and dice numbers, and explain why the ink is not as crimson as it appears. They could assert the department is run with a steely hand on the tiller.Late last month, I requested an interview with the athletic director, Patrick Hobbs. A day later, I also asked to speak with the president, Robert Barchi. These requests were met with silence.AdvertisementOn Thursday, I asked again, and a spokeswoman offered an off-the-record interview with Hobbs. I declined. An email statement soon arrived, saying in part, “Rutgers Athletics will be in a position to generate a positive cash flow for the university after we receive our full share of Big Ten revenues in 2021.”Let me translate: That the athletic department has been run with no regard for sound financial practice is a trifle. Soon enough, piles of dough from the Big Ten’s billion-dollar-plus television contract will be deposited on the front steps of the athletic department. Its take could amount to $40 million.This is like handing Jesse James the keys to Fort Knox.Deficits are not the only problem plaguing Rutgers athletics. Its football and basketball teams are impressively scandal-scarred. Here is a brief recap:In 2012, not long after Rutgers announced it was joining the Big Ten, Pernetti, as athletic director, received a video that showed the Scarlet Knights’ basketball coach, Mike Rice Jr., berating his players and using homophobic slurs. For punctuation, the coach hurled basketballs at their heads. Eventually Pernetti suspended Rice for a few games. A few months later, ESPN obtained and broadcast the video. This time, Pernetti fired Rice.Alas, this was too late. Pernetti, who engineered Rutgers’s entrance into the Big Ten, tumbled out the door, followed by the university’s general counsel.Barchi, the president, hired Julie Hermann as athletic director. He described her as “one of the most respected athletic administrators in the country.” Her pay and benefits were nearly half a million dollars.More or less immediately, it was reported that Hermann, who earlier served as the volleyball coach at Tennessee, had demeaned her players as “whores, alcoholics and learning disabled.”Hermann was shown the door in 2015 in a purge that also claimed Kyle Flood, the football coach.Flood was accused of trying to persuade a dance appreciation teacher to change a failing grade for one of his players. Seven of his players were arrested, on charges including armed burglary and an unprovoked punch that broke a student’s jaw. An additional 16 players tested positive for banned substances, reportedly marijuana, which under university rules merited suspensions. The football staff covered this up.More seriously, Rutgers, like other “big-time” schools, chooses pretty female students as “ambassadors” to show male recruits around campus. The N.C.A.A. has accused Rutgers of allowing two ambassadors to meet with the recruits in dorm rooms, which is prohibited.Get the big sports news, highlights and analysis from Times journalists, with distinctive takes on games and some behind-the-scenes surprises, delivered to your inbox every week.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.Rutgers’s fired athletic officials will draw severance payments for years to come. Hermann is owed about $1.2 million over the next two years. Flood will pull down $2.1 million. Eddie Jordan, the basketball coach who, refreshingly, was fired for losing rather than for abusing his players, will receive almost $1.9 million.AdvertisementHence the athletic department’s need for a loan.Pernetti no longer draws a university check. No wolf has arrived at his door. In one of his last acts as athletic director, he persuaded Rutgers to pay $7 million to end its contract with a sports marketing firm. Shortly after he was fired, Rutgers signed an 11-year, $65 million contract with IMG College to handle sports marketing for the university.Two years ago, IMG hired Pernetti as president for multimedia, covering Rutgers and other colleges.An intriguing aspect of Rutgers’s dive into big-time sports is that each time a coach or an athletic director left soaked in scandal, the successor received more money. The departed football coach made $1.25 million; the new coach makes $2 million. The departed basketball coach made about $1.1 million; the new coach makes $1.6 million.As athletic director, Hobbs earns $110,000 more per year than Hermann did. Hobbs is quick-witted. He described the piling up of severance payments to dismissed coaches as “investments that need to be made.”Hobbs once served as dean of Seton Hall’s law school, where he displayed a gift for fund-raising and an impressive ear for politics. Over the years, Jon Corzine, the former New Jersey senator and governor, had donated $1 million to Seton Hall. In 2004, his girlfriend, Carla Katz, applied to Seton Hall’s law school. He wrote a letter of recommendation for her.Katz was president of the state’s largest public employees’ union. The law school awarded her a coveted presidential scholarship. Hobbs said he had no idea Corzine had written a letter of recommendation. He took exception to suggestions that a law school student “could receive a scholarship as a favor.”Gov. Chris Christie was a graduate of the Seton Hall law school and a donor to his alma mater. When he served as a federal prosecutor, he got to know Hobbs. After an investigation of Bristol-Myers Squibb in 2005, Christie’s office cut a deal. It would not charge the company with securities fraud, and in exchange the company would pay a fine to fund a $5 million professorship of business ethics at the law school. (The Justice Department since has barred this practice, out of concern that prosecutors would start creating what it called “summer camps” at favored institutions.)When Christie was elected governor, he appointed Hobbs to his transition committee. After that unfortunate business with the George Washington Bridge, he made Hobbs his $75,600-a-year part-time ombudsman. Hobbs had no office in the Capitol and produced no public work product.AdvertisementA month ago, Hobbs and Killingsworth, the economics professor, agreed to answer questions for NJ.com, in a de facto email debate. Hobbs waxed joyful.“Our teams and student-athletes have enjoyed a great deal of success in the Big Ten,” he said, citing women’s soccer, wrestling and lacrosse.These are fine sports. The Big Ten, however, prays at the altar of the grand moneymakers, football and basketball. The Rutgers football team finished 2-10 over all in 2016, 0-9 in the Big Ten. The men’s basketball team, Hobbs noted, got off to a fine 11-1 start. Alas, the team was beating up on mugs. When it stepped into the maw of the Big Ten season, Rutgers won three games and lost 15 before going 1-1 in the conference tournament.“The athletic department has already budgeted for a 2 percent increase in student fees,” Killingsworth said. “I have a novel idea: Why don’t they learn to live within their means?”That’s a small-time question for a big-time athletic program.Email: powellm@nytimes.comA version of this article appears in print on March 12, 2017, on Page SP1 of the New York edition with the headline: After Years of Disgrace, Rutgers Drifts in Money Pit.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.See More »