

 Billy Witz
 

ON BASEBALL
MAY 20, 2016
OAKLAND, Calif. — When Oakland Athletics outfielder Josh Reddick settled under a fly ball on Thursday night, Carlos Beltran retreated to second base, where he was as startled as everyone else in the stadium when the ball popped out of Reddick’s glove and dropped to the grass.But Beltran was nearly as startled when he arrived at third base and glanced up at the scoreboard. Suddenly he felt queasy. It read: two outs.“I’m like, ‘Oh my God,’” Beltran said.Beltran had simply forgotten how many outs there were. If he had remembered that there were two outs, he would have been running at the crack of the bat and would have scored easily. Instead, he was left at third base, and the score remained tied when the next batter, Starlin Castro, ripped a line drive that was snagged by Athletics third baseman Danny Valencia.Beltran was able to explain what had happened in good humor because his blunder had not cost the Yankees the game. Indeed, he did his best to atone for it by belting a two-run, ninth-inning homer that finally provided the Yankees a cushion in their 4-1 victory.Advertisement“Yeah, terrible mistake,” Beltran said with a smile. “I’m sorry that I’m laughing, but it’s a mistake that unfortunately can happen in baseball.”AdvertisementThat is true. As Manager Joe Girardi pointed out, there is probably not a player who has been in the major leagues for a while who has not at some point forgotten how many outs there were. Beltran sheepishly admitted that it had happened to him before, so he could not promise that it would not happen again.It happened in the World Series last October when Kansas City right fielder Alex Rios thought there were two outs when there was really one, and did not throw home when he had a good chance to nail Curtis Granderson trying to score on a fly ball. Like Beltran, Rios was relieved that night when his team won.Get the big sports news, highlights and analysis from Times journalists, with distinctive takes on games and some behind-the-scenes surprises, delivered to your inbox every week.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.Beltran said his mistake had brought him several innings of anxiety.“I felt like I got caught up praying for four innings that we got the lead and would be able to win this one,” he said.What is troubling for the Yankees is that Beltran is not the only one who has recently spent time whispering invocations. Third baseman Chase Headley, who was out of the lineup Friday night, has been picked off base and has thrown to the wrong base. Catcher Brian McCann allowed a runner to take two bases when he loafed after a passed ball. Shortstop Didi Gregorius was thrown out trying to take an extra base, and pitcher Michael Pineda did not look back Arizona’s Paul Goldschmidt when Goldschmidt was a third of the way to third base as Pineda delivered a pitch.That was all in the last three days.The list could have been longer had Jacoby Ellsbury not been hit in the head by the baseball that was most likely going to beat him to the bag when he stretched a double into a triple — and taken home when the ball bounced into the stands.Such mental mistakes and miscalculations can be infuriating to fans who may not be able to fully understand why Mark Teixeira is in a funk at the plate because they have never tried to hit a 95-mile-per-hour fastball. But when the mistakes are the types that are drilled out of Little Leaguers — well, what’s the excuse for that?Girardi said such blunders were addressed individually by the coaching staff.“There’s nothing that goes unnoticed here, whether it’s a bad read, whether it’s a mental mistake — everything is always talked about,” Girardi said Friday. “Sometimes it’s trying too hard; sometimes it’s just a mental mistake. The mental mistakes are the ones that bother you the most, because those are the ones you have more control over.”AdvertisementGirardi said that today’s players were given so much information on where to be positioned and which pitches to swing at that he wondered whether they had become too programmed. But that would not seem to apply to the Yankees, whose mistakes in recent days have been committed mostly by veterans who know better.Girardi also insisted that the Yankees devoted as much time to fundamentals as ever.“I take full responsibility,” he said. “I always do. Our job is to teach and to tell them. I’m never going to back away from that. I’m the guy that’s in charge here, and I always take full responsibility, for everything that happens.”So it is that Beltran is not the only one who was able to breathe easier. The Yankees managed to win on Wednesday in Arizona and on Thursday in Oakland, playing through their mental miscues. That is admirable, but for a team that is struggling to find its offensive muscle and a full rotation and cannot count on its redoubtable relievers — Dellin Betances, Andrew Miller and Aroldis Chapman — to pitch every night, the Yankees have plenty to surmount.It would be good if they did not have to overcome themselves.A version of this article appears in print on May 21, 2016, on Page D3 of the New York edition with the headline: Blunders Hurt Only Egos, So Far.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.See More »