AdvertisementSupported byCavaliers 108, Raptors 89 | Cleveland leads series, 2-0By Scott CacciolaCLEVELAND — At least the Toronto Raptors mixed it up. They missed layups and 3-pointers, midrange jumpers and hook shots, ensuring that they were equal-opportunity bricklayers. On Thursday night, with hope already in short supply, the Raptors slogged their way through the final minutes of the first half, missing nine straight field-goal attempts.It was a stretch of ineptitude from which they could not recover — not in the playoffs, and especially not against an opponent as fearsome as the Cleveland Cavaliers, who feasted on Toronto’s lapses en route to a 108-89 victory in Game 2 of the Eastern Conference finals at Quicken Loans Arena.The victory was more of the same for the Cavaliers, who took a two-games-to-none series lead in running their overall postseason record to 10-0. More of LeBron James, who collected 23 points, 11 rebounds and 11 assists for another triple-double. More of Kyrie Irving, who scored 26 points. And more stout defense against a weary opponent. The Cavaliers led by 14 at the half.“We just got a great team,” Coach Tyronn Lue said, “and they’re playing great basketball right now.”DeMar DeRozan scored 22 points for the Raptors, but everyone else labored. Kyle Lowry, whose outside touch has been a persistent problem in the playoffs, finished with 10 points while going 4 of 14 from the field and 1 of 8 from 3-point range. The Raptors shot 40.2 percent over all.“I know I can be more effective,” Lowry said, adding, “I’ve been getting good looks that I’ve been missing, and I don’t think I’ll be missing any more of those.”Before the game, Raptors Coach Dwane Casey tried to reassure everyone that his players were confident despite “getting spanked by, like, 30” in Game 1. (The Raptors actually lost by 31, but who’s counting?) Casey added that his team had already proved its toughness this season.“Nobody’s getting ready to jump off a building or anything like that,” he said.But the series has quickly turned into a struggle of the highest order for the Raptors, who cannot handle James. He dunked, passed to open teammates and muscled his way to the free-throw line. Toronto’s best chance at this point might be having Customs stop him at the border.Game 3 is scheduled for Saturday night at Air Canada Centre.The Raptors sought solutions after being blown out in Tuesday’s opener. In Game 1, the Raptors chose to defend the 3-point line, so the Cavaliers drove for layups. Ahead of Game 2, Casey knew he would need to make adjustments, despite the continued absence of his starting center, Jonas Valanciunas, with a sprained ankle.“They’re further along in their building process than we are,” Casey said of the Cavaliers before the game, “and we’re trying to get what they have. To do that, you’ve got to do multiple things. You’ve got to outwork them. You’ve got to out-scrap them.”With all that in mind, Casey started Luis Scola at power forward in place of Patrick Patterson with the hope that Patterson would help anchor the team’s sluggish second unit. The Raptors also tried to ratchet up their defensive pressure in the paint, with mixed results.The Cavaliers made two 3-pointers in the first five minutes, and James collected six assists in the first quarter.But after the Raptors went ahead by a single point midway through the second quarter, they fell apart. The Cavaliers closed the half on a 20-5 run.Through two games, the Raptors have not created much of a problem for the Cavaliers, who are now being critiqued for the quality of their postseason opponents. After breezing past the Detroit Pistons and the Atlanta Hawks in the first two rounds, the Cavaliers have spent this week roughing up a team that finished the regular season with 56 wins.“We haven’t overlooked any steps along this process,” James said, “and I think that’s part of the reason we’re in this position today.”Compared to the meat grinder out west, with the Golden State Warriors and the Oklahoma City Thunder taking turns pummeling one another, the Cavaliers’ path to the N.B.A. finals looks like a smooth ride on the autobahn. But is that a product of lesser competition or the Cavaliers’ dominant play? Perhaps a bit of both, not that it matters to Cleveland.“I don’t care about that,” Lue said. “We just got to win games.”By that standard, the Cavaliers are doing just fine.Advertisement