By TIM ROHANMARCH 6, 2016
PORT ST. LUCIE, Fla. —  At some point near the end of spring training, Tim Teufel, the Mets’ third-base coach, will gather the team for a meeting to demonstrate and decode the hand signs they will use this season. One sequence of signs may tell a batter to bunt, or tell a runner to steal, or tell them both that the hit-and-run is on. Teufel has about 10 signs, and he uses his own elaborate system to relay them, just to make the enterprise that much harder for an opponent to pick up on.Most years, Teufel keeps some of his system the same, tweaking it here and there. But this year, because Daniel Murphy signed with the Washington Nationals in free agency and Bob Geren left to take a coaching job with the Los Angeles Dodgers, Teufel is starting over — the baseball equivalent of changing the locks after a bad breakup.“The way I do them,” Teufel said, “no one will get them.”When players change teams, the Mets generally believe, no one is above stealing signs, but Murphy’s situation is somewhat different. Not only does he know the Mets’ inner workings after nearly a decade in the organization, but he also joined the Nationals, the team most likely to stand between the Mets and a division title.Murphy now appears to be at the center of a burgeoning rivalry. Last year, Washington was the heavy favorite in the National League East, but the Mets, with Murphy helping to lead the way, swept the Nationals twice down the stretch and won the division. After the disappointing finish, the Nationals replaced Manager Matt Williams with Dusty Baker and signed Murphy, hoping he would provide a veteran presence.AdvertisementThe Nationals placed Murphy’s spring training locker next to Bryce Harper’s, in a corner of the room with other veteran leaders. Harper, who last season became the fourth-youngest player to win a Most Valuable Player Award, began studying Murphy’s routine in the batting cage and the weight room and picking his brain about the game.AdvertisementBaker figured that at some point this season, Murphy could offer some useful tips about the Mets during scouting meetings.“As long as they don’t change too much of their personnel, he could be a tremendous asset to us,” Baker said. “I mean, we took one of their spiritual leaders, one of their team leaders. And we didn’t take him; they gave him to us.”Get the big sports news, highlights and analysis from Times journalists, with distinctive takes on games and some behind-the-scenes surprises, delivered to your inbox every week.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.Baseball, however, does not rely on set plays. When a player changes teams, he cannot take a playbook with him; his knowledge about his former teammates is harder to define. Mets General Manager Sandy Alderson pointed out that much of the information on plays could be quantified with statistics and was widely distributed.Jerry Blevins, a left-handed reliever the Mets acquired from the Nationals last year, said the Mets did not “interrogate” him about the Nationals when he arrived “because there are no secrets in baseball, for the most part; everything we do is documented.”The one secret, then, may be a team’s signs and its system of relaying them.When a Met turns to Teufel, the first thing he looks for is an indicator, a sign that tells the player that the actual sign is coming. It could be as simple as Teufel tugging at his ear. Without the indicator, Teufel’s hand motions are meaningless.Once the indicator has been given, Teufel uses a series of gestures to communicate the signal. That could involve touching his belt, his hat — anything. At any point, though, Teufel could also use a wipe-off move, a gesture meaning the sign is off. That way, he can toggle back and forth, putting the sign on and taking it off.All the while, Teufel also uses diversions. For example, he could communicate to the players that his right hand is relaying the actual sign while his left hand is a decoy. The system can become so complicated that sometimes he puts a sign on by accident and has to erase it.Advertisement“I can put a sign on, take it off, put it back on, take it off,” Teufel said. “You can’t follow it all. It happens too quickly. You may think you’ve got it, but you don’t really.”The Mets also use signs when defending against bunts. Teufel relays a sign from the dugout to David Wright at third base, and that tells the infielders, the pitcher and the catcher where to be. Those signs will also change this spring.The Mets figure they cannot trust the Nationals at all. As Nationals General Manager Mike Rizzo said, “they’re the king of the mountain, and we’re trying to knock them off.”A version of this article appears in print on March 7, 2016, on Page D2 of the New York edition with the headline: To Avoid a Steal, the Mets Change Their Signs.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.