By BRAD SPURGEONMAY 19, 2016
For auto racing fans, the month of May is synonymous with two of the world’s most famous car races, the Monaco Grand Prix and the Indianapolis 500. A third exceptional race, the 24 Hours of Le Mans, then follows in mid-June. Those three races, along with Nascar, represent the highest level of car racing, and the events are grandiose, multiday, or even weeklong spectacles in which the cars are showcased through technical verifications, practice and qualifying sessions, and, finally, the races.This May, the Formula E series is also vying for the attention of racing fans with its Berlin ePrix on Saturday. Even though the horsepower and speed of the Formula E cars is far below the cars in other categories, some drivers say that the overall challenge of the electric series, now in its second season, is greater than that of other series.In Formula E, the track action — practice, qualifying and racing — and the drivers’ off-track appearances — for the media, fans and sponsors — all happen on a single day, Saturday. And while in all other series drivers have one car to race and set up, in the environmentally ambitious Formula E series, drivers must prepare and drive two cars because the battery charge is limited. They switch cars mid-race.“I love the fact that it’s only one day,” said Nick Heidfeld, a former Formula One driver who now drives for the Mahindra Formula E team. “The reason I like it is because my whole career was always Friday practice, Saturday qualifying and Sunday race. That was more sensible probably, because you have more time to work on the car. But this is just a huge challenge and completely different.”AdvertisementFitting everything into a single day also allows the electric series to run its ePrix through the streets of major world capitals, like Berlin, Buenos Aires, London and Paris. Such cities might be less inclined to close off their streets if racing activities extended across several days.AdvertisementArranging the workload within a single day means that drivers are on the go from the first practice sessions, starting at 8:15 a.m., to the post-race interviews with the media, ending around 7 p.m. During the day, they must also find the best setup on the car in practice, aim for the fastest lap in qualifying and then compete in the race. In between all of that, they have to meet sponsors, fans and the media.“Because it is done all in one day, the format of the weekend makes it tricky,” said Lucas di Grassi, another former Formula One driver, who won the Paris ePrix race last month for the ABT Schaeffler Audi Sport team and who is leading the series.“If we stayed here for five days testing and finding the limit, drivers who take longer to find the limit will come closer to those who find the limit earlier,” he added. “But because we have one hour of free practice, one lap in qualifying and then the race, either you find the limit there without crashing or you are going to be nowhere. The car is not the quickest, but it is extremely difficult to drive, the level of the difficulty of getting everything correct is very high.”As a result, he said, it’s necessary to be extremely precise in looking for setup tweaks. Any change is likely to stay with the driver throughout the race, and if it’s wrong, he will pay for it.Mark Preston, team principal of Team Aguri, said that this need for precision marked the entire day.“If you have a problem, just one problem — like a car stopping on track during one of the sessions — because you’ve only got two sessions of practice, then you’ve lost a quarter of your whole preparation for qualifying,” he said.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.“When we won the race last year it was one of those weekends where everything just flowed toward the end,” Preston added. “We had no problems on that car. And so you’ll see that if anybody can just go through the weekend with no problems, it’s that — you have to get it perfectly right. It’s not just all about a screaming fastest lap in qualifying.”Paradoxically, the challenges of Formula E car technology lend themselves less to this single-day format than the technology in other series might, Heidfeld suggested.“In Formula E, we need longer to charge the batteries, whereas refueling is much quicker, so this is also a limiting factor for us,” he said.Advertisement“I don’t see a reason why this format wouldn’t be possible elsewhere,” Heidfeld added. “Because even in Formula One and other series, it is not as limited as in the past, where they had parts that lasted only one outing or one qualifying session. This has now changed, so the parts should last.”For Bruno Senna, another former Formula One driver now racing in Formula E, all of these factors mean that the electric series may not be the fastest, but it is one of the most exhausting and challenging series for a driver.“I would say that WEC is a much more relaxed championship than Formula E is,” Senna said, referring to the World Endurance Championship, of which the 24 Hours of Le Mans is the most famous race. “There, your workload is shared with the other driver, so you’re working together. In Formula E you have that one hour and 15 minutes of practice before you actually qualify and race.”“And qualifying is one lap, the race is also a short race,” he added. “So you don’t have enough time to feel yourself into a place. You go to all of these crazy new street circuits, they change every year. It’s a tough championship, extremely competitive for the drivers, not really relaxing, but fun nevertheless.”Ultimately, a single-day event is also much easier for spectators to commit to, which is one of the main goals of the ambitious, innovative Formula E series: to attract new fans.“It is good for the fans who get to see everything in one day,” said Oliver Turvey, a British driver at the NEXTEV TCR team.A version of this special report appears in print on May 20, 2016, in The International New York Times.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.See More »