By THE ASSOCIATED PRESSMAY 19, 2016
SCOTTSDALE, Ariz. — Jose Reyes took the last of his dozen or so swings, stepped out of the batting cage and did a little dance to the beat of the music playing from a small radio in the grass near his feet.Contrite but happy to be back on a baseball field, Reyes worked out at the Colorado Rockies’ spring training complex on Thursday, his first step in returning from a 59-day suspension for violating Major League Baseball’s new domestic violence policy.“It’s good to be on the field and put that stuff behind me,” Reyes said. “I’m sorry. I made a mistake and will stand here like a man. I just have to try to be a better man, a better husband.”Reyes did not participate in spring training and was suspended through May 31 after being charged with domestic violence for an altercation with his wife in Hawaii last October. Prosecutors dropped the charge before a scheduled April 4 trial after saying Reyes’s wife was not cooperating. Reyes became the second player to be suspended under baseball’s domestic violence policy — Yankees closer Aroldis Chapman was the other — and will lose close to $7 million of his $22 million salary while sitting out.Advertisement“I put myself in this situation and I’m sorry about it,” Reyes said. “I need to put this in the past and continue with my life and my career. Human beings make mistakes. Like I said, I’m sorry to put Rockies fans in this kind of situation.”AdvertisementReyes stood out at Colorado’s extended spring training, not just with his purple workout shirt among the gray-shirted youngsters, but with his slick fielding and quick bat.A four-time All-Star shortstop with the Mets, Reyes spent about two hours on the Rockies’ back fields, working with some of the younger players while fielding grounders for about 20 minutes. The young players seemed to enjoy being around a player of his stature, laughing as he joked around on the field, some of them sneaking peeks at him around the backstop.Get the big sports news, highlights and analysis from Times journalists, with distinctive takes on games and some behind-the-scenes surprises, delivered to your inbox every week.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.Reyes spent some time in the batting cage, then waited for the others to go through situational hitting drills before taking swings from both sides of the plate.“Being here on the field again, I feel like I’m 18 again, working out with those young kids, great talents moving around, that made me feel good,” Reyes said.Reyes, 32, can return on June 1, but it is unclear what his role will be when he gets back.The rookie Trevor Story has excelled in his place, hitting .277 with 11 homers and 28 R.B.I. through Colorado’s first 38 games, and the Rockies appear to have no intention of taking him out of the starting lineup.Reyes has lost some of his range, according to defensive metrics, but he still runs well and hit a combined .274 with seven homers and 53 R.B.I. last season with Toronto and Colorado.Reyes is due $41 million in guaranteed salary over the next two seasons, so the Rockies will need to decide whether to put him in a backup infielder role or trade him.Advertisement“We haven’t talked logistics of his fit on this club yet,” Rockies Manager Walt Weiss said this week. “But we will at some point. I’m just letting it play out.”Reyes has been working out on his own since November, but is way behind players who went through spring training and two months of the season. He still needs to get his timing right on the field, take swings against live pitching and pick up all the nuances that come with playing baseball at full speed in game situations.“When you get on the field, it’s a different ballgame,” he said. “There’s a lot of stuff that doesn’t feel right when you get on the baseball field, but my body feels great.”A version of this article appears in print on May 20, 2016, on Page B13 of the New York edition with the headline: Reyes on Way Back From Suspension.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.