AdvertisementSupported byYankees 4, Diamondbacks 2By Billy WitzPHOENIX — By the time Hal Steinbrenner’s rather tepid criticism of several of his Yankees — statements of fact, really — had carried across the country from New York, landing on ears in the visitors’ clubhouse, it was as if the blustery ghost of Steinbrenners past had delivered a pound-the-fist-on-his-desk message.Chase Headley, Mark Teixeira and Michael Pineda — who were mentioned by Steinbrenner as underperforming — took turns being grilled by reporters. (Luis Severino, the other player named by Steinbrenner, is injured and away from the team, so he was spared.)The line of questioning went like this: How does it feel to be singled out by the owner? Is it extra motivation? Does it add more pressure?Manager Joe Girardi, though he and General Manager Brian Cashman were exonerated by Steinbrenner, nevertheless bravely located a sword to fall on.“I always take full responsibility for what happens,” Girardi said.The Yankees put the brakes on any manufactured tumult on Wednesday — as well as on a two-game losing streak — with a 4-2 victory over the Arizona Diamondbacks.Brett Gardner got the Yankees off to a good start with a two-run homer in the first, Nathan Eovaldi was near perfect for six innings, and the bullpen — despite a few jittery moments — secured the victory.Eovaldi allowed only one baserunner — Jean Segura, who led off the bottom of the first with a ground ball up the middle that kicked off second base, depriving both shortstop Didi Gregorius and second baseman Starlin Castro the opportunity to throw him out.Eovaldi retired the next 18 batters, striking out five and allowing only three balls to be hit out of the infield. He might have turned a shutout over to the bullpen, but third baseman Chase Headley chose to throw to first even as Segura froze halfway home on a one-out grounder.The decision to remove Eovaldi after he had thrown only 85 pitches immediately looked shaky when Dellin Betances walked two batters to open the seventh. But Betances struck out Jake Lamb, who had homered the previous two nights, on a devastating 3-2 slider, got Wellington Castillo to fly out, and struck out Brandon Drury.“I was just trying to make the people sweat a little bit back home,” Betances said of the walks.Andrew Miller then came on in the eighth and hung an 0-2 slider that Chris Owings hit over the left-field wall and removed the margin for error that Jacoby Ellsbury had provided in the sixth when his two-out single — he had three hits and a walk — scored Headley. Miller quickly recovered to strike out the side.“I thought I was going back out,” Eovaldi said. “I was a little disappointed, but with those three guys coming in, you can’t be too frustrated about that.”Girardi said, “We had Betances, Miller and Chapman rested and that’s what they’re there for,” adding that he would have kept Eovaldi in if he had been throwing a no-hitter.“Nate did his job, and it’s the responsibility of the next three guys to do their job,” Girardi said.Ellsbury, who had three hits and two walks, scored on a wild pitch in the ninth.Aroldis Chapman retired the Diamondbacks in order for his fourth save, sparing the Yankees any further drama.The stir that Steinbrenner’s comments created outweighed their content. The players Steinbrenner had mentioned when he spoke to reporters at an owners meeting in Manhattan were not singled out in harsh terms — certainly not as harsh as many fans would use to assess their performance.Pineda and Severino are a combined 1-13, and both have E.R.A.s are over 6.50. Teixeira has not hit a home run in his last 107 at-bats. Though Headley has awakened at the plate of late — he is hitting .316 since May 7 — he did not have an extra-base hit until May 12.Though Steinbrenner’s comments were not quoted to the players, they shrugged.“I’ve been around long enough to know you’re going to get singled out when you’re not producing, especially the type of career I’ve had,” Teixeira said. “I’ve always been someone who’s been able to carry teams during tough streaks, and we’ve been in a tough stretch the whole season, and I’m the type of player that can carry a team — I just haven’t done it yet.”Headley and Pineda said they were just as disappointed in their play thus far as Steinbrenner — or anyone else — might be.“It’s his team,” Headley said. “It doesn’t really mean anything, to be honest. I don’t need a reminder. By saying that, make sure it’s not me saying I wish he wouldn’t have said anything. I know that I haven’t played the way that I’m capable.”Pineda, speaking through a translator, said, “It doesn’t bother me that he’s saying that, but at the same time I expect a lot from myself, and I know I can be better.”Teixeira’s slump is most discomfiting.He hit 31 home runs last year, even after missing all but a few at-bats of the final seven weeks after fouling a ball off his shin. Teixeira has been swinging the bat reasonably well right-handed — batting .288 — but he has been dreadful hitting left-handed, which is where most of his power comes from.He is hitting .148 left-handed and has struck out 32 times in 96 plate appearances, including three Tuesday night and three more Wednesday. (He did strike one ball well, but Drury caught his first-inning drive while crashing into the right-field fence.)Another sign of his timing being off, Teixeira said, is that he is hitting too many weak ground balls and is not driving the ball. It is something that he has worked on with the hitting coaches, Alan Cockrell and Marcus Thames, but thus far the work has not translated to games.“That’s the thing that’s a little frustrating,” Teixeira said. “In the cage and in batting practice, everything is fine. But you know, you face some tough pitchers, you expand the zone a little bit — I’m not taking my walks like I was earlier. I need to swing at better pitches, and hopefully the home runs will come, I’ll draw my walks when I need to, and then hopefully get on a roll.”That roll did not begin for Teixeira on Wednesday, but the Yankees can at least hope it did for them.Advertisement