By JONAH BROMWICHMARCH 7, 2016
Every week, we choose one essential game to watch, highlighting hot teams, winning and losing streaks and statistical intrigue in the N.B.A.Washington at Portland, Tuesday, 10 p.m. Eastern, NBATVWhen LaMarcus Aldridge left the Trail Blazers for San Antonio, Portland’s playoff hopes seemed to take a nose dive. The Blazers had not been surefire contenders in recent seasons, but they had established a core that seemed to be going places.In the summer of 2012, they hired Terry Stotts, a Mavericks assistant, as coach and drafted a young guard named Damian Lillard who ended up receiving rookie of the year honors. A season later, they leapt into the playoffs with a 54-28 record and beat the Houston Rockets in a six-game first-round series before losing to the Spurs in the semifinals.Last season was a disappointment. The reliable guard Wesley Matthews was lost to an Achilles’ tendon injury in March, and the Blazers seemed to lose faith, limping through the rest of the season and leaving the playoffs early. Matthews signed with Dallas in the off-season, and a day later, Aldridge made known his decision to leave. It seemed that the Blazers would be sent back to the drawing board.AdvertisementBut Portland has defied expectations. Seventh in the Western Conference with a record of 33-31 after falling at Detroit, 123-103, on Sunday, the Blazers have won 18 of their last 25 games. Among those wins were impressive home victories over the Oklahoma City Thunder, on Jan. 10, and the Golden State Warriors, whom they blew out on Feb. 18 on the back of 51 points from Lillard.AdvertisementLillard, now 25 and in his fourth season, is one of the more underrated stars in the league. He made the All-Star Game last year only as a replacement for the injured Blake Griffin and was left out of the proceedings this year. He seems to have used the slight as motivation: He was averaging 24.3 points per game before the All-Star Game, but his average has soared nearly 10 points higher since, to 33.6 points.Lillard was never expected to hamper the Blazers’ chances, but few people believed that the team would have the firepower to win games without Matthews and Aldridge. On that count, the play of the third-year guard C. J. McCollum has been the surprise of the season. McCollum is in the conversation for the Most Improved Player Award after becoming a starter and averaging 20.9 points and 4.2 assists a game.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.With their dynamic backcourt and relative weakness up front, the Blazers are reminiscent of Eastern Conference teams like the Toronto Raptors, who got the better of Portland on Friday despite another 50-point night from Lillard, and the Washington Wizards.The Wizards’ recent experience has been diametrically opposed to that of the Blazers. High hopes accompanied them into the season, with some projecting that Washington would be the No. 2 team in the East. But the Wizards have struggled to meet those expectations and are currently sitting just outside the playoffs, 10th in the standings and two games below .500.Washington has shown flashes of the team it was expected to be but too often falls apart in the fourth quarter, losing close games that it has a chance of winning. Its backcourt, composed of John Wall and Bradley Beal, is one of the best in the league. But Beal, who has struggled with injuries throughout his career, has missed time this season with a shoulder injury and a concussion, among other ailments; Saturday, in a loss to the Pacers, a tough block from the Indiana rookie Myles Turner left Beal with a sprained pelvis.There is some bright news for Washington. Forward Markieff Morris, whom they acquired from the Phoenix Suns right before the trade deadline, has been playing well, regularly scoring in double digits and giving Wall another target to pass to in the lane. (Wall, a classic pass-first point guard, is a dream for any big man to play with.) If Morris can capitalize on his talent and provide the Wizards with more scoring, he could help them overcome their current malaise.With fewer than 20 games left in the season, most teams are in a position similar to those of the Blazers and the Wizards, fighting for their postseason fates. The playoffs are not only a race to the championship; they also provide a bellwether for a franchise’s path over the next few seasons. If the Blazers continue to play as well as they have, they may be back in the contender conversation sooner than expected. And if the Wizards continue to underperform, the personnel who make up their current squad will not be around to disappoint much longer.We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.See More »