By ROB HUGHESMARCH 6, 2016
LONDON — “The title is not ours,” said Leicester City Manager Claudio Ranieri. “Something special can happen, but we have to fight a lot, slowly, slowly.”Those cautious words, said on television after Leicester’s latest win at Watford on Saturday, contained for the first time an acknowledgement from this wily old coach that the seemingly impossible could happen.Ranieri has been in denial throughout this remarkable season. His mantra has been that the Foxes are a small club running just to survive and that he has been expecting them to be chased down by the pack, led by Tottenham Hotspur, Arsenal and Manchester City.He is right, to the extent that it is still an implausible dream that a club the size of Leicester ever could win the Premiership. Yet with nine games remaining after this weekend, and with the Foxes five points ahead of their closest rival, the chasers are beginning to run out of games to reel Leicester in.Advertisement“A lot can happen,” insisted Leicester’s goalkeeper, Kasper Schmeichel. “In nine games last season, we saved ourselves in this league.”AdvertisementIndeed, they did. The team was fighting to stay in the Premier League a year ago, and it barely changed over the summer. Now it is running to win the title for the first time.Typical of what Leicester has done all season, Saturday’s victory was full of hard work and tenacious synchronicity between defense, midfield and attack.The 1-0 win at Watford was topped off by the magic of Riyad Mahrez, who was bought for little more than half a million dollars from the French second division team Le Havre in early 2014. Mahrez struck the only goal of the game from the edge of the penalty box after 56 minutes. There were opponents in front of him, to his left and to his right, but when the ball came his way after Watford tried to head out a clearance, the Algerian took one touch to control it and a second to guide the ball into the roof of the net, beyond the reach of Watford goalie Heurelho Gomes.Mahrez is so slight a figure that you have to marvel at the power, speed and precision with which he can strike a ball. It was his 15th goal of this season, and he has assisted on 11 others, many of them for his running mate, Jamie Vardy.They make quite a combination: the fierce, fast tenacity of Vardy along with the subtlety of Mahrez. Leicester paid peanuts for them, compared with what Manchester City, Chelsea, Manchester United or Arsenal shell out for top players.While Leicester keeps winning, with a place in next season’s Champions League almost assured, most of the others are floundering.Manchester City won easily enough Saturday with a merciless 4-0 drubbing of Aston Villa, a team that appears already resigned to its fate of relegation. Villa, a bigger club than Leicester when it comes to both tradition and finances, has become so badly run, from top to bottom, that it has lost any semblance of fight. By the end in Manchester, it simply became a question of counting how many goals City would score.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.But City is 10 points behind Leicester and has tougher games ahead.Tottenham and Arsenal, the not-so-neighborly North London neighbors, lie in second and third place. They fought each other to a 2-2 standstill at the Spurs’ White Hart Lane Stadium on Saturday. The highlights of that game were above what Leicester generally can achieve, but both sides lacked the defensive stability, unity and hunger shown by the Foxes.AdvertisementArsenal scored first through a brilliantly improvised back heel by Aaron Ramsey. But after halftime, Arsenal lost a man, and with it control of the derby match.The culprit was Francis Coquelin, who is as close to being an artisan as Arsenal has ever fielded. His job is to win the ball in midfield and give Arsenal some cover in front of a shaky defense, especially on a days like Saturday, when it lacked the security of its first-string goalkeeper, Petr Cech.Early on, Coquelin received a yellow card for a blatant handball. “We told him at half time to be careful,” said Arsenal Manager Arsène Wenger. “The regret of the day was that we lost control when Coquelin was sent off. He deserved to go, I cannot deny that.”No one could. Coquelin’s second yellow was for a late and high foul on Harry Kane 10 minutes into the second half. It was a tackle that was completely unnecessary because Kane, out on the sideline, was running nowhere with the ball.After that irresponsible foul, Spurs took command. Defender Toby Alderweireld scored after a Tottenham corner kick, and two minutes later Kane curled in a beauty from the left edge of the penalty area.Arsenal came back, thanks to the passing and movement the team is known for, and it tied the score at 2-2 through a goal by Alexis Sánchez.A tie, though, serves neither Arsenal nor Tottenham well, because the team above them, Leicester, would not settle for just one point.Ranieri can make all the denials he wants, but in the locker room he must be humming a different tune. Leicester’s strength has been continuity in its lineups, but every once in a while, Ranieri will throw a tactical switch to utilize what he has learned in his 30 years of management. After halftime on Saturday, he took off striker Shinji Okazaki and winger Marc Albrighton and inserted Andy King and Jeff Schlupp to match up with Watford’s congested five man-midfield.It worked, and quickly. Leicester took the game away from Watford, and the chase to the title was on.Advertisement“I don’t know who is behind us,” concluded Ranieri. “I want to run, very, very fast to the line.”Because of an editing error, a picture caption with this article misidentified the Leicester City player at the right of the photograph. He is Danny Simpson, not Riyad Mahrez.A version of this article appears in print on March 7, 2016, in The International New York Times.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.