By SETH BERKMANMAY 18, 2016
Bartolo Colon might look physically out of place on a baseball field, but he rarely presents an uncomfortable image. During stoppages in play, Colon will casually toss the ball in the air and catch it basket-style in his mitt, like a Little Leaguer awaiting action to resume.In two-plus seasons with the Mets, Colon, a rotund veteran with an unflappable demeanor on the mound and a batting helmet that sometimes spins off his head when he swings, has earned folk-hero status with an endearing approach to the game that occasionally defies logic. He was at the center of attention for several reasons in his start Wednesday, but by the end of the day, the overarching conclusion might have been that the magic in Colon’s memorable run with the Mets was wearing thin.Colon walked five batters for the first time since April 26, 2005, when he pitched for the Los Angeles Angels, and threw a season-high 107 pitches in only four and two-thirds innings, hitting a batter and allowing three runs as the Mets lost to the Washington Nationals, 7-1.The Mets’ six pitchers walked 11 batters.“I haven’t seen that out of our pitching staff since I’ve been here,” Manager Terry Collins said. “That’s not us. We’re better than that. We’re a lot better than that.”AdvertisementIt was Colon’s first game at Citi Field since he went deep in San Diego for his first major league home run at age 42, a feat that still boggles the mind.AdvertisementOn Tuesday, Colon demonstrated that his homer had not been a fluke. He walked out of the Mets’ clubhouse just before 4 p.m., tightening the straps on his blue and white batting gloves. Entering the dugout, he went over to the collection of bats and pulled out a glistening black and brown model, looking it over like a scientist carefully inspecting a petri dish.David Wright, the Mets’ captain, has praised Colon’s hand-eye coordination and his ability to hit home runs in batting practice, and now Colon began to reveal signs of his hitting acumen. First, he showed bunt before pulling back the bat to swing away. He then hit balls to the opposite field.While waiting his next turn, Colon walked to the side and spat his gum into the air, taking a cut, and whiffing. Suddenly, Wright’s proclamations of Colon’s hitting prowess again seemed farcical.Colon then began his third round of swings, waving his bat back and forth in his stance, a less violent version of Gary Sheffield’s approach. But the balls did not crash into the seats the way they would when Sheffield, who hit 509 career home runs, took batting practice. Instead, Colon kept popping the ball straight up into the top of the cage.Get the big sports news, highlights and analysis from Times journalists, with distinctive takes on games and some behind-the-scenes surprises, delivered to your inbox every week.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.At this point, the Mets’ position players slowly began to file out onto the field for pregame stretching, signaling that the pitchers’ batting practice was coming to a close. Fred Wilpon, the Mets’ principal owner, also made an appearance, walking toward the outfield.With Wilpon and just about all of the Mets looking on, Colon entered the cage for his final swings. He began by taking pitches, which was puzzling; showing plate discipline in batting practice is as useful as stealing a base while trailing by 10 runs.But maybe there was a method to Colon’s madness. On one of the last pitches thrown to him, he took a hearty cut, creating a booming snap off the bat. Some Mets players yelled, “Ohh,” and paused to gawk at the ball in flight.AdvertisementThe ball continued to carry, looking as if it might clear the fence. And in the end, it did, bouncing off Casey Stengel’s retired No. 37 above the left-field railing.Colon cracked a small smile, as if he knew he had it in him all along.Those good feelings may be tarnished after a report in The New York Post on Wednesday said that Colon had been taken to court by a woman who contended that she had two children, now school age, with him out of wedlock and that he had failed to pay child support.Evan Schein, a lawyer representing the woman, and Robert H. Moses, a lawyer representing Colon, did not return requests for comment.“I have nothing to add to that,” Colon, who is married, said. “I don’t really care to talk about my personal stuff.”The news did not lead to any jeers when the starting lineup was announced Wednesday, and Colon received the warmest reception of any Mets player. Before the game, Collins was asked if he thought Colon might be distracted when he pitched Wednesday night.“His personal issues are his personal issues,” Collins said. “But Bartolo can handle anything.”That may no longer hold true. The loss to the Nationals was his third straight uninspiring start. Despite belting a 90-mile-an-hour pitch from San Diego’s James Shields, a former All-Star, over the left-field wall at Petco Park on May 7, Colon still yielded three runs in that game, and another five in his next outing, against the Los Angeles Dodgers.A version of this article appears in print on May 19, 2016, on Page B11 of the New York edition with the headline: For Mets’ Colon, 107 Pitches, No Home Run, and a Loss.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.