By KAREN CROUSENOV. 17, 2016
PHOENIX — Alan Williams and his mother, Jeri, watched on television this summer as San Francisco 49ers quarterback Colin Kaepernick protested police brutality and racial injustice by refusing to stand during the national anthem. Kaepernick’s political statement was personal for both Williams, a second-year player for the Phoenix Suns, and his mother, who had recently agreed to become the city’s police chief.They began a pointed discussion over Kaepernick’s gesture and its potential to unravel their tightly knit relationship.Alan Williams, 23, said he felt obliged to support his teammates if they decided, like several other professional athletes, to join Kaepernick.His mother reminded him that his actions would reflect on her, and vice versa.“We’re kind of like this connected entity,” she said.AdvertisementIn the end, Alan Williams and his teammates decided to emphasize community outreach over gestures of outrage. It was a relief for Williams, who could not have imagined his career and his mother’s intersecting in a way that reflected some of their country’s deepest divisions.“It’s kind of crazy how it’s worked out,” Williams said Saturday after the Suns’ home loss to the Nets.It had been an eventful night for Williams, a 6-foot-8 reserve center, who got into his second game of the season and made the only shot he took in 1 minute 32 seconds of playing time.And it was the end of an eventful week for Williams’s mother, whose officers were deployed to keep the peace on Election Day after several hundred students from both her alma mater, Maryvale High School, and Alan’s, North High, staged walkouts to protest the candidacies of Donald J. Trump and Sheriff Joe Arpaio of Maricopa County, an immigration hard-liner who lost his bid for a seventh term.On election eve, when the possibility loomed that Hillary Clinton would become the first woman to win the presidency, Chief Jeri Williams sat in her corner office at the Police Department headquarters downtown and talked for nearly an hour about her own turn as a trailblazer. She is the first woman and the second African-American to become the Phoenix police chief.AdvertisementChief Williams, 51, pointed out a framed piece of art she had received as a gift. It depicts a young black girl holding an American flag, her eyes fixed on the stars and stripes.“I just kind of look at her, and it reminds me that anything is possible,” the chief said.Williams had sky-high aspirations in 1988 after earning an undergraduate degree in fine arts from Arizona State. She applied for her dream job, as a flight attendant with Pan American Airlines, but did not make it past the first interview.“I got told I was too heavy to be a Pan Am girl,” she said. “They did measurements of my elbows and my wrists, and I didn’t fit the mold.”She found a Plan B on a bulletin board that advertised openings in the Police Department.The prospect of holding a job where no two days were the same appealed to her, and she said the department’s equal pay for women was also a huge selling point. She quickly realized that she had found her calling.“Most days I went home amazed that someone was paying me to do this job,” she said. “I get to engage with a bunch of people, I get to help people, and then I get to put bad guys in jail.”At first, she didn’t dwell much on the dangers. They became more of a concern after she and her husband, Cody Williams Sr., a justice of the peace who played two years of basketball at the University of Oklahoma, started a family. In addition to Alan, they have a younger son, Cody Jr., a student at the University of California, Santa Barbara.When Alan was a child, he watched an episode of “Cops,” the reality series that follows police officers on duty. He stayed up until his mother returned from work late and tearfully asked if she was going to get hurt doing her job.She lifted her shirt and revealed her bulletproof vest, encouraging her son touch it. “I said, ‘As long as I’m wearing this vest, I’m safe,’” she recalled.During the interview, she undid a few of her shirt buttons to show that she continues to wear it.“Always,” she said. “Just as a reminder of the promise I made to my kid.”AdvertisementHer first two decades in the department included a stint as an assistant chief. In 2011, she left Phoenix to become the police chief in Oxnard, Calif., where she oversaw a 400-person force. While there, she dealt with an episode involving a bystander fatally shot by officers in a case of mistaken identity and another episode involving the death of a person in custody.“It was almost like for two years I couldn’t breathe because I didn’t know what was going to happen next,” Chief Williams said. She sought advice from an advisory board made up of people from the business and religious sectors, and said she made sure her department held itself accountable for its actions.During this time, Alan Williams was about 40 miles north of Oxnard, at Santa Barbara, the university he had settled on before his mother got the chief’s job. She tried not to let what was happening in her workplace affect his world, but headlines critical of her department cast a long shadow.“I always tried to be there for her as much as possible,” said Williams, who starred on the Gauchos’ basketball team. “She understood I was on my journey, too.”Get the big sports news, highlights and analysis from Times journalists, with distinctive takes on games and some behind-the-scenes surprises, delivered to your inbox every week.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.He signed with the Suns in 2015 as an undrafted free agent and appeared in 10 games last season. His value to the team, Coach Earl Watson said, goes far beyond statistics.“I can go on and on about how much we love him and his energy on the bench,” Watson said, adding: “He has an edge to him, so he is not just a nice guy. He has toughness to him, changes the tone and kind of the energy in practice.”Williams and the Suns were in Oklahoma City for a game on Oct. 28 when his mother was sworn in as police chief.AdvertisementOutside the ceremony, more than two dozen people protested, carrying white crosses and black coffins in remembrance of the 17 people killed this year by Phoenix police officers.Two days later, Chief Williams received a standing ovation from a crowd of 17,000 when she was introduced after the first quarter of the Suns’ home game against the Golden State Warriors.“It was one of the coolest things I’ve ever been able to be a part of,” her son said.The chief struggled to keep her emotions in check.“I kind of took a deep breath,” she said, “and then I said to my brain: ‘Don’t disappoint them. Don’t disappoint them.’”Watching how her son handled his campus celebrity in college has helped Chief Williams deal with the attention that has accompanied her new job.“It can be overwhelming,” she said, “but Alan taught me grace.”Respect for his mother’s profession inspired the Suns player to develop a ritual.For years, he said, he has sought out the police officers who work at his games, to shake their hands and to thank them for their service.His mother learned only recently about that habit.“Really?” she said. Her voice quivered. “I’m going to cry. Don’t cry. Don’t cry.”A version of this article appears in print on November 18, 2016, on Page B9 of the New York edition with the headline: The Player Who Calls the Police Chief ‘Mom’.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.