By KAREN CROUSEMAY 19, 2016
Muirfield Golf Club, the site of 16 British Opens and the source of the written Rules of Golf, dating to 1744, has been stripped of the right to host the Open after voting against allowing female members.Of the 648 eligible voters, 616 cast ballots, with 64 percent in favor of admitting women. The resolution fell short of the two-thirds majority required to pass.Muirfield, which has been in Gullane, Scotland, about 20 miles northeast of Edinburgh, since 1891, is run by the Honourable Company of Edinburgh Golfers. It is one of two clubs among the 10 in the British Open rotation to exclude women. Royal Troon, site of this year’s event, is the other.The tournament was awarded to Royal Troon in 2012. At the time, it was one of a handful of all-male clubs to host men’s majors. Since then, the heat has been turned up on the issue of gender discrimination in membership policies. The male-only membership has increasingly become an anachronism undermining one of the main mandates of golf’s governing bodies, which is to grow the game.AdvertisementIn 2012, Augusta National Golf Club, site of the Masters, announced that it was opening its membership to women. Following suit two years later was the Royal and Ancient Golf Club, which has its headquarters in Scotland at St. Andrews, another regular British Open course. Last year, Royal St. George’s Golf Club in Sandwich, England, which has hosted the Open 14 times, voted to allow women, with 90 percent of its members approving the measure.AdvertisementReacting to the decision by the Muirfield membership, Martin Slumbers, the chief executive of the R & A, which organizes the British Open, said in a statement: “We have consistently said that it is a matter for the Honourable Company to conduct a review of its membership policy and that we would await their decision. The Open is one of the world’s great sporting events, and going forward we will not stage the Championship at a venue that does not admit women as members.”He added, “If the policy at the club should change, we would reconsider Muirfield as a venue in future.”An article in The Scotsman revealed that a group of 30 members lobbied vigorously against the inclusion of female members. A letter distributed by the group among the membership cited concerns about slow play and making women “feel uncomfortable” as drawbacks in admitting female members.The letter added that the club was “quite unique with its fraternity built, inter alia, on foursomes play with a round taking only the same time as lunch and leaving enough time for a further round after lunch (even in midwinter). This is one of the miracles in modern-day play and is much admired. Our foursomes and speedy play would be endangered.”Gary Player, who won the 1959 British Open at Muirfield, released a statement on his Twitter account condemning the vote.Get the big sports news, highlights and analysis from Times journalists, with distinctive takes on games and some behind-the-scenes surprises, delivered to your inbox every week.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.“As much as I love and respect Muirfield as a club where I won The Open, I totally agree with the R & A that staging the championship at any venue that does not admit women as members is simply unacceptable,” he wrote. “I hope Muirfield will reconsider their position soon and continue hosting one of the world’s greatest golf events.”Catriona Matthew, the highest-ranked Scottish woman on the L.P.G.A. Tour, won the Women’s British Open in 2009 at Royal Lytham and St. Annes Golf Club and lives only a few miles from Muirfield. She said via Twitter, “Embarrassed to be a Scottish women golfer from East Lothian after that decision.”AdvertisementThe British Open sites are set through 2019, when the tournament will return to Northern Ireland’s Royal Portrush for the first time since 1951, the only occasion in which the major was held outside Scotland or England since its inception in 1860. The R & A has also been noncommital about the future role of Turnberry in the rotation because of the polarizing political views of Donald J. Trump, who bought the course in 2014. In advance of Muirfield’s vote on offering women membership, Royal Troon earlier this week announced that it was consulting its 800 members about its all-male policy.On the eve of the 2013 tournament at Muirfield, won by Phil Mickelson, Peter Dawson, Slumbers’s predecessor as the chief executive of the R & A, was dismissive of questions about clubs with discriminatory memberships hosting the British Open.“Obviously the whole issue of gender and single-sex clubs has been pretty much beaten to death recently,” he said, adding, “It’s a subject that we’re finding increasingly difficult, to be honest.”Dawson noted that men’s only clubs are “perfectly legal” and that “the right of freedom of association is important.”He added: “To be honest, our natural reaction is to resist these pressures, because we actually don’t think they have very much substance. But I’d like to stress we’re not so insular as to fail to recognize the potential damage that campaigns like this can do to the Open Championship.”Dawson retired from his R & A post in 2015, but has stayed active in the sport as the president of the International Golf Federation, which is shepherding the sport’s return to the Olympics in Rio de Janeiro this year. Dawson was still heading the R & A in September 2014, when the Royal and Ancient Golf Club, which had separated from the R & A in 2004, voted to end its all-male policy, with 85 percent of the 2,400 members opting to accept women.The next February, membership was offered to seven women, including Renee Powell, the first African-American woman to be a Class A member of the P.G.A. of America and the first female head professional at a golf course in Britain.Powell, reached by telephone at Clearview Golf Club, the club her father founded in East Canton, Ohio, expressed surprise at the vote.“When the Royal and Ancient Golf Club has voted to allow women, you’d think all the other clubs would follow suit,” she said, adding, “It’s unfortunate that a small group of members was effective in not allowing women to become members when the majority of the membership wanted it to happen.”A version of this article appears in print on May 20, 2016, on Page B9 of the New York edition with the headline: No Female Members?  Then No British Open.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.See More »