AdvertisementSupported byOn BaseballBy Tyler KepnerThe war is over. It was decided years ago, and the outcome is permanent: Every team in baseball has a chance to win. At least, this is what the owner of the Yankees believes, and he would know.“The reality is: Parity is here to stay,” that owner, Hal Steinbrenner, said Wednesday during a break at the quarterly owners’ meetings at Major League Baseball’s headquarters in Manhattan. “We’re there. We’ve got a little ways to go, but look at the teams that were in the playoffs last year. It looks a lot different than 10, 15, 20 years ago in many cases.“Parity’s here, and we’re just going to have to figure out how to do the best to rebuild, and at the same time — because we are the Yankees — we know we always have to have the veterans; we always have to have the marquee players. It’s always a balance for us.”The Kansas City Royals are the reigning champions and the two-time defending American League pennant winners. The Toronto Blue Jays snapped a 22-year playoff drought last season. The Pittsburgh Pirates have hosted the National League wild-card game three years in a row. Since 2001, every team has reached the postseason.Steinbrenner insisted that parity was “good for baseball.” He inherited the team from his father, but not the environment that once helped the Yankees dominate the sport.The Yankees still outspend almost everyone, but their rivals, often aided by revenue sharing, can easily maintain competitive payrolls. The highest average annual salary belongs to a member of the Arizona Diamondbacks, pitcher Zack Greinke, at $34.4 million. He beat the Yankees on Tuesday.The loss plunged the Yankees’ record to 16-22 and dropped their winning percentage to .421, putting them ahead of only Cincinnati, Houston, Minnesota and Atlanta. The Yankees earned a wild-card berth last fall but have not played in a postseason series since 2012.The team is still searching for a championship formula that fits the modern era. Yet as the league and the union negotiate a new collective bargaining agreement, Steinbrenner is not clamoring — in public, anyway — for the right to keep more of his money. The closest he came to complaining about the system on Wednesday was to mildly rebuke unnamed teams for not spending to win.“I think anytime you have a system like this, there’s always going to be a handful of people that don’t use the funds for what they’re intended to be used for,” he said.The changes in the system alone do not fully explain the shift in the Yankees’ landscape. The truth is that their most recent dynasty — four titles in five seasons in a 13-year playoff run through 2007 — was largely a result of remarkable scouting and luck. In 1995, when that streak began, they promoted four extraordinary players — Derek Jeter, Andy Pettitte, Jorge Posada and Mariano Rivera — and they kept them all for almost the entirety of their careers.Theoretically, the Yankees could still do something similar; of those players and the other homegrown star of the era, Bernie Williams, only Jeter was a high draft choice. But the chances of having five superstars grow up together, and surrounding them with precisely the right mix of veterans, are remote.“We’re always going to have the veterans; we’re always going to have the marquee players and the mentors,” Steinbrenner said. “If you’ve got a good, solid group — it would be tough to replicate those four, Jeter and all — but look, if Bird pans out and Judge pans out, Severino and Kaprielian, and you start getting Mateo a year or two from now, if you can build a good group of young players that play different positions, obviously, I think it’s entirely possible. Is it more difficult? Sure, it may be more difficult than it was.”Steinbrenner was referring to pitchers Luis Severino and James Kaprielian, first baseman Greg Bird, outfielder Aaron Judge and shortstop Jorge Mateo, and so much must happen before they are major league stars. The first three are injured, including Severino, who is 0-6 for the Yankees. Judge, 24, was hitting .261 with seven homers at Class AAA through Tuesday. Mateo, 20, was hitting .331 with 13 stolen bases at high Class A.All teams have prospects, of course, and there is no indication that the Yankees’ farm system sets them apart. Before the season, both Baseball America and MiLB.com — the official website of the minors — ranked the Yankees 17th of 30 teams in organizational talent. Steinbrenner said he was encouraged because the system was improving.As for the slow start in the majors, Steinbrenner mentioned specific players — Michael Pineda, Mark Teixeira, Chase Headley — but not in harsh terms. He did not criticize Manager Joe Girardi or his staff.“The coaches and manager, I think they’re doing all they can,” Steinbrenner said. “I think they’re doing a good job. I’ve got no complaints there.”Steinbrenner praised General Manager Brian Cashman’s trades for Starlin Castro and Aaron Hicks, which provided at least some youth.“I don’t think there’s a flaw in the way the team’s put together,” Steinbrenner said. “I think the team we have this year is better than the team we had last year.”Steinbrenner said he was pleased by the last homestand, in which the Yankees went 7-3. If they keep playing like that, he said, things will be fine. He said he had not considered dumping veterans for young players at the trading deadline.“Right now that’s the least of my concerns,” he said, “because I think the hitting’s turned the corner.”He said the family had no intention of selling the team.“We’re here to stay,” he said, adding later: “As I’ve always said, if my name wasn’t Steinbrenner, I wouldn’t be here. I don’t look at this as something I deserve. I’ve been given this. It’s a gift. I respect it, and I enjoy it.”Steinbrenner said he even found some solace in the hard times. “It’s never enjoyable to struggle, but it does make one stronger and wiser, I believe,” he said. “You’re not going to learn all the life lessons by winning all the time, that’s for sure.”Steinbrenner projects admirable calm; the threatening directives of an old generation are not his style. But if the season continues this way, the most fascinating question around the Yankees will be what lessons, exactly, Steinbrenner will have learned. He will, at least, be much stronger and wiser.Advertisement