By BRAD SPURGEONMAY 19, 2016
It’s a question asked again and again about auto racing, and the answer is pertinent to defining the competitive level of a motorized series: How much can victory be attributed to the technology of the car and how much to the skill of the driver?Not only a top-level racing category featuring some of the finest drivers in the world, Formula E is also one of the series that most emphasizes driver skill over car technology.In the inaugural Formula E season last year, all the cars had equivalent technology and batteries; the only differences were teamwork and drivers. In its second season, the series has opened up the regulations, allowing manufacturers to create their own drivetrains and develop their own software.“When the development of a car is free — like in WEC and F1 — you can develop the car forever, so the car makes more difference than the driver,” said Lucas di Grassi, a driver at the ABT Schaeffler Audi Sport team, referring to the World Endurance Championship and Formula One. “Here everybody has the same car, same aerodynamics, same brakes, same everything.”Advertisement“What changes is the drivetrain,” added di Grassi, who won the Paris ePrix last month and is leading the series heading into the Berlin race this weekend. “The drivetrains are better or worse, but they are within maybe two or three tenths of a second. And two or three tenths on tracks like these, the driver makes more difference than the drivetrain.”AdvertisementIn Formula E, there is also much less dependence on telemetry and other computerized aids that are used in series like Formula One and the WEC to analyze car performance, tires and brakes.“It is slower, much slower than WEC, and it has much less horsepower,” di Grassi said of the electric car. “But the car is as tricky as a fantastic car to drive because of these unknown circumstances with the tires and the brakes. The car is moving and changing all of the time. So you have to really be aware of the energy and what the regeneration is doing, and it’s all down to the driver to do it. It is forbidden to have the computer help you.”The job is so difficult and requires so much precision and knowledge that only the best, most-experienced drivers are sought by the teams. And those drivers must not already be racing in the other leading series on the same weekends as Formula E races.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.Formula E is one of the rare racing series in which the “pay driver,”  who is hired  to bring money or sponsors to a team, does not exist. All of the Formula E drivers are paid by the teams to race.“The skill level, the experience that Antonio brought from running on the simulator in Red Bull, and being very good at energy management in Formula One, helped us a lot, it made him more of a natural at it,” said Mark Preston, team principal of Team Aguri, referring to his driver Antonio Félix da Costa, a former reserve driver at the Red Bull Formula One team.He noted that as drivers advance through the various levels of racing, the workload increases. He said that in Formula E “the workload in this is pretty high,” and so, he added, “the capability, that’s the difference.”Not only are the Formula E cars all the same, but, as Preston pointed out, there is a limit on the amount of power. In most other series, the car has a limit on engine size, but within that the teams seek to produce as much power as possible. In Formula E, the amount of battery power for every car is limited to 170 kilowatts during the race and 200 kilowatts during qualifying.Another factor in the equation that results in a more equal ratio between the importance of the driver and that of his machine is that the races take place on sinuous street circuits that provide little grip. These tracks require a level of precise driving that is rarely needed on permanent racing circuits with large runoff areas such as those in Formula One or the WEC.“There’s a bigger opportunity for good drivers, for people who have shown results,” said Simona de Silvestro, who races at the Andretti Formula E team. She also raced with Andretti in IndyCar and was a reserve driver at the Sauber team in Formula One.AdvertisementReferring to Formula E, she added, “When you look at the field here, everybody has been winning races and has been really competitive.”A version of this special report appears in print on May 20, 2016, in The International New York Times.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.See More »