By THE ASSOCIATED PRESSMARCH 5, 2016
Cristiano Ronaldo scored four second-half goals Saturday to become the second-leading career scorer in the Spanish league as Real Madrid routed Celta Vigo, 7-1.Ronaldo has 252 career goals, surpassing Telmo Zarra’s total of 251 goals, which had stood as a record until the Barcelona star Lionel Messi passed it in 2014. Messi’s hat trick in a 5-1 win at Rayo Vallecano on Thursday took his tally to 305.Ronaldo scored with a long blast, on a free kick, on a short cross and with a header on a corner kick.Besides surpassing the total Zarra reached in 1955 with Athletic Bilbao, Ronaldo also passed Barcelona’s Luis Suárez as the league’s top scorer for the season. Ronaldo has 27 goals to Suárez’s 25.AdvertisementMadrid remained in third place, 9 points behind first-place Barcelona, which visits Eibar on Sunday. Second-place Atlético Madrid visits Valencia the same day.AdvertisementDisqualified from the Copa del Rey and with its league title hopes all but gone, Madrid will have its most realistic chance to salvage the season when it hosts Roma on Tuesday in the Champions League round of 16. It holds a 2-0 advantage.Madrid’s win over sixth-place Celta came after jeers from Santiago Bernabéu Stadium fans last weekend following a 1-0 loss to Atlético.LEICESTER PULLS AWAY Hours after its title rivals Tottenham and Arsenal drew, 2-2, in a north London derby, Leicester beat Watford, 1-0, away to continue its bid to become the Premier League’s most unlikely champion.Riyad Mahrez scored the winner with his 15th goal of the season in the 56th minute as Leicester extended its lead to 5 points with nine games remaining.Get the big sports news, highlights and analysis from Times journalists, with distinctive takes on games and some behind-the-scenes surprises, delivered to your inbox every week.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.A team that was almost relegated last season is showing no sign of slowing in its charge to the title. The same cannot be said of the other contenders.Alexis Sanchez scored a 76th-minute equalizer to earn 10-man Arsenal a point against Spurs, meaning both sides dropped 2 points to Leicester. Leicester has 60 points, Tottenham has 55 and Arsenal has 52.For fourth-place Manchester City, the other team with a realistic chance of catching Leicester, a 4-0 win over Aston Villa ended a run of three losses.AdvertisementWest Ham scored three goals in the final 12 minutes to rally to a 3-2 win at Everton and keep in touch with the top four. That could now be out of reach for the defending champion, Chelsea, which drew, 1-1, at home against Stoke.BAYERN PROTECTS LEAD Bayern Munich took another step toward an unprecedented fourth successive Bundesliga title with a scoreless draw at its closest rival, Borussia Dortmund.Bayern, which had a healthy 8-point lead before a surprising home loss to Mainz on Wednesday, preserved its 5-point edge with nine games left. It was the first 0-0 draw in 26 competitive meetings between the rivals.P.S.G. IN SCORELESS DRAW Paris St.-Germain prepared for its Champions League game against Chelsea with an unimpressive 0-0 draw against Montpellier in the French league.P.S.G. Coach Laurent Blanc rotated his team at the Parc des Princes to avoid injuries before Wednesday’s match at Stamford Bridge.P.S.G. remained 23 points ahead of second-place Monaco, which drew, 2-2, at third-place Caen on Friday. Montpellier — the last club to win the French title before P.S.G. claimed it for three consecutive seasons — continued its recovery under Coach Pascal Hantz, extending its unbeaten run to five games. NAPOLI TIES FOR FIRST Napoli came from behind to beat Chievo Verona, 3-1, and move provisionally level with Juventus at the top of Italy’s Serie A.Gonzalo Higuaín, Vlad Chiriches and José Callejón scored for Napoli, which secured its first win in six matches in all competitions. Juventus visits Atalanta on Sunday.A version of this article appears in print on March 6, 2016, on Page SP10 of the New York edition with the headline: With Four Goals, Ronaldo Climbs to Second on the Spanish Career List .  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.