By THE ASSOCIATED PRESSMARCH 6, 2016
Mix Diskerud scored the eventual game winner in the 63rd minute as New York City F.C. won on the road against the Chicago Fire, 4-3, on Sunday in a wild affair that opened the M.L.S. season for both teams.N.Y.C.F.C.’s Thomas McNamara scored the first goal of the new season in spectacular fashion in the 10th minute, taking a feed from Khiry Shelton at the top of the penalty area and curling it into the upper corner. Nine minutes later, Razvan Cocis evened the score on a brilliant run, and he almost scored again a few moments later.Tony Taylor and Shelton both added goals to give N.Y.C.F.C. a 3-1 advantage at halftime.The scoring picked back up after intermission. Chicago’s Kennedy Igboananike scored off a turnover and pass from David Accam in the 49th minute. But Diskerud, who was left undefended, restored the two-goal advantage in the 63rd, beating Matt Lampson near-post.Accam scored on a penalty kick following a hand ball by Shelton, but the Fire could not find an equalizer.AdvertisementLater, in a rematch of last year’s M.L.S. Cup final, the Portland Timbers defeated the Columbus Crew, 2-1, after Fanendo Adi scored in the 79th minute.AdvertisementU.S. WOMEN DOWN FRANCE Alex Morgan scored a minute into second-half stoppage time, Hope Solo posted her 97th career shutout, and the United States beat France, 1-0, in the SheBelieves Cup in Nashville, Tenn.The United States has won its first two games of the inaugural four-team SheBelieves Cup. The United States beat No. 5 England on Thursday and will face Germany on Wednesday.With the victory over France, the No. 3 team in the world, the Americans improved to 8-0-0 in 2016, having outscored opponents by 30-0.On the lone goal, 17-year-old Mallory Pugh controlled the ball just past midfield and passed ahead to Morgan, who sprinted through the defense for a left-footed shot that beat goalkeeper Sarah Bouhaddi.MESSI SCORES 2 FOR BARçA Lionel Messi continued his impressive stretch of play by scoring two goals in Barcelona’s 4-0 win at Eibar in the Spanish league, as the strike force of Messi, Luis Suárez and Neymar reached a total of 100 goals this season in all competitions.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.It was Barcelona’s fourth goal, scored by Suárez, that reached the century mark, keeping the three on track to beat the record of 122 they set last season.Messi scored with a great run in the 41st minute and added a penalty kick in the 76th, leaving Barcelona with an 8-point advantage over Atlético Madrid, which won, 3-1, at Valencia to keep pace with 10 games remaining.UNITED FALLS TO WEST BROM Playing with 10 men proved to be no problem for Liverpool in the Premier League, but the same could not be said for Manchester United.AdvertisementLiverpool responded to a red card on James Milner in the 62nd minute at Crystal Palace by coming back after trailing by 1-0. Christian Benteke clinched a 2-1 victory in the sixth minute of injury time with a penalty kick.However, United was made to pay for a 26th-minute red card on Juan Mata — also for two yellow cards — at West Bromwich Albion, which won, 1-0, thanks to a goal by Salomón Rondón.United dropped to 3 points behind fourth-place Manchester City in the race for Champions League qualification and is now only 3 ahead of Liverpool, which has won three straight league games for the first time in a year. City has also played one fewer game than United.JUVENTUS RESTORES LEAD Juventus restored its 3-point advantage at the top of the Italian league with a 2-0 win at Atalanta, while Inter Milan boosted its chances of returning to the Champions League with a 3-1 win at Palermo.Gianluigi Buffon had a ninth successive shutout. He has not been scored on in Serie A in 836 minutes, the third-longest stretch in league history.A version of this article appears in print on March 7, 2016, on Page D6 of the New York edition with the headline: New York City F.C. Kicks Off With a Wild Win at Chicago .  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.