By THE ASSOCIATED PRESSMARCH 5, 2016
Not every major leaguer is lucky enough to have a lighthearted reunion with his former teammates the first time he faces them in a new uniform.But Jordan Zimmermann, who pitched for the Washington Nationals for seven seasons before signing a five-year, $110 million deal with Detroit over the winter, gazed into many friendly faces in his Tigers debut — and got the better of them. He retired eight of the nine batters he faced Saturday at the Nationals’ spring-training home in Viera, Fla.“It’s definitely fun getting out there and attacking these guys after all the smack talk,” a smiling Zimmermann said. “They said when I moved on they were going to take me deep. It was a good outing.”Among the batters Zimmermann retired were Bryce Harper, Jayson Werth and Anthony Rendon.“You know some of these guys’ tendencies,” Zimmermann said. Werth usually takes the first pitch, he said, so “I threw it for a ball.”AdvertisementThen he added: “I threw a slider, and he’s yelling at me out there, rounding first after he popped up. It was fun.”AdvertisementBefore Zimmermann took the mound, he caught up with Werth and Washington pitchers like Tanner Roark, Aaron Barrett, Gio Gonzalez and Stephen Strasburg.The Strasburg and Zimmermann families are very close, in part because both men have children who are the same age.“It was strange, but it was good to see him,” Strasburg said. “I saw him in the weight room before the game. He’s doing well. He likes it over there, so I’m happy for him.”Despite Zimmermann’s strong outing, the Nationals went on to win, 8-4.METS MOURN STAFF MEMBER The Mets’ clubhouse was somber Saturday morning after word came Friday night that Shannon Forde, a longtime member of the Mets’ media relations staff, had died of breast cancer. The Mets and the Yankees both had moments of silence in her memory before their spring-training games on Saturday.David Wright, the Mets’ captain, spoke about how Forde had helped him adjust to playing in the majors and how she had always treated his family like her own. He added that even as her illness was progressing, she was a presence during the Mets’ playoff run last year.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.“She had such a hard time just walking around, doing daily things, but she tried to make all the trips during the playoffs,” Wright said. “She tried to make it to the stadium as much as she could. That says a lot about her and how much she loved this organization.”The Mets also announced they would hold a memorial service for Forde at 3 p.m. Wednesday at Citi Field. TIM ROHANBRAVES LOSE RELIEVER Andrew McKirahan, a left-handed reliever for Atlanta, is most likely headed for another major elbow operation after sustaining an injury in his first appearance of spring training.AdvertisementBraves General Manager John Coppolella said McKirahan was expected to miss the season with a torn ulnar collateral ligament.McKirahan, 26, will seek a second opinion, but the Braves said they believed he would need Tommy John surgery, a procedure he already had in 2012.The injury occurred Wednesday on the fifth pitch of his spring debut against the Orioles.McKirahan missed 80 games last season after being suspended for testing positive for performance-enhancing drugs. He pitched in 27 games, going 1-0 with a 5.93 E.R.A.The Braves further pared down their pitching staff on Saturday by releasing two right-handers: Ryan Kelly, 28, who struggled during his time with the team last season, and David Carpenter, who was a key part of the Braves team that won the National League East in 2013, serving as the main setup man for Craig Kimbrel.Atlanta also reassigned five players to its minor league camp: outfielders Braxton Davidson and Matt Tuiasosopo, and catchers Matt Kennelly, Joe Odom and Braeden Schlehuber. (AP)A version of this article appears in print on March 6, 2016, on Page SP2 of the New York edition with the headline: Zimmermann and Nationals Are Reunited in Good Spirits.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.