

 Benjamin Hoffman
 

KEEPING SCORE
APRIL 29, 2017
There have been several incarnations of Joe Johnson over the years. He was a top-10 pick who did not quite fit in Boston, which led to a trade to Phoenix, where he found his calling as Steve Nash’s favorite gunner. Johnson was an obscenely expensive, yet underappreciated, All-Star in Atlanta. He was also a solid, but somewhat disappointing, cog on a superteam in Brooklyn that ended up being far from super.Through it all, Johnson ignored the chatter and remained a player who says little in the locker room but wants the ball when the game is on the line.In Johnson’s latest chapter, he is trying something new: He comes off the bench for the Utah Jazz, who unexpectedly are relying on him offensively during their playoff series against the Los Angeles Clippers — the only first-round series this year to last seven games. Johnson’s new role was clear Friday night in a tough 98-93 loss in Game 6, in which Johnson, rather than any of the team’s starters, was given the ball in the final seconds with a chance to tie. His 3-point attempt was a brick and allowed the Clippers to hang on for the win.That it came down to Johnson was remarkable, since during the season the Jazz were a tough, entertaining team thanks chiefly to Rudy Gobert, Gordon Hayward and George Hill. Johnson, a 16-year veteran and seven-time All-Star, was mostly an afterthought, averaging 23.6 minutes a game.AdvertisementBut in their first six playoff games, the Jazz have found themselves in need of someone who can score, and Iso Joe — a nickname Johnson earned for his love of isolation plays — has been ready, willing and, most important, usually able. Should it come down to the last shot in Game 7 on Sunday, it would not be surprising if it were Johnson taking it.AdvertisementJohnson missed his shot on Friday, but among his highlights this series were a winning shot in Game 1 and a stretch during Game 4 in which he reeled off 11 straight points in the late going, leading Utah to a 105-98 victory.Get the big sports news, highlights and analysis from Times journalists, with distinctive takes on games and some behind-the-scenes surprises, delivered to your inbox every week.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.When asked after Game 4 to sum up Johnson’s impact, Coach Quin Snyder heaped praise on the veteran guard.“He basically either scored or assisted on every basket,” Snyder said. “We knew this is who he is, and he knows it’s playoff time.”Johnson’s vital role on a young team has been one of the better stories of the postseason, and as his unusual career begins to wind down, some writers have started to consider his credentials for the Naismith Memorial Basketball Hall of Fame.Some writers have taken a tongue-in-cheek approach to the idea. Nathaniel Friedman, a frequent GQ contributor, posted on Twitter, “Why not put Joe Johnson in the Hall of Fame, no one would ever notice anyway,” in a reference to Johnson’s unassuming demeanor.Devin Kharpertian, who covered Johnson’s Nets days for the website The Brooklyn Game, joked before the season about the possibility of Johnson’s eventual Hall of Fame induction, summing up his acceptance speech this way: “Oh man. Yeah. Thanks.”But ESPN’s Kevin Pelton made a more serious case for Johnson, noting that he had surpassed 20,000 career points this season. Among players eligible for Hall of Fame induction, only Tom Chambers has reached that point without getting in.Chambers will probably have some company in the coming years, as Antawn Jamison, despite 20,042 career points, is unlikely to be inducted, and Johnson, whose career is most similar statistically to those of Michael Finley, Dennis Johnson and Byron Scott, according to Basketball-Reference.com, will have to overcome a lot to enter the Hall.AdvertisementBut at his best, Johnson has been one of the few players who could simply take over a game in the final seconds. As he tries to will the Jazz to the second round through an abundance of confidence with the game on the line, he is proving that some things don’t change, even if the way a player is viewed over the years does.A version of this article appears in print on April 30, 2017, on Page SP2 of the New York edition with the headline: A Taciturn Veteran Speaks Volumes for the Jazz in the Postseason.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.See More »