By THE ASSOCIATED PRESSMAY 17, 2016
Major League Baseball suspended Texas Rangers second baseman Rougned Odor for eight games and fined him $5,000 on Tuesday for punching Toronto’s Jose Bautista on the jaw.In all, 14 people were disciplined for their roles during a brawl Sunday at Globe Life Park in Arlington, Tex.Blue Jays pitcher Jesse Chavez was suspended three games for hitting Prince Fielder with a pitch after the brawl. Blue Jays Manager John Gibbons, who returned to the field for the fight after having been ejected five innings earlier, was penalized three games for inciting additional fighting.Bautista, who made a hard takeout slide on Odor, was suspended one game by the M.L.B. senior vice president, Joe Garagiola Jr., for his actions and postgame comments.AdvertisementRangers shortstop Elvis Andrus was suspended for one game for aggressive actions, and the Blue Jays’ first-base coach, Tim Leiper, was suspended for one game for returning to the dugout after his ejection.AdvertisementOdor and Bautista appealed their discipline, which will be held in abeyance pending a resolution. Andrus was set to serve his penalty on Tuesday at Oakland. The league office was awaiting a decision by Chavez.Get the big sports news, highlights and analysis from Times journalists, with distinctive takes on games and some behind-the-scenes surprises, delivered to your inbox every week.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.For the Rangers, pitcher Matt Bush was fined for intentionally throwing at Bautista; Sam Dyson and the bench coach, Steve Buechele, were fined for aggressive actions; and pitcher A. J. Griffin and catcher Robinson Chirinos were fined for being on the field while on the disabled list.For the Blue Jays, third baseman Josh Donaldson, the reigning American League most valuable player, and outfielder Kevin Pillar were fined for aggressive actions. The bench coach, DeMarlo Hale, who was the acting manager after Gibbons’s ejection, was fined for Chavez’s intentional actions after the umpires had warned the teams.Tension had been brewing since Oct. 14, when Bautista hit a tiebreaking three-run homer against Dyson in the seventh inning of Game 5 of the teams’ A.L. division series at Rogers Centre. He admired the ball for a couple seconds until it glanced off the front of the second deck in left and then flipped his bat dramatically.In Sunday’s game, the last regular-season game between the teams this year, Bush opened the eighth inning with a 96-mile-per-hour fastball that hit Bautista on the left arm and ricocheted off his thigh.Dan Iassogna, the home-plate umpire, warned both benches, and Justin Smoak bounced to third with one out. Bautista slid hard and late into the right leg of Odor and eight feet past second base. Odor shoved Bautista with both hands, then threw a punch to Bautista’s jaw that made his head snap back and his sunglasses and helmet fly off. Dugouts and bullpens emptied.Smoak was called out for an inning-ending double play, and Chavez hit Fielder on the right thigh with the next pitch.“I thought it was pretty cowardly of them, too, to wait until my last at-bat to do that in the whole series,” Bautista said after the game. “They could have come out and done it, if they wanted to send a message. Again, it shows a little bit more of their colors.”A version of this article appears in print on May 18, 2016, on Page B11 of the New York edition with the headline: Rangers Player Suspended Eight Games for a Punch.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.