By TOM PEDULLAMAY 19, 2016
Change is coming to horse racing in Maryland, offering the potential to bolster an industry that has long been important to the state. But the pride of a downtrodden neighborhood, concern about maintaining tradition and the desire of a high-powered corporation to appeal to upscale clients are all in play as debate rages about the form that change should take.Even as Pimlico Race Course in Baltimore prepares to host the 141st Preakness Stakes on Saturday, the Maryland Stadium Authority is undertaking a study to determine the viability of keeping the second leg of the Triple Crown at that track for the long term. Pimlico opened in 1870, making it the nation’s second-oldest track after Saratoga Race Course, which began operations six years earlier in Saratoga Springs, N.Y. Pimlico has hosted the Preakness since the aptly named Survivor won the inaugural running in 1873, except for 16 races held in New York between 1890 to 1908.Frank Stronach, chairman of the Stronach Group, plans to invest as much as half a billion dollars to try to replicate what has become a bustling entertainment complex surrounding Gulfstream Park in Hallandale Beach, Fla. But that plan contemplates moving the Preakness to Laurel Park in Laurel, Md., halfway between Baltimore and Washington. The mere suggestion of that has emotions running high.“It’s like taking the Colts to Indianapolis,” said William H. Cole, president of the Baltimore Development Corporation. “It’s a very, very difficult thing. We have every reason to believe that the Preakness is a product of Baltimore and Pimlico and not something that can be relocated simply and easily. We will fight to ensure that it doesn’t happen.”AdvertisementSamuel Rosenberg, a member of the Maryland House of Delegates who represents the Park Heights neighborhood, which is home to Pimlico, said that moving the Preakness, Baltimore’s largest annual sporting event, “would be a major economic and development setback for the city and for the region.” The race, which this year will feature Nyquist, the undefeated Kentucky Derby winner, drew a record 131,680 fans in 2015.“If it were to be held at Laurel, there would be a huge drop-off for restaurants, hotels and so on in Baltimore because Laurel is Washington focused,” Rosenberg said.AdvertisementThe Black-Eyed Susan Stakes, which showcases top 3-year-old fillies and is contested on Friday, encourages tourists to enjoy a long weekend.City officials and executives representing the Stronach Group agree that Pimlico is at its end. Veteran racegoers well remember an electrical fire that led to a blackout there in 1998. Last year, low water pressure caused by increased water use rendered many toilets inoperable.Timothy Ritvo, the chief operating officer for the Stronach Group’s racing development business, said of Pimlico: “This building was built in the 1800s with no foundation. It’s on sand.”Because business at Pimlico is lacking, with the exception of the coming weekend, Ritvo questioned the extent to which rebuilding at that location would benefit the immediate area.Get the big sports news, highlights and analysis from Times journalists, with distinctive takes on games and some behind-the-scenes surprises, delivered to your inbox every week.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.“The whole community, what do they get out of it?” he said. “They get a venue space two days a year when they can hustle cars in parking lots and stuff like that. What if we had a plan for that property where we create year-round jobs in the community?”Although Ritvo said he understood the feelings of traditionalists, he added that he believed the need for a dramatic change should override that. “We have historical guys that say you just can’t move something that historic,” he said. “Listen, they moved Yankee Stadium, the House That Ruth Built.”AdvertisementAs much as Ritvo, Cole, Rosenberg and others have expressed a willingness to work together, there appear to be starkly different views of how the interests of the surrounding area, the state, the racing business and the Stronach Group can best be served.“I don’t see it as a racetrack,” Cole said. “I see it as an anchor for redevelopment of the entire neighborhood.”Cole said that the city had invested millions of dollars to acquire property in Park Heights with an eye toward reversing its fortunes. Safety issues there came to the forefront last June when Kevin Jones, a 22-year-old security guard at Pimlico, was shot and killed during a robbery attempt as he walked to work.Still, Cole remains upbeat about what the future of that area can be if public funds are combined with private investment. “If you invest in Pimlico, you have a tremendous opportunity to invest in the redevelopment of Park Heights,” he said.Laurel, which sits on about 360 acres, offers three times as much space as Pimlico, seemingly making it more suitable for the huge complex the Stronach Group seeks.Ritvo said it had spent about $1 billion in Florida to rework Gulfstream Park, creating a complex around the racetrack and casino that includes shops and restaurants, and a training track used by many Kentucky Derby prospects in the winter.Stronach has already invested an estimated $25 million in Laurel while opening four off-track betting locations. Sal Sinatra, vice president of the Maryland Jockey Club, said that design work had been done that would increase Laurel’s seating to 70,000 for major events. He hopes such a capacity could attract the season-ending Breeders’ Cup, which would be an economic boon.Would a large expenditure at both Pimlico and Laurel make sense given their proximity? The Maryland Stadium Authority’s work should provide some answers, with negotiations expected to follow.“I think there is a win-win out there for the city and Stronach,” Cole said.An article on May 20 about the possibility that the Preakness Stakes might leave Pimlico Race Course referred incorrectly to the history of the race there. While Pimlico has hosted most Preakness Stakes since the first one in 1873, it has not hosted the Preakness since 1873. (The race was held in New York in 1890 and from 1894 to 1908.)A version of this article appears in print on May 20, 2016, on Page B15 of the New York edition with the headline: Battle Lines Form Over Moving the Preakness.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.