

 Benjamin Hoffman
 

KEEPING SCORE
MAY 18, 2016
The Oklahoma City Thunder survived a lengthy cold stretch by Kevin Durant in Game 1 of the N.B.A.’s Western Conference finals thanks in part to a strong offensive effort by Steven Adams, their 22-year-old center from New Zealand.Adams had averaged only 8 points a game in the regular season, but in Oklahoma City’s upset of the Golden State Warriors, he proved he was capable of more.In truth, the 16-point, 12-rebound, 2-block performance Adams turned in on Monday was the type of game Thunder fans have come to expect, even if the general view of Adams is tied to his long hair and his reputation for being almost annoyingly aggressive.Adams can be hard to appreciate. Opponents have accused him of playing dirty, and as a rookie in the 2013-14 season, he had a penchant for getting players to retaliate against him and draw ejections. But for the most part this season, the focus has been on his importance to his team on both ends of the floor, regardless of what a standard box score might say.AdvertisementAdams drew a different kind of attention when, in an interview after Monday’s game, he referred to the Warriors’ guards as “quick little monkeys.” But in a nod to his newfound maturity, he sought out reporters to explain that he intended no racist undertones and that it was largely a vernacular issue from not having grown up in the West. The Adams of two years ago seemed to seek out the ire of opponents; the current one realizes that focusing on the game is more important.AdvertisementThat Adams is still starting demonstrates his perseverance. Last season, the Thunder traded for Enes Kanter, who thrived to the point that in the off-season, Oklahoma City matched Portland’s four-year, $70 million offer sheet for him when he was a restricted free agent.Not content to be pushed aside, Adams refocused his game and became far more efficient. With his combination of youth, size and relevance on both ends of the court, he became one of the most important cogs in the Thunder machine, even if he is being paid about $14 million less this season than Kanter, who is essentially his backup. The two players average a combined 20.7 points and 14.8 rebounds, making the Thunder’s center rotation one of the most productive position groups in the N.B.A.It can sometimes be hard to see Adams’s contribution to the offense, but he is an extreme case of a player who understands his role and the limits of his abilities, and he works within those constraints remarkably well. In this, his third N.B.A. season, he set a career high with a .613 field-goal percentage, with 72.1 percent of his shots coming from inside three feet. He had 101 dunks and no attempts from 3-point range, and 76.2 percent of his field goals were assisted. It all led to a career-high offensive rating, a statistic that estimates he helped produce a whopping 123 points per 100 possessions.Get the big sports news, highlights and analysis from Times journalists, with distinctive takes on games and some behind-the-scenes surprises, delivered to your inbox every week.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.Kanter has more offensive skill than Adams, but because of Adams’s contributions on defense and his ability to function in the offense without the ball, the Thunder’s two most efficient lineups in the regular season both featured Adams. The Thunder’s most-used lineup — Durant, Serge Ibaka, Andre Roberson, Russell Westbrook and Adams — played together for 816 minutes and had a net rating of 17.8, meaning the group scored 17.8 points more than it allowed per 100 possessions. That lineup played for 12 minutes in Game 1 against the Warriors and managed to outscore the dominant Golden State offense, 29-21.An interesting aspect of Game 1 was that the Thunder, looking to exploit an extreme size advantage against the Warriors, chose to play Adams and Kanter at the same time for 10.7 minutes. Given that the two centers shared the court for 4.7 minutes a game during the regular season, it seemed to indicate that Oklahoma City was committed to fighting fire with water, and not going small, as others teams have done, unsuccessfully, against the Warriors.The Warriors have not lost consecutive games since Games 2 and 3 of last year’s N.B.A. finals, but the Thunder, having eliminated the Dallas Mavericks and the San Antonio Spurs, were looking to take a commanding 2-0 lead in the series on Wednesday night. And Adams, having spent a few days with people dissecting his personal history in terms of racial relations, will most likely be happy to get the focus back to his contributions on the court.A version of this article appears in print on May 19, 2016, on Page B13 of the New York edition with the headline: Center’s Value to Thunder Begins to Show in Box Score.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.See More »