AdvertisementSupported byToronto F.C. 2, Red Bulls 0By Filip BondyHARRISON, N.J. — Before a disheartening home opener Sunday, Red Bulls Coach Jesse Marsch had spoken about a possible Plan B for this season, if opponents adjusted too effectively to his club’s high-press tactics.But when the Toronto F.C. midfield pinched the Red Bulls coming forward and set six to 10 men behind the ball, in and around the box, there were no effective answers. Marsch switched to three strikers, then back to two, to no avail. Half-chances were botched. The match devolved into a frustrating 2-0 defeat decided by two late, disastrous counters against the run of play. Clearly, after the Columbus Crew derailed his team in the playoffs last season with ambushes from the rear, Marsch can expect much more of the same this season — a bogging down of the beautiful game from opposing teams.“They tried to stop the game and slow it down at almost every point,” Marsch griped. “Goal kicks. Fouls. The slowing-down tactic has to be mitigated by officials. There were very few times Toronto pressed us and caused us trouble.”On two counters, though, there was a great deal of trouble. Toronto’s Sebastian Giovinco, who spent much of the match as a sneaky soloist downfield, scooted down the left side and found Tsubasa Endoh cutting into the box with a cross in the 81st minute. When Red Bulls defender Kemar Lawrence slid into the pass and took down the wing, the referee Allen Chapman took a moment before whistling for a foul and pointing to the penalty spot.“We were both going, and I think he was going down before I slid in,” Lawrence said, referring to Endoh. “It went past a couple seconds, and the referee blew the whistle trying to make up his mind whether it was or was not a penalty.”Regardless, Giovinco ripped the penalty kick past Luis Robles, low and to the left corner. Then, in the first minute of added time, Marco Delgado beat a stretched, desperate Red Bulls defense for a clean breakaway and finished an easy clincher past a helpless Robles. The roving Giovinco, M.L.S.’s most valuable player in 2015, had been a constant source of concern for the back line.“They did a good job of staying compact, and we realized at that point they were just going to spring Giovinco,” Robles said. “We lacked the mental toughness to shut a player like that down.”The defeat did nothing to alleviate early fears among fans that the rest of the league had caught on to the Red Bulls’ frenetic tactics and that the team might need to mix things up considerably if it is to repeat the success of 2015.Last year, the Red Bulls won the Supporters’ Shield with the best record in the league, only to be knocked out in the Eastern Conference finals by Columbus, which gummed up the works around the box and countered effectively. Toronto did not produce as many dangerous opportunities as Columbus did, but it did not need to, because the Red Bulls could not finish their own opportunities.“We weren’t very sharp,” said Bradley Wright-Phillips, who missed a couple of chances. “Our touches let us down. It’s the first game. It’s nothing to worry about.”The Red Bulls did not lose a match last season until their eighth game and did not drop a home match until May 24. Marsch insisted, however, that his side would regain its form quickly. It is a familiar group. His lineup included 10 of the 11 players who started the last playoff game in November against Columbus, with the exception of Gideon Baah, who played at center back in place of Matt Miazga, who left the team for Chelsea.Baah played brilliantly, held his space and marked Giovinco effectively for most of the match. Still, the Red Bulls frayed near the end, and Marsch acknowledged that he might need to tweak his system and loosen things up a bit. “We believe what we’re doing,” he said last week. “That being said, there are ways to address what we’re doing. Mixing it up, varying our formations a little, looking at rotations and matchups. We have more flexibility. I think it will be even harder to prepare for us.“This year, you’ll see greater variations,” he added.A slight variation on a theme was not good enough on Sunday, when the Red Bulls were stymied on offense and then caught flat-footed twice in the final minutes.“We got them in transitions,” Toronto Coach Greg Vanney said. “We knew that would be a big part of the game.”Advertisement