By DAVID WALDSTEINMARCH 6, 2016
CLEARWATER, Fla. —  On Sunday, for the first time since the wild-card playoff game against the Houston Astros, Masahiro Tanaka pitched in a game.There was no great anxiety about it beforehand, but it was still noteworthy that Tanaka made it safely through two innings of his spring training debut against the Philadelphia Phillies without any physical limitations. That leaves him on pace to start on opening day for the Yankees.“That is the goal,” he said through an interpreter. “That is what I am trying to do.”Shortly after that Oct. 6 playoff loss to the Astros, Tanaka had surgery to remove a bone spur in his right elbow. The spur did not cause Tanaka to miss any starts. He said it had not bothered him on days he pitched, only between starts.But for a second straight season, Tanaka had to pitch around arm injuries. A wrist and forearm strain caused him to miss all of May, and he made only 24 starts. The previous season, his rookie campaign, Tanaka was found to have a small tear in his ulnar collateral ligament, and he made just 20 starts.AdvertisementThe hope, of course, is that he will not only survive the entire coming season free of injuries but also pitch to the level he did in the first half of 2014, before the first elbow injury surfaced.Advertisement“Yes, I do feel that I can get back to that form,” he said after his outing against the Phillies, “because it feels better.”Pitching to catcher Gary Sanchez, Tanaka threw two scoreless innings. He allowed two hits and a walk and struck out two batters. Most important, he reported no problems with his elbow, either during the game, a 6-5 Phillies win, or at any point during spring training.Manager Joe Girardi said Tanaka was on schedule to start opening day against the Astros, in what is likely to be a rematch of the wild-card face-off between Tanaka and Dallas Keuchel.“The idea is that he is our No. 1 starter,” Girardi said, “but you have to see how he does physically.”Tanaka was assisted in the game by Rob Refsnyder, who made his debut of sorts at third base. With runners on first and second and nobody out in the first inning, Refsnyder dived to his left to snare a sharp ground ball off the bat of Carlos Ruiz. He scrambled to his feet and fired a strike to Starlin Castro, who relayed to Dustin Ackley to complete the double play.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.“He got the good part of the bat, and the ball had a lot of velocity,” Tanaka said of the ball Ruiz hit. “It was huge that he made that play.”In his brief professional career, Refsnyder has been moved from right field to second base, where Castro is set to be the starter. Now Refsnyder is being asked to try third base. If he can show proficiency there, he stands a chance of making the roster as a backup infielder.Refsnyder began working at third base about a week ago and said he had split his time evenly between second and third in practices.Advertisement“I’m just trying to do my best and help the team in any way I can,” he said.Refsnyder also performed well offensively, with a hit and a walk in two plate appearances. He stole two bases and scored a run.Sanchez, another young player given a chance to start, did well behind the plate. He left the game in the sixth inning after being hit in the leg by a pitch by the submarine thrower Greg Burke, but he said he felt fine.Austin Romine, who is also competing for the backup catching job, replaced Sanchez and went 2 for 2 with two doubles and three R.B.I.Sanchez, 23, who is from the Dominican Republic, is one of the top prospects in the Yankees organization. He is competing for a spot as the backup to Brian McCann and is considered the catcher of the future. The Yankees must weigh the benefits of having him sit and learn behind McCann against giving him a chance to play every day in Class AAA.“I’m excited to be in the mix,” Sanchez said through an interpreter. “But for us players who want to make it to the big leagues, it is not our decision.”As for catching Tanaka, Sanchez said he was pleased with how the two innings had proceeded.“We were on the same page,” he said.A version of this article appears in print on March 7, 2016, on Page D2 of the New York edition with the headline: Tanaka Returns to Mound for Yankees After Off-Season Surgery for Bone Spur.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.