By BENJAMIN HOFFMANAPRIL 27, 2017
The first round of the 2017 N.F.L. draft featured several trades and a few surprising selections. The Cleveland Browns ended up with three first-round picks, and the Chicago Bears surprised most observers by trading up to the No. 2 spot to draft a quarterback, even though they paid a lot of money for one in the off-season. Here is a look at each player selected in the first round:Myles Garrett, Defensive end, Texas A&MHe is a 6-foot-4, 270-pound pass-rushing defensive end who runs the 40-yard dash in 4.64 seconds, and has a 41-inch vertical leap. He has especially long arms, does not bother with social media, and is as likely to be found reading a book as he is listening to music or watching a movie. Warren Sapp may not think he qualifies as a special prospect, but virtually everyone else who watched him star for the Aggies thinks he can dominate in the N.F.L. He is this draft’s closest approximation of a sure thing.How he fits: Cleveland’s top needs are quarterback and the secondary, but adding an absolute monster on the defensive line would help any team, and by all accounts Garrett is the type of player a team builds itself around. The Browns pick again at No. 12, when Mitchell Trubisky could still be available, giving the team a major asset on both sides of the ball.Mitchell Trubisky, Quarterback, North CarolinaOnly a one-year starter at quarterback in college, Trubisky is still learning the position, but he has already shown a great deal of accuracy and arm strength. A solid performance at the scouting combine proved that his mobility will not be a concern, and he is thought to be the personality type that will make him a solid leader. He played almost entirely out of the shotgun in college, and will be a project rather than a Day 1 star, but in this draft class he seems like the best bet at his position.The trade: The 49ers agreed to swap top picks with the Bears in exchange for third- and fourth-round picks in this year’s draft and a third-rounder in 2018. The selection of Trubisky was a major surprise. He was not considered a top-10 pick, but Chicago determined that quarterback was a need, and with Cleveland lurking as a team hoping to draft him, the Bears clearly believed they could not wait.Solomon Thomas, Defensive line, StanfordA defensive end in a 3-4 defense in college, he will likely be asked to play tackle in the N.F.L., which may require adding some bulk to his athletic frame. Even at a lower weight, he has proven adept against the run and the pass as a strong player (30 bench-press repetitions) who is deceptively fast. He had 11.5 sacks and 25.5 tackles for a loss over his last two seasons at Stanford.AdvertisementHow he fits: The 49ers have a talent deficiency at virtually every position, so swapping picks with Chicago to get two more selections in this draft made sense. They kept it local by drafting a player from Stanford, and he will have plenty of time to determine his N.F.L. position as the 49ers look to rebuild their entire defense.Leonard Fournette, Running back, Louisiana StateFournette became a household name as a sophomore, when he lit up opposing defenses by rushing for 1,943 yards and 22 touchdowns. Injuries prevented him from repeating that success as a junior, but he is still believed to be the top running back in his draft class, and a special player at the position even if he will disappoint anyone expecting for the second coming of the Cowboys superstar Ezekiel Elliott. Fournette does not offer a lot in the passing game, but he is a throwback to the power runners of yesteryear. If given a plum situation like the one Elliott had last season, he could do something great.AdvertisementHow he fits: The Jaguars had a major letdown in 2016, failing to live up to preseason hype, and they were left with needs at tight end, running back and defensive depth. Tom Coughlin, the team’s new executive vice president of football operations, is an old-school guy and Fournette is an old-school pick.Corey Davis, Wide receiver, Western MichiganWith an incredible 5,285 career receiving yards at Western Michigan, Davis steps into the N.F.L. as the top route-running receiver in his class. He may not have the top-end speed some teams cherish, but he makes up for it with red-zone ability. The biggest concern, beyond his speed, is his fairly high number of drops, which could discourage quarterbacks from trusting him.How he fits: Drafting early thanks to last year’s trade with the Rams, the Titans improved a great deal last season and are now filling in the missing pieces that could allow them to go from good to great. Wide receiver was a major need, and even if Davis was not the top talent available, he was the top talent at the position where they needed the most help.Jamal Adams, Safety, Louisiana StateHe is not the fastest safety (4.56 seconds in the 40-yard dash) or the strongest (18 bench-press repetitions) but his instincts in pass coverage and his stellar run support make him a potential franchise cornerstone for a team willing to bet big on a position often ignored early. Among his few weaknesses is an inability to intercept passes. His father, George, was a running back taken with the 19th pick in the 1985 draft who split six seasons between the Giants and Patriots.How he fits: As much as the Jets need a quarterback, they may be even more desperate to bolster the secondary after Darrelle Revis fell off a cliff last season. They have selected a defensive player with their last nine first-round picks, but Adams seems to be a remarkably safe building block.Mike Williams, Wide receiver, ClemsonNot to be confused with the various other Mike Williamses through the years, this one is the Clemson star who had 98 catches for 1,361 yards and 11 touchdowns in 2016. He did so after missing all but one game in 2015 because of a freak injury in which he fractured his neck by hitting his helmet into a goal post after a touchdown. He has all the measurables teams look for, and beyond occasional drops and apprehension about the neck injury, there is little question he is the best receiver in the draft.AdvertisementHow he fits: Even after hitting a home run with Joey Bosa last year, the Chargers had holes all over the defense, as well as a need to develop an eventual replacement at quarterback for the aging Philip Rivers. But Mike Williams, the top receiver on the board, proved too enticing to pass up.Christian McCaffrey, Running back, StanfordMcCaffrey’s career at Stanford was nothing short of incredible, with the versatile running back piling up 5,128 yards from scrimmage and 31 touchdowns in 37 games. He was most productive as a sophomore, with injuries limiting him some as a junior, but the combination of elite running ability, elite speed and elite receiving skills makes him the do-everything back that many teams love. The only worry is that his lack of size and tackle-breaking ability, along with his overuse in college, could result in his body breaking down.How he fits: The Panthers were in the Super Bowl two years ago, but they were an also-ran in 2016. They are set at quarterback but could use plenty of offensive skill players to complement Cam Newton. McCaffrey is a one-man offensive depth chart who could be something special alongside Newton.John Ross, Wide receiver, WashingtonSure he’s small, but with a 4.22-second 40-yard dash and a 133-inch broad jump, teams are unlikely to get hung up on height or weight. His 23 touchdowns on 112 touches will not hurt his stock either, though a history of trouble in both knees — including an anterior cruciate ligament repair in 2015 — will result in teams poring over his medical reports.How he fits: Trying to get back to the playoffs after a one-year absence, the Bengals need talent and depth on the offensive and defensive lines. Instead, they reached for a wide receiver who can fly.Patrick Mahomes, Quarterback, Texas TechMahomes is a big, brash guy who put up huge numbers in Texas Tech’s offense. With an ability to extend plays with athleticism and then find players downfield, he could develop into something special if a team can afford to be patient. He has probably the strongest arm in this draft.How he fits: The Bills traded the No. 10 pick to the Chiefs for the 27th selection in this draft, a third-rounder and Kansas City’s 2018 first-rounder. The Chiefs made the move because they need a long-term solution behind Alex Smith. He was a bit of a reach this early in the draft, but it seems like a perfect situation for Mahomes to learn the game.Marshon Lattimore, Cornerback, Ohio StateHe is ridiculously fast (4.36-second 40-yard dash), excels in the vertical leap and broad jump, and justified his measurables on the field after a slow start because of ailing hamstrings that required surgery. He has the coverage skills to be a shutdown corner and the strength and instincts to beat receivers for the ball when he is challenged. The only real knock is his lack of experience against top competition.AdvertisementHow he fits: It is a broken record to say the Saints have needs on defense, as the Drew Brees era has been almost entirely defined by lighting up the scoreboard on offense while the defense lets the other team keep pace. Lattimore is a step in the right direction as the top cornerback in the draft.Deshaun Watson, Quarterback, ClemsonA two-time finalist for the Heisman Trophy, Watson went 32-3 as a starter in college, and he scored 75 combined points against the punishing Alabama defense in the last two national championship games. He does not possess the necessary accuracy on deep passes to be a true N.F.L. star, and if he wants to continue to be a threat as a mobile quarterback he will probably need to add some size to his slender frame.How he fits: The Browns traded the No. 12 pick to the Texans for a package that reportedly includes the No. 25 pick and a first-rounder in 2018. Watson may be a project at the pro level but that immediately makes him better than any of the recent Houston quarterbacks who were highly paid spaceholders.Haason Reddick, Linebacker, TempleA running back and safety in high school, Reddick was a walk-on at Temple but showed off an impressive combination of athletic abilities at the scouting combine, complementing his growth as a pass-rusher over the last few years. He retained his coverage abilities from his time as a defensive back, which will keep him on the field for third downs, but as a smaller linebacker he will have to fight for everything.How he fits: The Cardinals’ world-beater offense fell apart last season despite nearly the entire team returning from the previous year’s 13-3 squad. Suddenly a team that seemed to have all of the position players they needed finds themselves looking for long-term solutions at quarterback and wide receiver to support the dominant David Johnson. Reddick, however, was too irresistible of a solution at linebacker.Derek Barnett, Defensive end, TennesseeAfter three years of intense production in the hyper-competitive Southeastern Conference (he broke Reggie White’s university sack record), Barnett disappointed at the combine by justifying concerns about his speed. He can make up for that lack of burst with excellent technique, but with non-ideal size and an inability to keep up with faster quarterbacks, he will need the perfect situation to thrive.How he fits: It is hard to say if the Eagles’ 3-0 start was a mirage, or if it was a sign of what the team is capable of at full-strength, but Philadelphia believes it has a franchise quarterback in Carson Wentz and now will look to support him with skill players and defensive depth. They went with the latter, adding a defensive end who has some serious question marks despite great production.Malik Hooker, Safety, Ohio StateRecruited as a basketball player, Hooker has only one year of starting experience, but he did a lot with that one year, intercepting seven passes. He is still learning the position, but a patient team willing to let him improve at stopping the run will very likely be rewarded with a star player. His first years may be awkward, however, as he has to refine his tackling technique and let experience help him on plays where instincts and athletic ability are not enough.AdvertisementHow he fits: The Colts are committed to building a defense that will hold up its end of the bargain with an Andrew Luck-led offense. Hooker has the athletic ability to control the middle of the field once he gets comfortable in the pro game.Marlon Humphrey, Cornerback, AlabamaSmaller than Washington’s Kevin King, and lacking King’s top-notch instincts, Humphrey succeeds thanks to top-end speed (4.41-second 40-yard dash) and his ability to adjust and recover when he makes a mistake. He most likely will need time to adjust to the N.F.L. before he has a chance to truly succeed.How he fits: Ozzie Newsome does not have a great track record of first-round picks, but while looking for depth all over the field, he went for Humphrey despite a potentially superior player in King being available. Humphrey is the first Alabama player taken in this draft, despite being ranked below a number of his teammates.Jonathan Allen, Defensive line, AlabamaAllen won the Chuck Bednarik and Bronco Nagurski Awards in 2016, signifying him as the nation’s top defender on the nation’s top defense. He is small for a tackle, and potentially not long enough or fast enough to play on the end, so there will be an adjustment period regardless of his tremendous success in college. But he was a key part of a wildly successful defense, and he is the type of player who tends to outperform his measurables.How he fits: The Redskins could use some skill players on offense, as well as some offensive line depth, but the team’s defense was its weak point last year. They lucked out with Allen, a top-five pick on talent, falling all the way to No. 17.Adoree’ Jackson, Cornerback, Southern CaliforniaAn All-American in track, and a two-way performer for the Trojans as a cornerback and wide receiver, Jackson has shown steady improvement in terms of his coverage ability. His lack of size and his inability to provide run support could limit his ability to contribute on the outside in coverage. But he has the makings of an elite return specialist, so even if he is limited to being a slot corner, he could still provide enough production to justify a high draft pick.How he fits: With a second pick in the first round, the Titans were working with house money. They decided to go with an intriguing option at defensive back rather than rolling the dice on Reuben Foster, a linebacker whose character concerns have him still hanging around despite top-10 talent.O.J. Howard, Tight end, AlabamaThe second-fastest tight end at this year’s combine (his 4.51 40-yard dash was within a tenth of a second of all but three wide receivers), Howard did not have exceptional production in college because of an offense that underutilizes tight ends. However, he has the size and skill-set to thrive in a pro offense. He may not be ready to contribute as an in-line blocker right away, which could limit his playing time, but there is little reason to believe that is not a skill he could develop.AdvertisementHow he fits: Jameis Winston and Mike Evans form one of the best quarterback-wide receiver combinations, and the Buccaneers showed solid improvement last year. To build on that success, Tampa Bay continued the run on Alabama players by taking Howard, who gives Winston another enormous target in the red zone.Garett Bolles, Tackle, UtahBolles turns 25 in May and started only one year for Utah after transferring from a junior college, with a long history of off-field troubles giving him a late start. While that probably gave teams pause, his massive frame, which could seemingly take on quite a bit more weight, and his athleticism project him as an impact left tackle.How he fits: Blaming last year’s failures on the retirement of Peyton Manning ignores how ineffective Manning was in 2015 despite the Super Bowl win. The Broncos still has one of the game’s most exciting defenses, even with the retirement of DeMarcus Ware, and decided to bulk up on the offensive line. A draft had never gone this long before an offensive lineman was selected.Jarrad Davis, Linebacker, FloridaHe is two years removed from his most productive college season and lacks consistency in his technique, but he has the type of character on and off the field that has teams willing to look past his shortcomings and potentially even his injury history.How he fits: The Lions were a playoff team last season and bolstered their offensive line depth through free agency, so adding a solid prospect at linebacker seems like a wise move for a team that needs to fix a lot of small problems if they want to get to the next level. They passed on Alabama linebacker Reuben Foster, who is a top-five talent but turned in a diluted drug sample before the draft.Charles Harris, Linebacker, MissouriHarris did not play football until his junior year of high school, but it came naturally and he was a solid player at Missouri, with 18 sacks and 34.5 tackles for a loss in 35 games. His impact is limited by his size, and he is not adept at stopping the run, but he can contribute if a team lets him focus on the quarterback.How he fits: The Dolphins lucked into Laremy Tunsil as a long-term solution at left tackle last season because of some social media shenanigans, and this year they rolled the dice by taking a player who is still learning his position but could eventually be a great pass rusher.Evan Engram, Tight end, MississippiA tight end who is closer to ideal size for a wide receiver, Engram will most likely never be much of a blocker, and he has plenty of issues in terms of his receiving technique. But as a larger pass-catching option with very good speed (4.42-second 40-yard dash), he could be a nice fit for a creative offense.AdvertisementHow he fits: The Giants had a good record last season, but a playoff loss to the Packers showed how far they still have to go thanks to big holes at running back, offensive line and, shockingly for the Giants, defensive line. Tight end may not have been at the top of their list, but Engram should be a wonderful complement to Brandon Marshall, giving Eli Manning multiple big targets when Odell Beckham Jr. is locked down.Gareon Conley, Cornerback, Ohio StateA player who had his draft status thrown up in the air because of a sexual-assault allegation, Conley has first-round talent and the ability to succeed in man or zone coverage. He has yet to be charged and has denied the allegation against him, but it raised a red flag for many teams.How he fits: The Raiders ended a long playoff drought thanks to Derek Carr and Khalil Mack (and some help from Sebastian Janikowski, who was the last player remaining from their Super Bowl appearance following the 2002 season), and are now looking to add to their young core by shoring up a defense that is awfully thin beyond Mack. Conley is a bit of a throwback for the Raiders as a high-risk, high-reward pick that could backfire in a big way.Jabrill Peppers, Linebacker/Safety, MichiganWhether he is a linebacker or a safety is open to debate, as the do-everything star for the Wolverines played offense and defense and never committed to a single position. He runs a 4.46-second 40-yard dash and can seemingly do everything well, but he may be too small to play linebacker and may lack the ball-hawking instincts to play defensive back.How he fits: The Browns traded into this spot when the Texans selected Deshaun Watson (the Browns also received a 2018 first-round pick), and with Myles Garrett seeming like a sure thing at defensive end, they took a chance on Peppers, giving them two of the most intriguing defensive players in college football last season.Takkarist McKinley, Defensive end, UCLAA defensive end in a 4-3 or an outside linebacker in a 3-4, McKinley utilizes his elite speed to wear out opposing linemen. His technique and his overall power are lacking at the pro level, so he will need to add some size and absorb a great deal of coaching if he wants to find success in the N.F.L. McKinley was extremely emotional after being picked, honoring his deceased grandmother and repeatedly cursing during a live interview.How he fits: The Seahawks traded the No. 26 pick to the Falcons in exchange for the No. 31 pick and other assets. With needs on the offensive and defensive lines, Atlanta went for defense. It is an ideal situation for McKinley, who can learn the game under Dan Quinn, one of the game’s best defensive coaches.Tre’Davious White, Cornerback, Louisiana StateHis athleticism and instincts make him seem like an elite prospect at cornerback, but his small frame, below-average tackling, and reputation for playing soft count against him. Even if he does not appear to be an every-down corner, because his run support is lacking, he can be an asset in man coverage and is fast enough to be a strong special-teams performer.AdvertisementHow he fits: The Bills moved into this spot after trading the No. 10 pick to the Chiefs for a package of draft picks. Looking for a new identity after firing Rex Ryan, the Bills have needs at cornerback, wide receiver and linebacker, They got a solid cornerback prospect at the end of the first round, with some caveats about his size and toughness.Taco Charlton, Defensive end, MichiganHe is big (6-foot-6, 277 pounds), he is strong, and he was occasionally dominant for Jim Harbaugh’s defense, but he lacked consistency and does not have truly elite speed on the edge. If he gets stronger while he develops in the N.F.L. and evens out his effort, he could be a steal toward the end of the first round.How he fits: A team with relatively few needs, the Cowboys could use some help at defensive end and in the secondary. They went with the former, getting a player who might not contribute right away but who could pay off in the long run.David Njoku, Tight end, MiamiA wide receiver in high school, and a boys’ high jump champion, Njoku is the athletic tight end people have come to expect from Miami. Possessing plenty of speed and leaping ability, Njoku had 698 receiving yards and eight touchdowns in 2016, and if he can improve his in-line blocking skills he has the talent to be a top tight end. He may have to add some bulk if he wants to handle bigger defenders.How he fits: The Packers badly need some depth in the secondary, and they may be setting up for that by trading the 29th pick to the Browns in exchange for the 33rd and 108th picks. The Browns, who already drafted Myles Garrett and Jabrill Peppers, added to their haul with a big-play tight end. They may not have anyone to throw him the ball just yet, but Njoku will be a 20-year-old rookie, so he can presumably hit his prime after Cleveland has acquired more assets.T. J. Watt, Linebacker, WisconsinA younger brother of J. J. Watt, T. J. missed some time early in his college career but was an All-American in 2016 on the strength of 15.5 tackles for a loss and 11.5 sacks. Not really an elite athlete, he has the frame to become a massive linebacker and has the work ethic to get there.How he fits: It is time for the Steelers to get younger at linebacker, and some help in the secondary would be nice as well. They got the linebacker they were looking for in Watt, choosing a safer option who might take time to develop rather than Alabama’s Reuben Foster, who has a higher ceiling but a lower floor.Reuben Foster, Linebacker, AlabamaAn every-down linebacker who can run the field and deliver crushing blows, Foster is a potential centerpiece for an N.F.L. defense, but he saw his stock fluctuate wildly after a heated argument with a hospital worker ended his time at scouting combine. He was already not able to participate in on-field activities because of rotator cuff surgery, and that combined with reports of a diluted drug sample, which is treated as a positive result, sent many teams running in the other direction. The winner of the 2016 Butkus Award as the nation’s top linebacker, he is capable of dominant play at the pro level if he can get his off-field issues under control.AdvertisementHow he fits: The 49ers traded the Nos. 34 and 111 picks to Seattle for this pick, swinging for the fences with Foster, who could fill the gaping hole the team has had since the unexpected retirement of Patrick Willis. Before his off-field troubles, Foster was a top-three pick with Ray Lewis-like potential, and if the 49ers can help him get his life together, he could be the steal of the draft.Ryan Ramczyk, Tackle, WisconsinHe was only a one-year starter in the Football Bowl Subdivision, and he has relatively short arms for a player hoping to be viewed as a left tackle, but the skill he showed as a pass -blocker in 2016 put him into the conversation as a first-rounder. The only red flag, besides his short arms, was off-season surgery to repair the labrum in his hip.How he fits: The Saints need defenders, even after drafting Marshon Lattimore with the No. 11 pick, but with the last pick in the first round they apparently could not pass up Ramczyk, who was the top tackle left on the board. It is hard to go wrong with a big tackle from Wisconsin.We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.