By SETH BERKMANMAY 17, 2016
Curtis Granderson awaited Max Scherzer’s first pitch, tapping his fingers along the handle of his bat like keys on a piano.To upstage Scherzer, a virtuoso in the art of pitching, Granderson wanted to set an early tempo. When Scherzer delivered a 93-mile-per-hour fastball, Granderson jumped on the offering, sending it high over the right-field fence at Citi Field and proving, if nothing else, that Scherzer would not be infallible Tuesday night.After tossing a no-hitter in his previous appearance at Citi Field last October and striking out 20 batters in his last start, on May 11, Scherzer allowed another homer in the third inning to Michael Conforto. The Mets, behind a masterful performance by Noah Syndergaard, defeated the Nationals, 2-0.“I’m sure he said to himself, ‘I got to get it going,’ ” Manager Terry Collins said of Granderson, adding, “As he goes, we go.”AdvertisementThe win was a placating remedy to an otherwise hectic day at Citi Field, during which the Mets revealed ailments affecting Lucas Duda and David Wright, and Daniel Murphy returned to his former home field for the first time.AdvertisementTwo runs were ample support for Syndergaard, who struck out 10 batters over seven scoreless innings. In the sixth, after allowing two singles, Syndergaard came back from a 3-0 count to strike out Bryce Harper with a piercing 91-m.p.h. slider. Syndergaard bounced off the mound gracefully before clenching his fist.“He throws 100 miles an hour,” Harper said. “Sometimes, you’ve just got to tip your cap. He’s got devastating stuff — his fastball, his slider’s 93, his changeup’s devastating as well. That’s a tough guy to hit.”Harper added: “I know he’s not scared. I know he wants to get out there and do everything he can to shut our team down. That’s what he did tonight.”Collins was particularly impressed by Syndergaard’s decision to throw Harper a slider out of the zone with a full count.“That shows you that he’s fearless,” Collins said. “He’s not afraid to do what he has to.”Almost the entire Nationals roster had leaned against the visitors’ dugout railing while Syndergaard warmed up before the game, observing the phenomenon who clocked two home runs in his last game, against the Los Angeles Dodgers, on May 11. He struck out twice Tuesday in two at-bats.Neutralized by Scherzer at the plate, Syndergaard more than compensated from the mound, giving up five hits and no walks, becoming the headlining act on a bill full of attractions.Get the big sports news, highlights and analysis from Times journalists, with distinctive takes on games and some behind-the-scenes surprises, delivered to your inbox every week.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.In another positive development for the Mets, Syndergaard allowed no stolen bases — a problem in previous outings at home. (The Reds stole five in a game there last month.) In the sixth, catcher Kevin Plawecki threw out Ben Revere, the only runner to try to steal a base on Syndergaard.AdvertisementThe Nationals walked onto Citi Field in first place in the National League East, while the Mets were licking their wounds from a 4-7 trip, which included the loss of their last four games. The last time the Mets lost five straight was last season, a streak capped with Scherzer’s hurling one of the most dominating performances in recent baseball history.In the end, the memory of Scherzer’s no-hitter against the Mets was erased when they stormed through the playoffs, guided by the thunderous bat of Murphy, their former second baseman. Last December, after the Mets decided not to retain his services, Murphy signed with the Nationals for three years and $37.5 million.General Manager Sandy Alderson presented Murphy with his N.L. championship ring before the game. Later, as Murphy walked to the batter’s box for his first at-bat at Citi Field as a visitor, the crowd slowly rose to its feet to salute Murphy for seven years of service. He went 1 for 3.“The ovation from the crowd left me humbled, to say the least,” Murphy said.While the Mets and Murphy officially closed the chapter on their partnership, the club welcomed Matt Reynolds, who was recalled before the game from Class AAA Las Vegas and inserted into the starting lineup after Wright was scratched. Eric Campbell started at first base for Duda, who has been experiencing back stiffness.Reynolds, who wore Wright’s glove at third base, finished 0 for 3. He cleanly fielded a hard-hit ground ball from Harper for the final out of the game, securing Syndergaard’s fourth win of the season, in which he outmatched one of the game’s premier pitchers.“No stage is too big for him,” Plawecki said.Tyler Kepner contributed reporting.A version of this article appears in print on May 18, 2016, on Page B11 of the New York edition with the headline: Syndergaard Outpitches Scherzer in Mets’ Victory.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.