AdvertisementSupported byBy Richard GoldsteinDick McAuliffe, the hard-nosed All-Star infielder who played 14 seasons for the Detroit Tigers and helped take them to the 1968 World Series championship, died on Friday in Connecticut. He was 76.His death was announced by the Tigers, who said he had Alzheimer’s disease. He lived in Farmington, Conn.A battle-hardened player known to his teammates as Mad Dog, McAuliffe had pop in his bat, hitting out of an unorthodox left-handed “open” stance with his bat held high and his hips turned toward the pitcher. In 1968, he led the American League in runs with 95, had 50 extra-base hits and never hit into a double play.He finished seventh in the balloting for the league’s most valuable player in 1968. His teammate Denny McLain, who won 31 games at the head of a formidable pitching staff that also included Mickey Lolich, was named M.V.P.McAuliffe, who was the Tigers’ second baseman in 1968 but who also played shortstop and at times third base during his career, was an All-Star every year from 1965 to 1967.In 1968, “he was the guy who made us go,” said Gates Brown, an outfielder and an extraordinary pinch-hitter for those Tigers, as quoted by Tim Wendel in his book “Summer of ’68” (2012). (Brown died in 2013.)“Dick McAuliffe was the kind of player you could always count on, and you know he will cover your back,” he added. “It’s hard to picture that ’68 team without him.”The Tigers went on to defeat the St. Louis Cardinals in a seven-game World Series, facing a star-studded roster that included pitcher Bob Gibson, first baseman Orlando Cepeda and outfielder Lou Brock.Jim Price, a backup catcher behind Bill Freehan for the 1968 Tigers and now a radio broadcaster for the team, told The Detroit Free Press upon McAuliffe’s death: “We had a lot of fights in those days, and Mad Dog was right there. Not mean at all. But you do him wrong from another team, they had to pay the price.”McAuliffe was remembered especially for a late August game in 1968 when the White Sox left-hander Tommy John threw several pitches close to him before yielding a walk on a pitch over his head. As McAuliffe headed to first base, he had words with John and then charged him. John incurred torn ligaments in his pitching shoulder in the scuffle and was out for the rest of the season.Richard John McAuliffe was born on Nov. 29, 1939, in Hartford and grew up in nearby Farmington, Conn., playing high school baseball there. He was signed by the Tigers in 1957.McAuliffe played for the Tigers from 1960 to 1973, then spent two years with the Boston Red Sox.He adopted his unorthodox style at the plate while in the low minor leagues.“I had a closed stance,” he told The Hartford Courant in 2010. “The manager asked me how I’d hit the previous year. I said, ‘Not so good.’ I was hitting everything to left field. He said, ‘Open your hips up and you’ll be able to hit it anywhere you want it.’ ”McAuliffe’s career batting average was only .247, but he had 1,530 hits and 197 home runs.After retiring from baseball, he owned a company supplying coin-operated washing machines and dryers.Survivors include his wife, Joanne; a son, Michael; and a daughter, Mary.“I always played hard and was very determined, something I learned from my high school coach,” McAuliffe told the website detroitathletic.com in 2009. “Through my father, I was a Yankee fan at an early age and Phil Rizzuto was my idol, a scrappy little player and a damned good one. What carried me through my long career was having determination and desire.”Advertisement