By KEN BELSONAPRIL 28, 2017
PHILADELPHIA — Offense ruled early in the opening round of the N.F.L. draft on Thursday, with quarterbacks, running backs and wide receivers in demand after years of focus on linemen and defense. Several teams traded up to acquire quarterbacks, creating competitions for starting jobs.Eight of the first 12 selections were offensive players.The event, held in Philadelphia for the first time since 1961, when Vince Lombardi coached the Green Bay Packers, had the feel of a football game. A giant stage was built in a park in front of the Philadelphia Museum of Art and near a statue of Rocky Balboa, the movie character who defined the city’s underdog quality. About 70,000 fans gathered and made themselves heard.“Especially when they played the national anthem, I caught chills,” said John Ross, a University of Washington wide receiver who was chosen in the ninth spot by the Cincinnati Bengals. “I thought we were going to strap it up and play.”The draft started predictably with waves of deafening boos for Commissioner Roger Goodell, who announced that, as expected, the Cleveland Browns had chosen defensive end Myles Garrett from Texas A&M with the No. 1 overall pick.AdvertisementThe Browns, who finished 1-15 last season, were clearly the most active team on Thursday. In addition to taking Garrett, they exchanged first-round picks with the Houston Texans, then acquired the Green Bay Packers’ top pick.AdvertisementThe proceedings quickly went off script when the San Francisco 49ers traded the second pick to the Chicago Bears, who had the third slot. The Bears then took quarterback Mitchell Trubisky, who started just 13 college games at the University of North Carolina.“I didn’t see this coming along,” Trubisky said. “It was a mystery.”The choice was confounding because the Bears signed quarterback Mike Glennon to a three-year, $45 million contract last month.The 49ers, who received the Bears’ third pick, as well as Chicago’s third- and fourth-round picks this year and a third-round pick in 2018, took Solomon Thomas, who played defensive end at Stanford.The Jacksonville Jaguars, who had one of the N.F.L.’s lowest-scoring offenses last season, then took Leonard Fournette, the hard-charging running back from Louisiana State. Fournette rushed for 2,045 yards and 22 touchdowns in 2015, but played in just seven games last season because of an injured ankle.Corey Davis from Western Michigan was the first wide receiver taken when the Tennessee Titans spent the No. 5 pick on him.And the Jets, trying to bolster their beleaguered defensive backfield, took Jamal Adams, a safety from L.S.U.The pursuit of offensive skill players remained a theme when the Chargers, which will begin playing in Los Angeles this season, chose wide receiver Mike Williams, who helped win a national title with Clemson in January.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.The Carolina Panthers then took Christian McCaffrey, a running back from Stanford, at No. 8.The Bengals then picked Ross, who had 17 touchdown receptions at Washington last season. He will be paired with A. J. Green, Cincinnati’s Pro Bowl receiver who missed six games last season with an injury.AdvertisementIt was the first time since 2004 that three wide receivers had been taken in the top 10 picks.The Kansas City Chiefs moved up 17 spots by acquiring the 10th pick from the Buffalo Bills for three other picks — the Chiefs’ 27th overall spot and a third-round pick this year, and a first-round pick next year. The Chiefs then took quarterback Patrick Mahomes II from Texas Tech. Mahomes will probably be an understudy to Alex Smith, who has two years left on his contract.With all the focus on offense, one of the best-rated defensive backs fell to No. 11, where the New Orleans Saints chose Marshon Lattimore, a cornerback from Ohio State.A year after signing quarterback Brock Osweiler to a big contract, the Houston Texans worked to correct that mistake. First they traded Osweiler to the Browns. On Thursday, the Texans filled the vacancy by acquiring the Browns’ other first-round pick, No. 12, and using it to take Deshaun Watson, Clemson’s quarterback.The Browns received the Texans’ 25th pick and two other picks in return, including Houston’s first-round pick next season.The first three teams that traded up on Thursday all used those higher picks to acquire quarterbacks.With the best-regarded offensive players off the board, teams began to focus on defense. The Arizona Cardinals chose Haason Reddick from Temple, the first linebacker taken.The hometown Philadelphia Eagles, who picked 14th, chose Derek Barnett, a defensive end from Tennessee who broke Reggie White’s program sack record.Not until the 20th slot did a team choose an offensive tackle, a premium position for years in the draft. The Denver Broncos took Garett Bolles from Utah.The Giants, trying to help quarterback Eli Manning, drafted tight end Evan Engram from Mississippi with the 23rd pick, a little more than a month after they signed the former Jets wide receiver Brandon Marshall as a free agent.A version of this article appears in print on April 28, 2017, on Page B8 of the New York edition with the headline: Offense Is Back in Favor As Skill Players Go Quickly.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.