By THE ASSOCIATED PRESSOCT. 22, 2016
WASHINGTON — The rookie Jimmy Vesey scored the tying and go-ahead goals three minutes apart in the second period Saturday night to lead the Rangers to a 4-2 victory over the Washington Capitals.Rick Nash scored a late empty-net goal and had an assist. Brandon Pirri also scored in a three-goal second period that began the Rangers’ comeback from two goals down en route to their first road win.Alex Ovechkin scored his third goal of the season to give Washington a 2-0 lead in the first. Lars Eller added his first goal as a member of the Capitals, who had won three straight and who failed to earn at least a point for the first time this season.Get the big sports news, highlights and analysis from Times journalists, with distinctive takes on games and some behind-the-scenes surprises, delivered to your inbox every week.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.Rangers goaltender Henrik Lundqvist made 26 saves. Braden Holtby stopped 22 shots for Washington.After Pirri’s goal early in the second period cut the deficit in half, Vesey’s two goals put the Rangers up by 3-2 with 5 minutes 38 seconds left.AdvertisementOn the first, Nash took a rebound off Holtby’s pads in front of the crease and found Vesey on the right for a simple wrist shot. It was the Rangers’ first power-play goal in three attempts on the night, and their third in 17 chances this season.Vesey did most of the work himself on the second, taking a pass from Mats Zuccarello on the left, circling around defender Karl Alzner and then beating Holtby with a backhander from in close for his third goal of the season.AdvertisementWashington’s best chance to tie came just before the midpoint of the third period, when Lundqvist denied T. J. Oshie and Ovechkin in quick succession from in close.A version of this article appears in print on October 23, 2016, on Page SP10 of the New York edition with the headline: Rookie’s Two Goals Fuel a Rangers Win.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.