
On Baseball By                     
 TYLER KEPNER
 
MAY 16, 2016
The forefathers of the Washington Nationals started and ended their existence against the Mets. Maury Wills struck out against Tom Seaver on April 8, 1969, and Endy Chavez grounded out against Bartolome Fortunato on Oct. 3, 2004. Those events, both at Shea Stadium, were the bookends of the Montreal Expos.The Nationals only whisper their affiliation with the Expos. Two small Montreal logos accompany the names of Gary Carter and Andre Dawson in a ring of honor at Nationals Park, but otherwise the team aligns itself with older clubs that played in Washington. Rivalries do not spring easily from such limited and fractured history.Yet here we are, in mid-May of the Nationals’ 12th season, and the Mets are a natural enemy. The teams meet for the first time this season, with three games at Citi Field this week and three more in Washington next week. The Mets wrested the East division from Washington’s grip last August and then earned the World Series trip that had been widely expected for the Nationals. Like their Montreal ancestors, the Nationals have still never won a pennant.This rivalry is one of circumstance, not history. There are really only three marquee rivalries in baseball: the Yankees and the Red Sox; the Dodgers and the Giants; the Cubs and the Cardinals. Others pop up intermittently, but are no less compelling in the moment.AdvertisementThe Mets-Nationals relationship is like that now, something approaching a torrid affair, all breathless intensity but probably not sustainable. The Yankees and the Red Sox, these days, are the stodgy old couple, paired together forever but without much present-day pizzazz.AdvertisementEvery now and then, that rivalry regains its fire, with rich storylines and outsize personalities. David Ortiz and Alex Rodriguez remain, but they are 40 years old and from the generation that brought us Pedro Martinez and Roger Clemens, Manny Ramirez and Johnny Damon, Curt Schilling and Bernie Williams, Kevin Millar and Hideki Matsui — and the Yankees’ Core Four.Get the big sports news, highlights and analysis from Times journalists, with distinctive takes on games and some behind-the-scenes surprises, delivered to your inbox every week.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.They had style, backstories that fit them comfortably as heroes or villains and, in some cases, arms that every serious fan wanted to see. Now, the best place to find those elements is a Mets-Nationals series.Start with the matchups this time around. On Tuesday, the Mets’ Noah Syndergaard faces Max Scherzer. In his last start, Syndergaard hit two home runs to beat the Dodgers. He throws so hard, with such a vicious slider, that it is natural to wonder how long his elbow can stay intact. Syndergaard even made a precautionary visit to a doctor recently.Scherzer? All he did was whiff 20 Tigers in his last start, tying a major league record for strikeouts in a nine-inning game. The last time Scherzer pitched in New York, on Oct. 3 at Citi Field, he threw a no-hitter with 17 strikeouts.In the final two games, the Mets will start two of three from the group of Steven Matz, Bartolo Colon and Matt Harvey. Each commands attention for a different reason: Matz for his elbow, which gave him discomfort last week; Colon for his bat, after his first career homer on the road trip; and Harvey for his puzzling performance this season, which has swelled his earned run average to 4.93.The Nationals will pitch Gio Gonzalez, a former 21-game winner, on Wednesday. Thursday’s start belongs to Stephen Strasburg, who signed a seven-year, $175 million contract extension last week.The series brings the return of the Nationals’ Daniel Murphy, who leads the majors with a .400 average — almost as high as his .421 mark for the Mets in the National League playoffs. The Mets would not make a long-term commitment to Murphy, who accepted three years and $37.5 million to try to beat them instead.AdvertisementThe Nationals’ headliner, of course, is Bryce Harper, the unanimous N.L. most valuable player last season, who leads the league with a 1.066 on-base plus slugging percentage. When the Cubs swept the Nationals in four games this month, they issued 13 walks to Harper, including six in the series finale. His hitting — when he gets a chance — is inspiring, and his unapologetic flair is endearing or annoying to fans, with nothing in between.The Mets have their own must-see attraction: Yoenis Cespedes, who plays with a fluorescent flourish. Like Harper, he backs up his strut with statistics. His 12 homers were one shy of Nolan Arenado’s major league lead through Sunday.Each team also has a franchise pillar from Virginia on an infield corner — third baseman David Wright for the Mets, first baseman Ryan Zimmerman for the Nationals — and the clubs have the two oldest managers in baseball. (The Mets’ Terry Collins was born 19 days before the Nationals’ Dusty Baker in 1949.)In time, of course, the players will shift, and so will the competitive landscape. The Mets and the Nationals might always be division neighbors but will not always contend at the same time. Historically, the Mets’ best rivalries have never stayed hot for very long.They upended the Cubs in 1969, clashed with the Cardinals in the 1980s, stewed in the Braves’ shadow in the late 1990s and early 2000s, and — after a runaway division crown in 2006 — crumbled down the stretch in pennant races with the Phillies.The Nationals and the Mets have won three of the last four N.L. East titles, and the Braves, who won in 2013, are rebuilding. The Phillies and the Marlins have winning records this year, though both had been outscored by their opponents through Sunday.The Mets, despite a losing road trip, should fight with the Nationals all season. They meet for one series in June, another just before the All-Star break, and two more in September — 19 games to stoke a rivalry that should be lots of fun while it lasts.A version of this article appears in print on May 17, 2016, on Page B9 of the New York edition with the headline: Rivalry in Passing Gains Heat of Moment.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.See More »