By THE ASSOCIATED PRESSAPRIL 28, 2017
BUCHAREST, Romania — Ilie Nastase responded to the backlash from his comments about Serena Williams and his Fed Cup outburst, saying in a Facebook post on Friday that his remarks about the pregnant tennis great were “spontaneous” and his tirade inexcusable.At a Fed Cup news conference last week, Nastase, the Romanian tennis team captain, speculated about the skin color of the baby Williams is expecting, saying to a team member: “Let’s see what color it has. Chocolate with milk?”Williams is black and her fiancé, Alexis Ohanian, is white.Nastase said on Friday that when he was asked at the news conference for his opinion about Williams’s pregnancy, it was the first time he heard she was pregnant.“My reaction was spontaneous,” he said.He added that Williams was “one of the greatest players of all time, and I know how much work goes into achieving these results.”AdvertisementNastase was also criticized for swearing at the British player Johanna Konta and captain Anne Keothavong during a Fed Cup match on Saturday. He said he would not try to “defend my words, but I assure you that behind them was my desire to defend the interests of the Romanian team and Romanian tennis.”AdvertisementRomania won the best-of-five series, 3-2, but Nastase was barred by the International Tennis Federation.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.Nastase called tennis not a sport but “my life,” saying his outburst meant “I managed to do what I didn’t imagine was possible, to feel that tennis was slipping away from me.”“I know that nothing can really excuse my words, nor a high-level match, not the nonconformist attitude I am now known for, not the unfortunate amplification of the situation,” he said. “My life remains dedicated to tennis and its public and I ask you to accept, as much as is possible, my apologies.”Despite the apology, he took another shot at Konta.“I think what happened was exaggerated from all sides,” Nastase said. “Nonetheless, Johanna Konta should not have spoken with the chair umpire, that’s what the team captain does. I asked her in a civilized way for some explanations, and she sent me to the tribune where I was removed as captain. After this, the umpire suspended the match. I don’t know why the match was suspended.”Nastase earned the nickname “Nasty” for his on-court outbursts and gamesmanship in his playing heyday in the 1970s. But it also described his game, which earned him two Grand Slam singles titles and more than 100 ATP titles. He is a member of the International Tennis Hall of Fame.A version of this article appears in print on April 29, 2017, on Page D6 of the New York edition with the headline: Tennis; A Response From Nastase.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.