By BILLY WITZMAY 17, 2016
PHOENIX — If the Yankees strolled into town finally feeling good about themselves after winning three consecutive series against two division leaders and the defending World Series champions, they were met with some discomfiting sights on Monday.Present at home plate for the exchange of lineup cards were Joe Torre and Bob Brenly, the managers when the Yankees and the Arizona Diamondbacks met when the stakes were higher — the 2001 World Series.Sitting in the stands were a couple of old antagonists for those Yankees, Randy Johnson, who dominated them from the mound, and Luis Gonzalez, who broke their hearts with his bloop single off Mariano Rivera that won Game 7.Those old ghosts were joined by some familiar goblins on Monday night as the Yankees were trounced by the Diamondbacks, 12-2.AdvertisementThere might not be much shame in a loss like this to the Red Sox, the Royals or the White Sox — opponents on the Yankees’ recent homestand — but the Diamondbacks, like the Yankees, sat in last place. And they scored five more runs Monday night than they had in a four-game sweep at the hands of the Giants over the weekend.AdvertisementThe Yankees’ breakdown was complete. Their defense was porous, their pitching was abysmal and their hitters had nothing to offer.The largely forgettable night did carry some meaning for two Yankees pitchers who made their major league debuts: Chad Green and Conor Mullee.Green showed promise, but his night unraveled in the fifth when he surrendered a tiebreaking three-run home run to Jake Lamb that sent the Diamondbacks on their way.“You leave the ball up here, it has a better chance of getting hit,” said Green, who had not allowed a home run in 37 innings in the minor leagues this season.Get the big sports news, highlights and analysis from Times journalists, with distinctive takes on games and some behind-the-scenes surprises, delivered to your inbox every week.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.It was a largely unmemorable return to Arizona for shortstop Didi Gregorius, who booted one grounder and was spared two errors, one on a deft scoop by first baseman Mark Teixeira and another by the official scorer when he missed the bag on a force play. Gregorius also popped out with runners on second and third in the fourth inning and one out as the Yankees trailed, 2-1.The key player the Diamondbacks acquired for Gregorius in a three-way deal with Detroit, the left-hander Robby Ray, mostly silenced the Yankees. He held them to six hits and two runs over seven innings, and he was unfortunate not to have fared better when a relay throw by shortstop Nick Ahmed, which would have put Jacoby Ellsbury out trying for a triple, nicked Ellsbury’s helmet and bounced into the stands, allowing him to come home.After that, Ray retired the final nine hitters he faced.Yankees Manager Joe Girardi had the chance to hit for Green in the fourth when the Yankees trailed, 2-1, after Austin Romine was intentionally walked to load the bases with two outs. But Green, who did not have a professional at-bat before Monday, struck out. Girardi, who had only one right-handed hitter on the bench — Ronald Torreyes — was not willing to turn to his bullpen so early.Advertisement“Your bullpen is so short, it’s just really hard,” Girardi said. “If you had a day off coming soon — it was just too early.”And he may have stuck with Green too long in the fifth after the Diamondbacks’ Michael Bourn reached when Teixeira dropped Green’s throw on a bunt. Green then walked Goldschmidt with the score tied at 2. Green jumped ahead of Jake Lamb with two quick strikes, but Lamb worked the count full and belted a home run to right field.Yasmany Tomas followed with a double before Girardi replaced Green with Nick Goody.“It’s not easy, your first time in the big leagues, whether you’re a position player or a pitcher making his first start,” Girardi said. “You always look to see how guys handle it, and I thought he handled it pretty well.”Girardi added, “There’s never a good time to have a game like this.”Green was not the only Yankee with a less-than-satisfying debut. Mullee did not allow a hit in the sixth inning, but he hit a batter and walked three — including Chris Herrmann with the bases loaded.Green’s night began encouragingly enough for the Yankees. He struck out the first batter he faced, Jean Segura, and retired Bourn on a fly ball. But Paul Goldschmidt drove Green’s next pitch — a 94 mile-per-hour fastball on the inner half — far over the left-field wall. Segura’s two-out double, a smash off the glove of Gregorius, put the Diamondbacks ahead, 2-0, in the second.Once Green left, in the fifth, the Diamondbacks added to their lead against relievers Nick Goody, Mullee and Phil Coke. The Diamondbacks had eight extra-base hits.“They were ready to hit fastballs, and they didn’t miss too many of them,” said Romine, the Yankees’ catcher.We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.