By CHRISTOPHER CLAREYSEPT. 29, 2016
CHASKA, Minn. — Golf might be losing market share and the millennials, but the Ryder Cup keeps expanding: more sponsor pavilions, more merchandise, more venues on the European continent (Paris and Rome are next).Like sedimentary rock, new layers keep accumulating, and that also applies to the team rosters.There was a time when Ryder Cup captains did not feel the need — or the obligation — to hire official assistants. Arnold Palmer, who died Sunday, even filled two roles in 1963, as a playing captain, and won four matches.But those streamlined days are long gone, and Hazeltine National Golf Club, site of this year’s competition, is swarming with underlings, some of them much more accustomed to being on top of the food chain.With the late addition of Bubba Watson to the American staff, the vice captain count is now in double digits for the first time at the Ryder Cup.AdvertisementTeam Europe has five, and so does Team USA, whose ranks include Tiger Woods, who is much more accustomed to playing in the rounds than making the rounds or the lunch runs.Advertisement“I hope guys are asking him to run and go get stuff for them, even if they don’t want it,” Jimmy Walker said, looking impish.The vice captain glut is not only a reflection of the Ryder Cup’s increasing importance; it is also part of an arms race, as each side looks for an edge, however slight.There have long been assistants in the Ryder Cup: Bernard Gallacher did the job for the European captain Tony Jacklin in 1985, 1987 and 1989 before taking over the captaincy in 1991. Gallacher had no formal title when he worked for Jacklin because the title of vice captain did not yet exist. But Gallacher was clearly a key aide and adviser, even if he sometimes did not attend team meetings.The American team used the inelegant term “partial helper” to describe its assistants in the 1990s. Captain Tom Watson had one partial helper in 1993: his mentor and former golf instructor, Stan Thirsk. Captain Tom Kite still had only one in 1997: the club pro Dennis Satyshur, a close friend.“My position is unofficial,” Satyshur told The Baltimore Sun before the 1997 Cup at the Valderrama Golf Club in Sotogrande, Spain. “Tom wants to keep it low-key, and I want to keep it low-key. I’m a helper, an extra pair of hands, an extra pair of eyes. Anything that needs to get done, I’ll do it.”But 1999 brought change and formal recognition as the American captain, Ben Crenshaw , and the European captain, Mark James , both named two official vice captains. None, however, could keep the final day at the Country Club in Brookline, Mass., from degenerating into a diplomatic incident as the American team came back from a 10-6 deficit to win, with ample help from some over-the-top fan support.“I made it clear to our Ryder Cup people that I wanted my assistants to be involved in everything,” James wrote of his vice captains, Sam Torrance and Ken Brown, in his 2000 book “Into the Bear Pit.” “To be at all the dinners. To walk out at the opening and closing ceremonies, to receive the same gifts as everybody else and generally to be an important part of the team.”AdvertisementJames wrote that the request was initially rejected by the PGA, but that the American officials eventually relented after he suggested that he would make attendance at the official dinner optional for his players if Torrance and Brown were excluded.The vice captains were in, truly in, and the race was on in earnest after the European captain, Nick Faldo, dared bring just one vice captain (José María Olazábal) to the United States in 2008 and lost while looking comparatively disorganized.Get the big sports news, highlights and analysis from Times journalists, with distinctive takes on games and some behind-the-scenes surprises, delivered to your inbox every week.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.Both teams arrived at Celtic Manor in Wales with four vice captains in 2010, and Colin Montgomerie, the European captain, ended up with a fifth after adding Olazábal to his roster in the midst of the matches (Olazábal was there initially to represent a Spanish coffee company).Both teams had four in 2012, but the European captain, Paul McGinley, upped the ante again in 2014 at Gleneagles in Scotland by naming five assistants. One of them, Padraig Harrington of Ireland, jokingly tweeted a photo of himself serving coffee with the caption, “What a vice captain really does at a Ryder Cup.”The former European captain Ian Woosnam speculated that McGinley might get too much feedback. “He might need a bigger team room,” Woosnam said in 2014. “He might as well have 12 vice captains, one for each player.”That does appear to be the direction this is heading, but McGinley insisted he needed the manpower. The idea was to have four vice captains available to follow the pairings out on the course and another to counsel or console the four players left out of each session on Friday and Saturday.Ultimately, there was no quibbling with a third straight European victory, no matter how much coffee was poured.Still, the United States captain Davis Love III — otherwise eager to follow the European template — seemed perfectly content to settle for four vice captains at Hazeltine. But that was before Bubba Watson volunteered to join the group after Love did not choose him as a player.AdvertisementVery few two-time Masters champions still in their prime would have cared to sublimate their ego for such a role, but Love, a losing captain in 2012, consulted his already sizable team and made room for one more.“I know if I was in Bubba’s situation I would not be here,” Brandt Snedeker said. “He’s 100 percent in. He’s 100 percent keeping us joking in the team room and being a water boy and a cart boy and whatever else you want to call him. And he loves it. Shows you what kind of guy he is.”The question remains, however: How many vice captains might it take to spoil the broth?The American brain trust has been accused of overthinking in some of the team’s previous defeats, adding to the collective angst. Phil Mickelson went after the 2014 captain, Tom Watson, for not including players in the decision-making process.The consensual approach is now all the rage, which could well work if the roles are clearly defined. It sounded as if that was still a work in progress Wednesday, with Bubba Watson now driving his own red cart.“We talked a lot this morning about — if we have four guys watching matches — what can Bubba and I do to complement each other and to support,” Love said. “That’s what it’s all about. We’re here to support the team, and if that means we run back and get a sweater, I’ll go get a sweater.”Love said he had even delivered a few turkey sandwiches this week.“All six of us are doing whatever we can to help out,” he said, referring to himself and his assistants.But the truth is, the Americans and the Europeans unofficially have more than five vice captains this year.Lee Westwood, playing in his 10th Ryder Cup, is one of the European captain Darren Clarke’s closest friends and has been a constant source of advice. Then there is Mickelson, as outspoken this week inside and outside the United States team room as he was in the aftermath at Gleneagles.“He’s our sixth vice captain,” Snedeker said. “He’s in there 100 percent.”A version of this article appears in print on September 30, 2016, on Page B14 of the New York edition with the headline: Need Coffee? Your Ryder Cup Sweater? Ask One of Those 10 Vice Captains.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.