AdvertisementSupported byCanada 2, Europe 1 | Canada wins series, 2-0By Curtis RushTORONTO — The problem with being Sidney Crosby is that he can never be ordinary. Others will not let him, and he will not stand for it.After Crosby got off to the slowest start in his N.H.L. career from October to December last season, his status as the league’s top star seemed in doubt, and he was among the doubters.After a period of self-reflection, he realized he had to get back to playing instinctive hockey. When the Pittsburgh Penguins fired Coach Mike Johnston and replaced him with Mike Sullivan in December, Crosby turned his game around in time to win his second Stanley Cup with the team.Crosby was again under pressure on Thursday night, leading Canada against Team Europe in the second game of the World Cup of Hockey finals at the Air Canada Centre.And again Crosby came up big, assisting on the tying goal as Canada defeated Team Europe, 2-1, to claim the first World Cup played after a 12-year hiatus.Crosby, who led the tournament in scoring with 10 points, was selected as the most valuable player.“Crazy the way everything worked out,” Crosby said after the game. “Pretty unbelievable feeling considering how hard we had to work tonight. They blocked a lot of shots. It’s special.”Europe grabbed a 1-0 lead on a goal by Zdeno Chara, and Europe frustrated Canada’s offense until the final three minutes of the third period.It appeared that Team Europe, a collection of players from eight European countries that was given little chance to win here, seemed to be on its way to forcing the best-of-three finals to a decisive game on Saturday night.But Canada, which entered the game with a 5-0 record in the tournament, responded forcefully to the first real adversity it had faced.Crosby had a tantalizing chance to tie the game in the third period, but Jaroslav Halak made an impressive pad save with Crosby on his doorstep.Then, with 2 minutes 53 seconds left in the game, Patrice Bergeron tied the score at 1-1 on a power play. Team Europe earned a power play with just under two minutes left, but Brad Marchand fired in a short-handed winner with 43.1 seconds left.Bergeron’s goal was set up by a pass off the boards from Crosby, who has grown accustomed to performing under pressure and delivering for Canada on the big stage.“To be put on a line with Sid and Bergy, it was an honor,” Marchand said, referring to Crosby and Bergeron. “I’ll treasure every second of this for the rest of my life.”Matt Duchene, who was also Crosby’s teammate at the 2015 world championships and the 2014 Sochi Olympics, understands the intensity of the spotlight on Crosby.“It’s a tough job,” Duchene said. “You can’t take the big games off. You’ve got to show up.”Crosby, who scored the gold-medal-winning goal at the 2010 Olympics in Vancouver, British Columbia, against the United States, seems to raise his level when playing for Canada.“He’s patriotic, and he wants to be the best he can possibly be for Canada,” Duchene said. “The second thing, when you’re the best in the world, you want to stay there. And that’s what drives him. I know it does.”Crosby had been having success at this World Cup by getting possession of the puck through aggressive forechecking in the offensive zone, meaning he had a shorter path to the goal.Duchene said Crosby reminded him of the former N.H.L. star Peter Forsberg in the way he uses his body to shield the puck and control it in close quarters.“You can see that in the goal he set up,” Duchene said. “I know Sid probably picked that up watching Peter.”When Canada beat Europe, 4-1, in group play, Crosby opened the scoring by using the space behind the net. At full speed, he swept behind goalie Jaroslav Halak and scored on a wraparound, using his quick hands to surprise Halak.Teammates take notice of Crosby’s quick hands, something he works on with the puck at practice and in the pregame warm-up.“You just watch him,” Ryan O’Reilly said. “Especially just how he practices and all the little things that as players you don’t get to see.”In the Canadian dressing room, the players all want to know how Crosby does it.“He’s under the microscope all the time,” Canada Coach Mike Babcock said.The Chicago Blackhawks’ captain, Jonathan Toews, said that when the Canadian team gathered at training camp in Ottawa, players picked Crosby’s brain about what was working for him during the latter part of last season and what he worked on in the off-season.“You want to find out what makes him so good,” Toews said. “We’re trying to figure out what he’s doing that’s different from the rest of us.”Advertisement