By THE ASSOCIATED PRESSOCT. 21, 2016
For the second consecutive W.N.B.A. finals game, the league acknowledged a late officiating mistake.The W.N.B.A. said the officials missed a shot clock violation in the decisive Game 5 of the finals on Thursday, when the Los Angeles Sparks beat the Minnesota Lynx, 77-76.“After reviewing postgame video, we have determined that Nneka Ogwumike’s shot with 1:14 remaining in regulation time should not have counted due to a shot clock violation, and that the referees improperly failed to review the play under the instant replay rules,” Renee Brown, the W.N.B.A. chief of basketball operations and player relations, said in a statement Friday.Ogwumike’s jumper with 3.1 seconds left, off the rebound of her blocked shot, won it for the Sparks.The league had previously admitted a mistake after officials missed an eight-second-violation call late in Game 4.AdvertisementMinnesota Coach Cheryl Reeve was angry in her postgame news conference Thursday about both missed calls, saying the league needed to do more than just apologize and “send a memo.”“Whether it was the eight-second call in L.A. or the game today, doesn’t matter, O.K.? The game today, it’s not fair to the players,” Reeve said. “It’s not enough just to apologize or send out a memo that they got something wrong, O.K.? These players are so invested, and something must be done about the officiating in this league because it’s not fair to these great players we have.”W.N.B.A. rules state that plays in the final two minutes of a game are reviewable only immediately. Earlier in the game, time can elapse and plays can still be reviewed.Get the big sports news, highlights and analysis from Times journalists, with distinctive takes on games and some behind-the-scenes surprises, delivered to your inbox every week.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.“It was reviewable at the time when she shot it,” Reeve said. “The referees at that point didn’t think anything was wrong. They didn’t understand it was the end of the clock. They didn’t hear the shot clock. When they put the ball in play, the play is no longer reviewable.”After some basketball arenas switched shot clocks midseason, there were concerns that the horn was not loud enough when the shot clock reached zero.AdvertisementThe Lynx have also benefited from an officiating mistake in a playoff game. In last season’s Western Conference finals, the Lynx were aided by a foul with 1.5 seconds left in a tie game against the Phoenix Mercury. The league acknowledged the call should never have been made.“It’s unfortunate we’re having this discussion,” Reeve said. “The number of people that have contacted us and said this shot was no good, it’s unfortunate. I mean, I don’t know what happens from there. Maybe they still win. I don’t know. That’s why I don’t want to take anything away from L.A.”The Lynx star Maya Moore did not realize the controversy existed until she was asked about it in a sullen locker room.“O.K., that doesn’t make me feel any better,” Moore said.She said she thought she saw an official signal for a review, and she was surprised to hear that did not occur, the details of the final minutes lost in the haze of defeat.“Well, it doesn’t mean anything now,” Moore said.A version of this article appears in print on October 22, 2016, on Page D6 of the New York edition with the headline: W.N.B.A. Admits Officials’ Critical Error.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.