By BILLY WITZMARCH 5, 2016
TAMPA, Fla. —  When Aaron Hicks was 10, already busy collecting golf trophies on some of the same courses that Tiger Woods had grown up on, his friends asked him to play Little League with them. So Hicks asked his father for permission.Joseph Hicks had always tried to keep Aaron, his youngest son, away from baseball, putting a golf club in his hands at an early age and doing his best to keep it there. Joseph Hicks knew from his seven years as a minor leaguer and another playing in Mexico that baseball was bound to deliver disappointment. Golf could be frustrating, too, but at least it was a sport in which you were measured by your score — not by your signing bonus or how you might be projected to perform.So when Aaron pestered him about playing baseball, they made a deal: He had to hit left-handed.The point was to make it so hard that Aaron would quit.“He didn’t want me to play baseball,” Aaron Hicks said. “I was winning tournaments, and he loved watching me play golf, and I was pretty good. He didn’t think baseball was in my future.”AdvertisementBatting left-handed did not become an impediment, though; it became an asset, allowing Hicks to develop into a switch-hitter, alongside his other gifts for baseball.AdvertisementWhile the Yankees’ acquisition of Hicks from Minnesota in November was overshadowed by their trades for closer Aroldis Chapman and middle infielder Starlin Castro, who have both made the All-Star team, it is worth noting that Hicks was the 14th overall pick in the 2008 draft.The Twins once envisioned him as their next cornerstone center fielder, following Kirby Puckett and Torii Hunter, but they became increasingly frustrated with Hicks’s lack of maturity. He showed up at the ballpark not knowing who the opposing pitcher was, gave up on switch-hitting on a whim and was benched after losing track of how many outs there were in an inning.Hicks, 26, made strides last season when the Twins reacquired Hunter. He made the more reserved Hicks his regular companion, often driving him to the ballpark so he could observe how Hunter went about his job — be it taking the time to talk with a security guard or studying film.Yankees General Manager Brian Cashman, who sent the backup catcher John Ryan Murphy to the Twins in exchange for Hicks, expressed hope that Alex Rodriguez and Carlos Beltran could provide a similar influence.The Yankees had the oldest starting lineup in baseball last year, and they saw the youthful Hicks’s athleticism as a perfect fit. He can serve as a defensive replacement for Beltran in right, offer a bat with right-handed pop off the bench and fill in for the often-injured outfielders Jacoby Ellsbury and Brett Gardner. The two will be given more regularly scheduled days off this season in the hope of preserving their health.Get the big sports news, highlights and analysis from Times journalists, with distinctive takes on games and some behind-the-scenes surprises, delivered to your inbox every week.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.If Hicks develops as the Yankees hope, he could force his way into a regular role next year, after Beltran’s contract expires.This was not quite what Hicks envisioned while growing up in Long Beach, Calif., in a neighborhood flush with public golf courses, many of them the training grounds for Woods, who had become a sensation as Hicks was learning the game by tagging along with his father.AdvertisementHicks played at Navy Golf Course in Seal Beach, where Woods set the course record; practiced at the same driving range where Woods had, at El Dorado Park; and was in the same youth program that Woods had played in, at Heartwell Park.“Everybody wanted to follow in the footsteps of Tiger, especially all the local kids, because he grew up where we did,” said Hicks, who won his first trophy at age 8 and played competitively until he was 13. He still plays regularly, especially in the off-season, carrying a 1.9 handicap.“When you’re playing golf, you’re just playing against yourself, competing against the score,” Hicks said. “Once you get a low score, you want to get even lower, so it becomes addicting.”As much as he enjoyed competing against himself, Hicks said, he also enjoyed the camaraderie of baseball once he began playing, first with his neighborhood friends in the Los Altos Youth Baseball League and then on travel teams.If growing up on the same courses as Woods fueled Hicks’s interest in golf, his attraction to baseball was fueled by his coming of age in an area with a rich tradition. In 1992 and 1993, the nearby Stearns Park team won back-to-back Little League World Series titles. The high school that Hicks attended, Woodrow Wilson Classical High School, produced Bob Lemon, a Hall of Fame pitcher and a former Yankees manager; Jeff Burroughs, the No. 1 overall pick in the 1969 draft and the American League’s most valuable player in 1974; and Bobby Grich, an All-Star second baseman in the 1970s and ’80s. Burroughs’s son, Sean, the star of the Little League teams and a former major leaguer, also played at Wilson.“There’s been a legacy of guys that have come through here, but I don’t think there’s so much pressure to live up to that as much as they do to create their own legacy,” said Andy Hall, the Wilson coach for the last 15 years. “I don’t think Aaron ever thought, ‘I have to be as good as Sean Burroughs was or get as drafted as high.’ ”Nevertheless, Hicks left his stamp by helping the school be named Baseball America’s 2007 national champion and, as a senior in 2008, leading his team back to the California Interscholastic Federation-Southern Section title game.Hicks makes his off-season home nearby, and when he found out that the school district would be charging the Wilson baseball program $50,000 to install a $20,000 scoreboard he had donated, he ponied up another $22,000 to cover the fund-raising gap, Hall said.“He just said, ‘Don’t worry; I’ve got it,’ ” Hall said. “That really took a lot of pressure off us for fund-raising.”AdvertisementHicks will not be asked to write any checks for the Yankees, but if he can play to his abilities and continue to mature, their newest outfielder might make a vital contribution in New York, too.A version of this article appears in print on March 6, 2016, on Page SP3 of the New York edition with the headline: New Yankee Had a Sweet Swing as a Child, but in Golf .  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.