AdvertisementSupported byBy Christopher ClareyAs the Australians and the Americans continued their first-round Davis Cup match on grass at historic Kooyong Stadium in Melbourne, tennis officials confirmed Friday that the matches should have been played on a hardcourt surface.In a statement, the International Tennis Federation attributed the extraordinary situation to a three-way “oversight” by the I.T.F., the United States Tennis Association and Tennis Australia, “which all acknowledge.”The I.T.F. said the matter now would be examined by its Davis Cup Committee.“We recognize that an oversight has taken place regarding the playing surface for the first-round Davis Cup match taking place in Kooyong, Australia,” said Chris Widmaier, a spokesman for the U.S.T.A., in an email Friday. “We look forward to working with the I.T.F. and Tennis Australia on how this oversight will be corrected the next time that the U.S. and Australia compete in Australia in the Davis Cup competition.”One of the privileges and principal advantages of hosting a Davis Cup tie is the ability to select the surface, known as “the choice of ground.” But in 1999, the last time the Australians and Americans met in Davis Cup, the Americans were forced to surrender that right and play on a hardcourt.That was because of fallout from the I.T.F. decision to stage a celebration of the 100th anniversary of Davis Cup at Longwood Cricket Club in the Boston area in conjunction with the 1999 quarterfinal round. Normally, in Davis Cup’s alternating home-and-away format, Australia should have hosted the United States that year, but the centenary celebration disrupted the usual order.John Newcombe, Australia’s captain at that time, and some team members were unhappy, even briefly threatening a boycott, but they were eventually placated, with the I.T.F. ruling that the Americans, who wanted to play on clay, should play on a more neutral hardcourt instead.In exchange, the I.T.F. president, Brian Tobin; the Tennis Australia president, Geoff Pollard; and the U.S.T.A. president, Judy Levering, agreed that the next tie in Australia between the two countries would be played on a hardcourt as well.Few would have imagined it would take 17 years for the two traditional Davis Cup powers to meet again, and when the particulars of the 2016 match were announced, the 1999 agreement, which is official and part of a signed document, was apparently lost in the bureaucratic shuffle.Tennis Australia and its new Davis Cup captain, Lleyton Hewitt, chose grass, installing a temporary court in Kooyong Stadium. No one from the U.S.T.A. protested, not even its Davis Cup captain, Jim Courier, who played in that 1999 tie and had lobbied for clay that year.This is not the first bureaucratic bungle of late involving the U.S.T.A. and I.T.F. Last month, it was revealed that Croatian umpire Denis Pitner had been suspended from officiating in August 2015 by the I.T.F. after a corruption inquiry but still was able to work as a linesman at last year’s United States Open.A grass surface looked like a bigger advantage this year for Australia when Nick Kyrgios, a former Wimbledon quarterfinalist with a big game and serve, was in the lineup. But even after Kyrgios’s late withdrawal, grass remains a strong surface for the Australians, whose four-man lineup includes Bernard Tomic, a former Wimbledon quarterfinalist himself, and Hewitt, a former Wimbledon champion who came out of retirement briefly to rejoin the Australian squad at age 35. It remains unclear if Hewitt will play at Kooyong.Tennis Australia could not immediately be reached for comment, but Barbara Travers, an I.T.F. spokeswoman, attributed some of the confusion on the choice of surface to an incomplete database that had not been updated properly after the 1999 agreement.“I absolutely believe this wasn’t gamesmanship; it’s just that nobody remembered,” Travers said by telephone Friday.The Australians also will be the host for the next match between the United States and Australia in compensation for the Americans hosting two consecutive ties between the nations in 1997 and 1999.The most likely solution to the surface oversight is for the Davis Cup Committee to rule that the next tie between the Americans and Australians will be on a hardcourt. But that remains to be confirmed.“While neither nation remembered the condition attached to this tie, now that it has been brought to their attention, both Australia and U.S.A., in the spirit of sportsmanship that characterizes Davis Cup by BNP Paribas, have agreed to accept the decision of the committee regarding surface for the future tie,” the I.T.F. said in its statement.Advertisement