AdvertisementSupported byBy Filip BondyThe Nets have no proven point guard and will not own a first-round pick in the N.B.A. draft next month at Barclays Center unless they make an unexpected deal. They dropped 61 games last season, including their final 10, finishing with the third-worst record in the league. Their owner, Mikhail D. Prokhorov, has dumped five full-time or interim coaches in less than four years.So the new coach of this team, Kenny Atkinson, will need all of his globe-trotting experience to thrive in a difficult environment in which he will need to be patient and impatient at the same time. If anyone can navigate such treacherous boundaries, it would seem to be this basketball lifer. Atkinson was a playmaker for nearly 20 international franchises and was an assistant for the Ukrainian and Georgian national teams.“We’d have a tough time getting across some borders,” Atkinson recalled Monday after his first news conference at the team’s Industry City facility. “We’d have a 23-hour bus ride around one country to get to another country on the other side. I wondered sometimes, ‘What am I doing in this business?’ ”Now, after apprenticeships all over the world and with several N.B.A. teams, Atkinson, 48, believes this was all worth it. There are only 30 head coaching jobs in the league, and he has one of them — very close to where he grew up in Huntington, N.Y.“I used to listen to Nets games, with John Sterling announcing, on my little black transistor radio,” Atkinson said, establishing his New York credentials while announcing he would be moving his family to “a nice neighborhood in Brooklyn.”“Brooklyn is basketball,” Atkinson said. “Pearl Washington. Chris Mullin. I used to say, ‘I’m going to go to a park in Brooklyn and play basketball.’ ”Atkinson was hired by the new general manager Sean Marks based on his reputation as a hard-working, high-energy motivator. He comes recommended by the coaches who teamed with him on the Knicks, the Houston Rockets and the Atlanta Hawks, and by several high-profile players such as Al Horford and Jeremy Lin, who say he lifted their games.It is Marks’s hope that free agents will sense Atkinson’s enthusiasm and come aboard a franchise that has the money to pay them, albeit not the glamour or winning tradition of some competitors.“He’s not an established name out there,” Marks said of Atkinson. “But he has the passion and résumé for it.”Anything might happen next with this unsettled roster. Although forward Thaddeus Young said Monday that he was told he would be a part of the Nets’ future, Marks said there were no guarantees. The Nets sent eight representatives — including Marks and Atkinson — to the Chicago combine recently to scout players, even though their first-round lottery pick belongs to the Boston Celtics and their second-round pick to the Los Angeles Clippers.“We’ll certainly try to get in the draft, depending on when and where the players are,” Marks said. “We’ll be scouring the globe.”No matter how this off-season goes, the Nets understand that there will be many losses this season. Marks said that would be O.K., and that he and Atkinson would try not to be “at each other’s neck” when it happens.Atkinson will not bring a set system with him to Brooklyn, no definitive triangle or four-corners offense. If past is prologue, however, he will be a force and a needler at practices. Atkinson often practiced with his players when he was an assistant, holding his own against the likes of Lin.“I don’t know if Sean wants that to happen now,” Atkinson said about joining the practice fray. “Maybe in the summer league.”Both Atkinson and Marks said that Prokhorov was committed to the longer-term view, after a somewhat disastrous attempt by the previous general manager, Billy King, at a mandated quick fix.“I hope people start to smell there’s a change,” Atkinson said. “Whether we win 28 or 62 games, we’re involved in a process.”Atkinson’s brother Steve was at the conference and described Kenny as something of a perpetual whirlwind who rises at 5 a.m. and never really stops working. Steve remembered how much fun the family enjoyed witnessing firsthand Kenny’s far-flung, determined career. Steve was in Naples in 1998 to watch his brother hit the winning jumper at the buzzer for Pasta Baronia Napoli against a nearby rival.“There were fireworks going off, and the fans were kissing me,” Steve said. “Me!”While Kenny learned four or five languages abroad, it was not always easy for this close-knit family when he set off to yet another foreign land.“Sometimes, we couldn’t communicate with each other,” his mother, Pauline, said. “There were no cellphones, and long distance was costing us five dollars a minute.”Because he enjoys a considerable basketball and familial support group, Atkinson made a point Monday to thank his mother, his seven brothers and his coaches at St. Anthony’s High and the University of Richmond.He said he had learned a lot from many professional head coaches, including Rick Adelman in Houston, Mike D’Antoni with the Knicks and Mike Budenholzer in Atlanta.Atkinson’s voice cracked at times from the emotion that welled inside from a return to New York. There was one striking omission. He never mentioned his father, Neil, who died two years ago. His father, an inspiration, would call Kenny every Sunday to debrief him about the latest basketball events, no matter where.“I couldn’t talk about him,” Atkinson said. “I would have completely lost it.”Advertisement