By SETH BERKMANAPRIL 28, 2017
FLORHAM PARK, N.J. — During his introduction as a Jet to the news media Friday afternoon, Jamal Adams, a safety from Louisiana State, offered some commentary on another position: tight end, which he said was increasingly playing a transformational role in the N.F.L.The Jets thought about going in that direction, considering Alabama’s O. J. Howard for their first pick on Thursday, but they instead opted for a foil to the influx of playmaking tight ends, taking Adams with the sixth overall pick. They doubled down with their second-round pick on Friday, selecting Florida safety Marcus Maye to pair with Adams in their secondary.For the Jets, who finished 30th out of 32 teams in points scored last season, while going 5-11, Howard offered the hope of landing the next Rob Gronkowski, the prototype for the modern tight end and someone who has tormented the Jets as a focal point on offense for the New England Patriots.But the Jets appear to believe that the safety position can have an equivalent effect on a game. Maye seems confident that he and Adams can deliver.Advertisement“Being out there with a guy like that, he’s just going to make you be great as well,” Maye said of Adams.AdvertisementThe Jets addressed their offense by choosing ArDarius Stewart, a wide receiver from Alabama, in the third round. Before taking Stewart, the Jets traded their original third-round pick, No. 70 over all, to the Minnesota Vikings for the 79th pick and a fifth-round pick (No. 160). The Jets also traded the 107th pick, the last of the third round, to Tampa Bay for a fourth-round pick (125) and one in the sixth (204).While Stewart’s addition made sense, particularly with the loss of Brandon Marshall, Maye’s selection was somewhat curious. Not just because of Adams’s presence, but also because safety Calvin Pryor, their 2014 first-round pick, remains under contract.“To me, you can’t have enough good players at any position,” general manager Mike Maccagnan said. “I don’t think there’s any reason why we can’t keep Calvin on this team.”Coach Todd Bowles added: “We have a bunch of packages where we play three safeties at one time, or we’d like to. Didn’t have the luxury last year, but we have that in our packages, yes.”Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.To Adams, having a young, deep secondary at the core of a defense makes perfect sense.“There’s so many guys out there that can split out and become a receiver, so the game has changed,” Adams said. “You don’t see too many blocking tight ends, as we call it. You see actual route running — great routes — strong hands, physical, so you need a safety who can cover and take those guys away out of the game because they’re a big portion when it comes to winning ballgames.”Adams cited Gronkowski as an example of such a player, calling him “a legend,” whom he will now face at least twice a year with the Jets. Their first meeting will be Oct. 15 at MetLife Stadium.“As soon as I got drafted, that was one of the first people I thought about, him, as well as, you know, the Goat, Tom Brady,” Adams said, using an acronym for “greatest of all time.”“Tremendous respect for those guys, that organization,” he added.On Thursday, shortly after the Jets picked Adams, Coach Todd Bowles described him as an “alpha dog” and someone who could immediately be a team leader.AdvertisementAdams said he had felt comfortable in a leadership role since he had begun playing football. Assessing his on-field skills, he described his versatility, bringing experience playing free safety and strong safety, and his ability to make calls in presnap coverage, as well as covering speedy receivers man to man in the slot.Maye, who broke his left arm in November, said he had been cleared to practice and listed his attributes very much the way Adams had described his. Together, Mayes and Adams sounded as if they believed that safeties could create just as much impact as tight ends such as Gronkowski.“I don’t feel like I’m average,” Adams said. “I don’t ever try to be average. I always try to be above and beyond in whatever I do.”A version of this article appears in print on April 29, 2017, on Page D4 of the New York edition with the headline: As a Counterweight to Modern Tight Ends, Jets Draft Two Safeties.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.