By ZACH SCHONBRUNMAY 15, 2016
Sixty-seven at-bats over the course of 10 seasons hardly make Yankees third baseman Chase Headley a prolific pinch-hitter, but in that time he has learned a thing or two about the art of being a successful substitute.“You don’t want to wait around,” Headley said. “The one thing that any great pinch-hitter I’ve ever talked to has told me is that you better be ready to hit the moment you step into that box.”So after languishing on the bench for five innings, and stretching and hitting in the cage for two more, Headley jumped on the first pitch he got from White Sox reliever Matt Albers in the seventh inning on Sunday afternoon at Yankee Stadium, pummeling a thigh-high sinker into the gap in right-center field to score the go-ahead run in a 7-5 win over Chicago.It was significant for Headley — who had recently gone 23 straight games without driving in a run — and the team, which polished off a third consecutive series win to finish a 7-3 homestand. Headley’s heroics helped reliever Dellin Betances shake off his first blown save, and allowed Carlos Beltran to smile in the clubhouse over a milestone homer.AdvertisementIn the sixth, Beltran hit the 400th home run of his career, joining Mickey Mantle, Eddie Murray and Chipper Jones as switch-hitters who have reached that mark.Advertisement“Just to be mentioned next to them motivates me to continue my career strong and see what I’m capable of doing,” Beltran said.Beltran’s swing gave the Yankees a 5-4 lead and allowed Manager Joe Girardi to turn the ball over to the heavyweight triumvirate forming the backbone of his bullpen. He had good reason to feel confident: Yankee relievers had not allowed a run in 15 ⅔ innings. But Betances uncharacteristically struggled, surrendering three straight hits to open the seventh and allowing Chicago to tie the score.“I felt like they got three well-placed hits,” Betances said. “After that, I was just trying to keep the game tied.”With runners on second and third, Betances managed to retire the next three batters, including the final two with swinging strikeouts.“I thought that gave us energy,” Betances said.Indeed, with two outs in the seventh, Didi Gregorius walked to bring up Headley, who has suddenly rebounded to become the team’s hottest hitter. Finally feeling comfortable at the plate after a fitful opening month, Headley said he had not been pleased to hear from Girardi on Saturday that he would have Sunday off. But he tried to keep his routine as normal as possible, and began warming up for a pinch-hitting opportunity in the fifth.The hit — Headley’s seventh in his last 20 at-bats — helped reinforce how things have begun to turn around for him. His work on his mechanics, particularly getting his bat head out in front of the plate, has boosted his confidence.“About a week and a half ago, I felt like there was the feel I’m looking for,” Headley said. “It didn’t really show up immediately. But I knew the results would soon follow.”AdvertisementYankees starter Masahiro Tanaka labored through five innings. Since throwing eight shutout innings at Baltimore on May 5, Tanaka has surrendered 10 earned runs in two starts, equaling the number he had allowed in his first six outings.He had been one of four pitchers in baseball to have allowed two runs or fewer in each of his first six starts.Get the big sports news, highlights and analysis from Times journalists, with distinctive takes on games and some behind-the-scenes surprises, delivered to your inbox every week.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.“The split wasn’t there,” Tanaka said through an interpreter. “I couldn’t rely on that pitch as much as I wanted to today.”The White Sox tagged Tanaka for eight hits, including a solo home run by Adam Eaton in the third and three hits by Avisail Garcia. Tanaka walked three and struck out seven.The Yankees welcomed back center fielder Jacoby Ellsbury, who had missed seven games with a hip strain. He immediately got the offense rolling with an infield single to lead off the first.The Yankees were aggressive at the plate against White Sox starter Miguel Gonzalez.The first three batters saw just four pitches before the Yankees had a 1-0 lead, with Ellsbury scoring on a sacrifice fly by Beltran.The Yankees had opportunities to add runs and missed some big chances. They loaded the bases against Gonzalez with one out in the third, but catcher Brian McCann popped out in foul territory. A single by the next hitter, Starlin Castro, and a walk by Dustin Ackley brought two runs around, but Gregorius grounded out to end the inning.So, despite lasting four and two-thirds innings and walking five batters, Gonzalez left the game with his team leading, 4-3.That was until Beltran’s homer.“We’re capable of winning against good teams,” Beltran said. “It’s good to see that we’re playing better baseball.”AdvertisementINSIDE PITCHC. C. Sabathia threw 45 pitches in a simulated game Sunday and reported no soreness in his injured groin. Manager Joe Girardi said that, barring a setback, Sabathia would be scheduled to start Friday at Oakland. … The Yankees announced that Chad Green would start Monday’s game in Arizona, followed by Michael Pineda and Nathan Eovaldi.A version of this article appears in print on May 16, 2016, on Page D5 of the New York edition with the headline: Pinch-Hit Heroics Help Yankees Salvage a Win.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.