By SIMON CAMBERSMAY 16, 2016
LONDON — When the world’s best players arrive in Paris this week for the French Open, where the qualifying tournament began Monday, one player will be conspicuous by her absence.For the first time since she began her comeback in 2008, Kimiko Date-Krumm will not be in the field for a Grand Slam event, neither main draw nor qualifying. At the grand old age of 45 — grandmother territory in tennis terms — Date-Krumm has defied conventional sporting wisdom to be competitive on the WTA Tour, but recent knee surgery means a long road back if she is to continue playing.Date-Krumm, of Japan, will turn 46 in September; she is three months older than Steffi Graf, the former No. 1 player who beat her in the semifinals at Wimbledon in 1996. Having made it as high as No. 4 in 1995, Date-Krumm was still ranked in the top 10 late in 1996 when she made the surprise announcement that she was quitting. After 12 years away, during which she barely picked up a racket, Date-Krumm returned at 37 and has been beating the odds ever since.Just ask Maria Sharapova, Li Na, Sabine Lisicki, Garbiñe Muguruza, Maria Kirilenko, Daniela Hantuchova, Laura Robson and Heather Watson, all victims of Date-Krumm during her second career. All of them were cut down by her old-school style of play, featuring flat groundstrokes, hitting on the rise and skills at the net.Advertisement“I am proud to have kept playing Grand Slams after a 12-year break, at the age of 37,” Date said in an email, adding: “Women’s tennis has changed from the ’90s, and it was really hard for me to adjust to power and speed tennis. However, I can enjoy my challenge more. On the tour, young players offered words to me with respect.”AdvertisementDate-Krumm’s age has posed a mental challenge for some of her opponents.When Li, who went on to win two Grand Slam singles titles, was ground down in a typically grueling three-setter in Bali in 2010, she was in tears hours later.Belinda Bencic of Switzerland, who is 19 and ranked No. 8, could barely believe what she was seeing when she defeated Date-Krumm in three sets at the 2014 Australian Open.“I remember everything because it was my first win at a Grand Slam main draw match,” Bencic said. “Sometimes it’s on YouTube and I still watch it. There were so many emotions. I was so happy, and I think I played good there. It was very hot that day, but she is so fit and I was like, ‘Come on, you cannot be more tired than her.’ ”One of Date-Krumm’s most exciting matches was a loss to Venus Williams at Wimbledon in 2011, when Date-Krumm was 40. Williams won, 6-7, 6-4, 8-6, in a match just short of three hours. When Serena Williams played Date-Krumm at Wimbledon in 2013, she said that she had been nervous because of her sister’s match two years before.Weight lifting and interval training — along with a Japanese diet, green tea and plenty of sleep — have helped Date-Krumm stay in shape. Her fitness and continued motivation allowed her to return to the top 50 in 2010 and have enabled her to continue to push the best players in the world.Muguruza, the runner-up last year at Wimbledon, lost to Date-Krumm in Thailand in 2014.“That was a dramatic match; oh, my God,” Muguruza said. “It was in Pattaya, it was at night and I had two match points, but I lost. I was so mad. I practiced with her a few times, and every time I see her I think, ‘Man, that’s amazing to be so fit, to be happy and motivated to work after so many years.’ ”Muguruza, 22, said it was depressing that Date-Krumm “could be my mother, and she’s fitter than me.”AdvertisementShe added that Date-Krumm was a very intelligent and athletic player who knew how to make her opponents run and how to use their power against them.Get the big sports news, highlights and analysis from Times journalists, with distinctive takes on games and some behind-the-scenes surprises, delivered to your inbox every week.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.“She reads where you’re going to play — she’s already there and waiting for you,” Muguruza said. “I think she really loves the sport. She’s not looking for fame or money; she just enjoys it.”Since 2008, Date-Krumm has set a number of records, including being the oldest WTA Tour singles title winner, in 2009, and being the oldest player since Billie Jean King in 1984 to be ranked in the top 50. Her highest rankings since her return were 46th in singles and 28th in doubles — a doubles career high she reached in 2015. She also reached the third round of Wimbledon and the Australian Open in 2013. Over all, she has won eight singles titles and six doubles titles in her career.But age appears to be finally catching up with Date-Krumm. She has not played since losing in the first round of qualifying at the Australian Open in January, and her ranking has fallen to No. 214. But the word “retirement” has not crossed her lips just yet. If she can recover from her knee operation, she said, she hopes to return again.“I feel happy to keep playing my much-loved tennis,” she wrote. “I hope that young players keep their passion, regardless of age and playing years.”A version of this article appears in print on May 17, 2016, on Page B10 of the New York edition with the headline: Seemingly Ageless, a Player Steps Away.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.