AdvertisementSupported byBy Karen CrouseLOS ANGELES — The night before what was possibly his final game at Dodger Stadium in a home uniform, Yasiel Puig restlessly paced around his double locker, his eyes on his smartphone as he tapped and talked out text messages. He engaged in a brief conversation in Spanish about the English Premier League.Even as the Dodgers’ clubhouse cleared out quickly after a Game 4 loss to the Cubs, Puig seemed in no hurry to go anywhere. As the room grew deathly quiet, he settled down in his chair with his phone, raising his head to talk to passers-by.The next night, Puig, 25, would be starting in right field in Game 5, against the Cubs left-hander Jon Lester, and he recognized the gravity of the assignment. “I don’t know what’s going to happen after this season,” he said through an interpreter. “And so I just try to go out there and give it my best for the fans.”In the end, Game 5 was a microcosm of Puig’s career since he joined the Dodgers in 2013, via Cuba, and earned the nickname the Wild Horse. Against Lester, he flied out in his first three at-bats. He showed good discipline in one of his plate appearances, taking the first three pitches for a 3-0 count, but in another, he impatiently swung on the first two pitches to put himself in an 0-2 bind.Against the Cubs closer Aroldis Chapman in the ninth, Puig lined a ball into deep right for a hit. On defense, he made a running catch of a well-hit ball by Ben Zobrist, potentially saving a run in the Dodgers’ 8-4 loss. Over all, he showed flashes of the skills that have earned him a huge following — but as has often been the case the last two seasons, he could not put his signature on the outcome.With the Cubs now leading, three games to two, in the best-of-seven National League Championship Series, the teams return to Wrigley Field for Game 6 on Saturday, where the crowd will be loud and unanimous in support of the Cubs.But during the three games this week at Dodger Stadium, the fans were more like base runners who kept mixing up the signs. They reserved some of their loudest cheers for Puig, and whoever came through in the clutch for Chicago.The Cubs’ extended traveling party included, apparently, thousands of its many fans. That explains the periodic roars for the road team, especially in Games 4 and 5 as the Cubs’ offense came alive. It was harder to comprehend the insistent cheering for Puig, who has been an unreliable playmaker for some time now.The Dodgers’ dependable first baseman Adrian Gonzalez, whose solo homer in Game 2 was the only run scored by either team in that game, did receive a warrior’s welcome every time he went to bat. But it was white noise compared to the greeting, fit for a prodigal son, that Dodgers fans accorded Puig, who spent time this season in Class AAA because of his poor hitting and also showed up on waivers, presumably because of his poor judgment. Those two strikes against him were captured in one Snapchat video of Puig partying with his Class AAA teammates after a loss.And it was not just the loud cheers for Puig that were notable. During the three games in Los Angeles, Clayton Kershaw’s No. 22 jersey was ubiquitous, as might be expected of an ace whose efforts have been heroic this postseason. But Puig’s No. 66 was also abundantly represented.The fans wearing T-shirts with Puig’s number on the back included Antonio Chi, who said, “I’m Hispanic, so I’m like — how do we say it — we’re all Latino.”He added, “He represents a lot of Spanish culture — people from Mexico, South America, Latin America who come here searching for the American dream, searching for a better life.”Michael Wells, another fan wearing Puig’s number, said his attachment could be traced back to Puig’s scintillating Dodgers debut in 2013 and his superstar-caliber contributions through the 2014 regular season. “He came with electricity and spark and it popped out,” Wells said.In the past two seasons, however, Puig has cooled off considerably. He did not record a hit in last year’s postseason, and he was hitless with two strikeouts in four games in the division series against Washington this October before getting four hits in 13 at-bats against the Cubs to raise his postseason average to .222.“I don’t think it’s going so well,” Puig said Wednesday about his hitting. “I keep preparing myself and doing the work.”As he spoke, Puig pushed up the long sleeves of his shirt, which could be loosely described as tailored for him. Written across his chest was #puigyourfriend.The hashtag was at the end of a Twitter post that Puig sent to Jared Goff as an olive branch after Goff was selected by the Los Angeles Rams earlier this year with the No. 1 overall pick. In 2013, soon after Puig hit a walk-off home run in the 11th inning of a scoreless game against the Cincinnati Reds and celebrated by sliding into home plate, Goff, then a quarterback at California, posted on Twitter, “I really hope Yasiel Puig gets a fastball in his ribs tomorrow.”Goff’s Twitter post resurfaced after the N.F.L. draft, and Puig acted quickly to turn a miff into a meme. He posted to Goff on Twitter: “Big hug. Welcome to L.A. I show you around, be my guest to @Dodgers game,” and added the hashtag that launched a thousand iterations on social media.Puig is a friend of Dodger Nation, as the Dodgers’ first-year manager, Dave Roberts, noted before Thursday’s game. “I think the energy that Yasiel brings is contagious, and he’s a very dynamic player,” Roberts said, adding, “He’s great with the fans.”But is he great for the Dodgers?Puig is owed just $14.5 million by the Dodgers over the next two seasons, which makes him immensely marketable, particularly for a team that believes it might get him back to where he was a few years ago. And if Thursday was his final home game as a Dodger, the ending was as restrained as the beginning had been flashy.Dressing quickly, Puig took a wide berth around a horde of reporters interviewing a teammate and, with reliever Kenley Jansen by his side, slipped into the dark night.Advertisement