By TOM SPOUSTAMARCH 4, 2016
DORAL, Fla. —  Phil Mickelson was his vintage self on Friday, a thrill ride filled with imagination and anticipation that anything was still possible. At 45, he is the oldest player in the Cadillac Championship field. He was leading by two strokes at midround when he inexplicably lost his momentum and golf’s next generation of stars blew past him like a rogue wind.“I don’t know what happened,” Mickelson said. “Sometimes I just lose focus. I’ve been out a little early, and I maybe overdid it and got a little tired in the end and just lost my train of thought.”Mickelson, who is looking for his first victory in almost three years, shot a par 72 that included a 40 on the back nine of the Blue Monster course at Trump National Resort. He dropped to five under, five shots behind the leader Adam Scott, who along with Rory McIlroy and Dustin Johnson feasted amid soft conditions and benign breezes in this World Golf Championships event.Scott fired a six-under 66 that put him in position for back-to-back victories after his win at the Honda Classic. He birdied Nos. 15 to 17 and led McIlroy and Johnson by two strokes.Advertisement“I can’t sit here and dwell about winning,” Scott said. “Around a course like this, you have to be quite focused, otherwise mistakes will happen. That will be my goal on the weekend, to really stay focused and keep my foot down.”AdvertisementScott said he had fed off the momentum of his playing partner, Johnson, who overpowered the Blue Monster with an eight-under 64, a bogey-free round that was eight shots better than his round on Thursday. McIlroy, who has switched to a left-hand low putting grip, found his groove on the greens and made eight birdies among his 23 putts to shoot 65.“There was a lot of big momentum putts in there that I had not been holing,” McIlroy said. “So to see those drop and to be as comfortable as I was, it feels really good going into the weekend.”Danny Willett (69) was fourth at seven under, followed one stroke back by Charley Hoffman (70) and Bubba Watson (69).Mickelson was next, tied for seventh, obviously still in contention but struggling to comprehend a demon that surfaced at No. 13. He had reeled off four consecutive birdies on Nos. 5 through 8 to reach eight under. His game looked to be in complete control, every shot executed, every blade of Bermuda grass read perfectly.He stalled midround, missing birdie putts inside 12 feet at Nos. 10 and 12 and watching a five-footer nearly circle the cup at No. 11 before cruelly spinning out. His stroke abandoned him again at No. 13, where he three-putted for bogey.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.At the par-3 15th, playing about 140 yards, he hit a clunky wedge shot that barely cleared the hazard and spun back into the water, resulting in a double bogey.“When I’m playing well, golf is an instinctive sport,” Mickelson said as he searched for answers. “I see the shot I want to hit, I feel the shot, and then I just execute. Somewhere, I lost one of those on the back nine.”Bad luck followed when his drive at No. 17 plugged into the face of a fairway bunker, leading to another bogey.AdvertisementMickelson’s last victory was at the 2013 British Open, the longest winless stretch of his Hall of Fame career. He has changed coaches, leaving Butch Harmon for Andrew Getson, and has been using a claw putting grip that has paid dividends. Mickelson led the PGA Tour in scoring average at 69.033 heading into the tournament, his sixth this year, so his stroke has been stellar.Mickelson’s last brush with victory came at this year’s Pebble Beach Pro-Am, where he missed a birdie putt at the 72nd hole that would have forced a playoff with Vaughn Taylor.Still, Mickelson called his awful back-nine collapse “kind of an anomaly” and vowed to be in the hunt for a 43rd career victory this weekend.“It’s always a challenge,” said Mickelson, who won here in 2009. “But the tough thing for me right now is to not focus on results, to just be patient. This is the best I’ve played in a long time, and the results will come if I’m patient. I just have to stay sharp. I’ll be fresh and ready, and it will be back this weekend.”NOTESJordan Spieth shot an even-par 72 and was tied for 12th, seven shots off the lead. ... Rickie Fowler followed his opening-round 70 with a 71 and was also tied for 12th. ... Jason Day’s 74 put him two over for the tournament and in a tie for 41st place.A version of this article appears in print on March 5, 2016, on Page D6 of the New York edition with the headline: Mickelson, Playing in Classic Form, Loses Grip on His Game, and Then the Lead.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.