

 Benjamin Hoffman
 

KEEPING SCORE
MARCH 5, 2016
One rookie-of-the-year contender was called a unicorn by Kevin Durant, has two nicknames that incorporate the word “god” and has single-handedly given hope to New York basketball fans. The other, known simply by his initials, has been honing his game far more quietly in Minnesota.Their identities should not be too difficult to figure out, given that three of the four Rookie of the Month Awards in the Eastern Conference this season have gone to Kristaps Porzingis of the Knicks and all four in the Western Conference have gone to Karl-Anthony Towns of the Minnesota Timberwolves.Putting aside the level of excitement that each has engendered, it is worth noting, for those who may have failed to see Towns regularly, that while Porzingis has proved to be an ingenious pick, Towns has quite simply been one of the best rookies ever to play in the N.B.A. When it is time to decide between them for rookie of the year, the voting should not even be close.Before the 2015 draft, Towns was widely considered the top player available. The draft-related debate among pundits mostly centered on whether the Los Angeles Lakers would choose Ohio State’s D’Angelo Russell or Duke’s Jahlil Okafor with the No. 2 pick.AdvertisementAs the players walked out onto the stage at Barclays Center in Brooklyn, all eyes began to shift from the known quantities to the thin European in the burgundy jacket towering over Towns, who at 7 feet is not the type of player who tends to look small.AdvertisementThe Knicks surprised nearly everyone by selecting that beanstalk, Porzingis, with the No. 4 pick, and boos rained down from the Knicks fans in attendance. Since then, though, Porzingis has commanded much of the national conversation by exceeding all expectations and demonstrating not only that he is a worthy sidekick for Carmelo Anthony but also that an aging Anthony may not be worthy of him at some point soon.As good as Porzingis has been, the distance between him and Towns in terms of efficiency helps demonstrate how rare a talent Towns is.Three months younger than Porzingis, Towns, 20, was expected to be a project for the Timberwolves, but he has dominated with averages of 17.4 points, 10.3 rebounds and 1.8 blocks a game entering Saturday’s game against the Nets.
            Get the latest tweets from @NYTSports, including breaking news, analysis and live updates.        Those averages have also been held back somewhat because the Timberwolves have been relatively conservative with Towns’s playing time, including limited him to under 22 minutes in a loss to Milwaukee on Friday despite a blistering start in which he scored Minnesota’s first 11 points. Towns finished the game with 21 points and 7 rebounds, having scored just under a point a minute. Adjusted to a per-36-minute average to account for his limited action, Towns’s averages for the season go up to 20.4 points, 12.1 rebounds and 2.1 blocks.Towns plays mostly at center but has shown himself as a capable outside shooter, connecting on 35.6 percent of his attempts from 3-point range, and he is not the liability at the free-throw line that many big men are, having hit 82.5 percent of his foul shots.There are many metrics designed to rate a player’s overall performance, and perhaps the most popular one is player efficiency rating, which was developed by John Hollinger to sum up a player’s positive contributions while subtracting his negative ones. By that measure, Towns was at 22.8 through Friday as compared with Porzingis’s 18.4 and the leaguewide average, 15.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.The gap between Towns and Porzingis, and between Porzingis and the league average, may not seem extreme, but among rookies who played enough to qualify for the minutes-per-game leader board, only 11 have managed a higher P.E.R. than Towns, and eight of them are in the Hall of Fame. (That total will almost surely grow to nine this year with Shaquille O’Neal, a Hall finalist.)To look at the list of players ahead of Towns is to truly appreciate the rare season he is having. They are, in order, Wilt Chamberlain, Walt Bellamy, David Robinson, Oscar Robertson, Michael Jordan, Arvydas Sabonis, Bob Pettit, Elgin Baylor, Ray Felix, O’Neal and Terry Cummings.AdvertisementFelix and Cummings may be head-scratchers, but there is not exactly a drop-off after Towns: The next two players on the list are Tim Duncan and Kareem Abdul-Jabbar.On top of that, every player on that list was older at the time of his debut than Towns. If the search is shifted from rookies to players 20 or younger, Towns’s season rates behind only the sophomore seasons of Anthony Davis and LeBron James and the rookie year of O’Neal.That is not to say that Porzingis has not been worthy of all of the praise he has received. In terms of P.E.R., Porzingis is having the 20th-most-efficient season by a player 20 or younger in N.B.A. history.But any debate about who should be named rookie of the year could easily be decided by another advanced statistic, estimated wins added. Despite Towns’s modest playing time and the belief that he has a great deal of room for improvement, he was ranked 13th in the N.B.A. prior to Saturday’s game with 11.6 E.W.A., between the All-Stars DeMar DeRozan and Andre Drummond. Porzingis is third among rookies at 6.0, or just slightly more than half of Towns’s total. (The Denver Nuggets big man Nikola Jokic is second at 6.8.)In this race, there would be no shame in second place for Porzingis. Given his size, age and production, he can be expected to have a long and successful career. But if the man some fans have called Godzingis is a unicorn, the world will need some far greater superlative to describe Towns.A version of this article appears in print on March 6, 2016, on Page SP4 of the New York edition with the headline: Duel for Top Rookie Should Be a Rout .  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.See More »