By SCOTT CACCIOLAMARCH 3, 2016
GREENBURGH, N.Y. —  The shelf life of Carmelo Anthony’s brief interaction with a heckler during the Knicks’ loss Tuesday night to the Portland Trail Blazers has proved to be amazingly long. On Wednesday, the team issued a statement on Anthony’s “behalf” in which he expressed regret for his actions. On Thursday, Anthony apologized for nothing.“I don’t think I said anything wrong,” Anthony said.Anthony said the statement issued by the team had been a directive from James L. Dolan, the Knicks’ owner.“It was Mr. Dolan’s decision,” Anthony said.Give the stumbling Knicks some credit: They are not dull. Their most recent stretch of dysfunction seems to be reaching a fever pitch ahead of their game Friday against the Celtics in Boston.Anthony said the only solution was to start winning some games, which sounded reasonable enough — except that the Knicks (25-37) are not very good at winning games.Advertisement“I know that the entire organization — players, coaching staff, management, owner — nobody likes losing,” said Kurt Rambis, the team’s interim coach. “So we all have to get better in order to right this ship, and we all have to handle the situation in the best way possible.”AdvertisementThe ship has been taking on water in recent days, and Rambis had the weary look of a stowaway. Not so long ago, Rambis was talking about pushing the Knicks toward a playoff berth. Now, all those hopes and dreams have devolved into breathless deconstructions of courtside exchanges with fans and team-issued apologies — or nonapologies, as the case may be.On Tuesday, late in the Knicks’ 104-85 loss to the Trail Blazers at Madison Square Garden, a fan sitting behind the home bench began to yell at Anthony. Dolan was sitting nearby in his customary spot along the baseline, and Anthony told the fan that he should ask Dolan for a refund — an episode that Anthony shared with reporters after the game.On Wednesday afternoon, the Knicks disseminated a public apology from Anthony through one of their Twitter accounts.“We are all frustrated by the team’s recent results — everyone, including me, my teammates, coaches and the fans,” the statement read. “Last night, a fan and I let those frustrations get the best of us. I should not have responded the way I did.”On Thursday, Anthony was asked about the origins of the statement: Whose idea was it?“The Knicks,” he said, before placing responsibility for the final call on Dolan. “It was a collaborative effort, though. We sat down and we talked about it. Everybody thought it would be a good idea to send out an apology.”Yet when he was pressed for additional details on his conversation with the fan, Anthony made it clear that he was not exactly full of remorse.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.“I really don’t want to keep harping on the same thing, but I don’t really think I said anything wrong,” Anthony said.He added: “The guy said he wasn’t coming to any more games. I said: ‘Why are you talking to me about it? The owner’s right there. You should discuss that with him. Don’t yell my name out and talk to me about that. Talk to the owner about that.’ There wasn’t no hostility. He said what he had to say, and I said what I had to say.”AdvertisementWithout getting into specifics, Rambis said he generally frowned on players getting into exchanges with fans.“I think that players that have been in this league for any length of time know that that’s something that you just don’t do,” Rambis said.Anthony, 31, is in the second year of a five-year deal worth $124 million, and his frustration has been mounting with the Knicks’ losses — 15 in their last 18 games. But rarely in his career has Anthony been so public about his feelings, and perhaps some of the bonds between himself and the franchise are fraying.He is, above all, sick of losing.“It tests you,” he said. “It tests your positivity. It tests you emotionally, psychologically.”At the same time, Anthony said he would continue to do what he could to help lift the team out of its funk. He said it was his duty.“At the end of the day, it falls on me,” he said. “I accept that.”REBOUNDSThe Knicks declined to renew the 10-day contract of Jimmer Fredette, leaving the team with an open roster spot. Fredette wound up playing five minutes in two appearances, scoring 7 points. Kurt Rambis said Fredette had done everything the Knicks had asked of him in practice. But Rambis was unable to find a role for him. “He didn’t do things that would have pushed someone else out of the rotation,” Rambis said.A version of this article appears in print on March 4, 2016, on Page B8 of the New York edition with the headline: Anthony Disputes Statement by Knicks.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.