By THE ASSOCIATED PRESSMARCH 3, 2016
PITTSBURGH — Sidney Crosby, Evgeni Malkin and Patric Hornqvist each scored in the final 2 minutes 13 seconds of the second period, leading the Pittsburgh Penguins to a 4-1 victory over the Rangers on Thursday night.Malkin added two assists and Phil Kessel scored into an empty net for the Penguins, who frustrated Rangers goaltender Henrik Lundqvist midway through the second period and chased him with a three-goal flurry at the end of it.Hornqvist has five goals in his last three games for Pittsburgh.Marc-Andre Fleury stopped 27 shots for the Penguins and is one away from becoming the 20th goalie in N.H.L. history to reach 350 wins.Chris Kreider scored his 14th goal for the Rangers, whose three-game winning streak ended. Defenseman Marc Staal missed the game with the flu.AdvertisementLundqvist made 19 saves through two periods before Antti Raanta took over for him and stopped three shots in the third.AdvertisementRangers Coach Alain Vigneault said Lundqvist was experiencing neck spasms after the second period and the trainers thought it would be best to hold him out during the third.“I don’t think it’s anything serious, but they wanted to go on the safe side, so we took him out,” Vigneault said.Lundqvist was whistled for delay of game during an odd second-period sequence in which he threw his own net off its moorings to get a stoppage in play. He was visibly upset after colliding with teammate Ryan McDonagh following a Penguins 2-on-1 rush and tossed his net into the end boards as Pittsburgh re-entered the zone seconds later, drawing the ire of the home fans.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.“I think he was trying to tell the referee he was hurt and I don’t know if the signals didn’t cross or whatever, but obviously the referee didn’t pick up on it and he wasn’t feeling right,” Vigneault said.Pittsburgh was given a power play, but squandered the advantage after Kessel was called for slashing.Kreider scored the game’s first goal with 3:10 left in the second period, but Crosby, Malkin and Hornqvist answered for Pittsburgh with three goals in 2:36.Pittsburgh had won only two of the previous 13 meetings (1-11-1) against the Rangers. Lundqvist started each of the last 13 games against Pittsburgh and allowed three goals on 119 shots during the previous four meetings. That included a 34-save effort last month for his fourth career shutout against the Penguins.“Each game kind of tells its own story, so I don’t read into it too much,” Crosby said. “Whether we got one in the past or three tonight, I think we’re confident that we can score goals if we do the right things no matter who we’re playing.”Rangers forward Rick Nash skated for the first time in a month on Thursday. He has not played since Jan. 22, missing his 17th game with a bone bruise in his left leg.A version of this article appears in print on March 4, 2016, on Page B12 of the New York edition with the headline: Rattled Lundqvist Is Chased in Rangers’ Loss to Penguins.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.