By VICTOR MATHERMARCH 3, 2016
On Jan. 18, 2015, the New England Patriots hammered the Indianapolis Colts, 45-7, to advance to the Super Bowl.A big win like that naturally made headlines. But what happened on the field would eventually be overshadowed by what happened — or did not — in the officials’ locker room, in the quarterbacks’ meeting room, and even in the bathroom.Shortly after the game, the N.F.L. began investigating whether the Patriots had used deflated footballs to gain an unfair advantage. “It’s ridiculous,” quarterback Tom Brady said at the time. “That’s the last of my worries.” Little did he know.More than a year later, the bizarre spectacle known as Deflategate is still not over. The latest chapter begins Thursday in a federal court in New York. At issue in this round is not whether the balls were deflated, but how Commissioner Roger Goodell handled the case and whether he violated the league’s collective bargaining agreement.AdvertisementThe N.F.L. released the results of its investigation last May, which stated that two low-level Patriots employees had knowingly deflated balls below the legal limit and that it was “more probable than not that Brady was at least generally aware of the inappropriate activities.”Advertisement“To say we are disappointed in its findings,” said Robert K. Kraft, the Patriots’ owner, “which do not include any incontrovertible or hard evidence of deliberate deflation of footballs at the A.F.C. championship game, would be a gross understatement.”The report was assembled by the New York law firm Paul, Weiss, Rifkind, Wharton & Garrison under the direction of Theodore V. Wells Jr.Its findings were immediately the subject of vigorous debate, with Patriots fans mostly scoffing and Patriots haters cheering.A few days after the release of the Wells report, the N.F.L. suspended Brady for four games without pay, putting the Patriots in the position of having to start the season with Jimmy Garoppolo at quarterback.The N.F.L. also fined the Patriots $1 million and took away two draft picks, including a first-round choice in 2016.The Patriots elected not to appeal, but Brady did. Despite objections from the players’ union, the appeal was heard by the man who handed down the suspension, Goodell, and the ban was upheld. The league said that its decision was based partly on Brady’s having asked an assistant to destroy a cellphone that he had used before, during and after the week of the game.The next step for Brady was a lawsuit. Talks between the two sides for a settlement stalled, and Judge Richard M. Berman of Federal District Court in Manhattan ruled in favor of Brady. He said that Brady had not been treated fairly and could not be suspended for deflating footballs because he had not been aware that such misconduct could lead to the kind of punishment he had received.The ruling came in September, in time for the regular season. Garoppolo remained on the bench. Tom Brady has maintained his innocence from the beginning. “I didn’t alter the balls in any way,” he said at a news conference a few days after the game.AdvertisementPatriots Coach Bill Belichick has been known for gamesmanship that some say pushes the boundaries of cheating, including a scandal that involved improperly taping opposing coaches’ signals. But he was exonerated in the deflation case by the Wells report.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.Robert K. Kraft, the owner of the Patriots, had been known as a key backer of Commissioner Roger Goodell, but their relationship may have been shaken by the deflation contretemps. He, too, vigorously defended his team: “I believe unconditionally,” Kraft said, “that the New England Patriots did nothing wrong in the process that was in violation of N.F.L. rules.”Jim McNally and John Jastremski, a locker room attendant and an equipment assistant, were cited in the Wells report as the men involved in the deflation of footballs. Texts between them referred to McNally as “the Deflator.” Jastremski and Brady talked on the phone for 13 minutes the morning of the A.F.C. championship game, and they met in the quarterbacks’ meeting room later that day. McNally took the balls from the referees’ locker room without permission, then into a bathroom for 1 minute 40 seconds, leading to speculation that he had deflated them there.They were suspended in the aftermath of the Wells report, but reinstated after Brady’s suspension was overturned.The Patriots went on to win the Super Bowl over the Seattle Seahawks, 28-24. They started the 2015 season with a 10-0 record before losing four of their last six games and being eliminated in the A.F.C. championship game by the Denver Broncos.The league appealed Judge Berman’s ruling. Arguments began Thursday afternoon before a panel of judges of the United States Court of Appeals for the Second Circuit in Manhattan. (Neither Brady nor Goodell was on hand.)“Stripped of its celebrity, this case involves a straightforward exercise of authority expressly granted under a collective bargaining agreement,” the league says in its brief, emphasizing that the commissioner has “broad authority to impose discipline” for conduct detrimental to the game.“The commissioner acted well within the bounds of discretion expressly granted by the C.B.A.,” the league concludes.AdvertisementBrady’s lawyers say that he did not receive fair notice of the potential penalty, and note that the C.B.A. says that for equipment violations, “first offenses will result in fines,” not suspensions. They also accuse Goodell of having been unfair to Brady in other ways, including denying him access to certain files pertaining to the case.Of the three judges on the panel, Barrington Daniels Parker Jr. was the most critical of Brady’s claims. Denny Chin, another judge, also seemed to have reservations about Kessler’s arguments. Chief Judge Robert Katzmann appeared to be the most sympathetic.Some lawyers in court Thursday said the chances were high that Berman’s ruling would be overturned and Brady would again face a four-game suspension, Ken Belson reported.Should either side be unhappy with the ruling of the appeals court, the next step would be the United States Supreme Court.We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.