
On Baseball By                     
 TYLER KEPNER
 
MARCH 2, 2016
TAMPA, Fla. — When the Yankees traded for Aroldis Chapman in late December, they did so with minimal risk. Here was a four-time All-Star closer, the man with the hardest fastball in recorded history and the best strikeout ratio of any pitcher ever with at least 300 career innings. And he came cheap.Brian Cashman pounced. Cashman, the Yankees’ general manager, acquired a star from the Cincinnati Reds without sacrificing a top prospect. The only downside was the possibility that Chapman would be suspended under baseball’s new domestic-violence policy and the fallout from welcoming a player under investigation.On Wednesday at Steinbrenner Field, the exhibition season began with an ending. The Yankees, who were off on Tuesday, gathered for their game against the Detroit Tigers knowing what the future holds for Chapman: a 30-game suspension at the start of the regular season. No appeal, no delayed free agency, no admission that Chapman harmed his girlfriend in October. Not much controversy, either.Things get ugly when appeals delay the inevitable. Remember the spectacle of Alex Rodriguez fighting his drug ban in 2013? Chapman had vowed to fight any discipline from the commissioner’s office, but reason prevailed in the end. He gets an extra month in Tampa and reaches free agency on schedule next winter, something he acknowledged was a factor.Advertisement“I think the lesson is very clear to everybody,” Chapman said through an interpreter on Wednesday. “We have to be able to make a better judgment in certain situations. At the same time, I want to take this opportunity to put this behind me. I really don’t want to keep talking about this, creating a distraction for my family and teammates.”AdvertisementThe Yankees are experts at managing distractions. They addressed the Chapman news with impressive efficiency: By 10:30 a.m., Chapman, Cashman, Manager Joe Girardi and Andrew Miller, who will remain the closer in Chapman’s absence, had all faced the news media.A longer suspension for Chapman, for a case in which no arrest was made, might have seemed excessive. A shorter ban would have minimized a problem that had long been tacitly condoned by professional teams and leagues. The commissioner’s office and the players’ union, who quarreled on almost everything a generation ago, arrived at a sound punishment.“There was a lot of time and effort put into play for a collaborative resolution,” Cashman said. “That’s a great thing. It’s a great sign, the first important step for a process that I think is important for our sport.”The decision represented a victory for Cashman, too. Perhaps Caleb Cotham, Rookie Davis, Eric Jagielo or Tony Renda will become stars for the Reds, but the Yankees needed Chapman after trading reliever Justin Wilson at the winter meetings. They went 66-3 last season when leading after six innings, thanks largely to Miller and Dellin Betances. They must maintain, or improve on, that late-game edge.“We think we’re really blessed with what we have in our bullpen, the back end of our bullpen, and it’s been that way for a long time here,” Girardi said. “I can go back to when I was here in 1996, our bullpen, the back end was outstanding, and it was a short game. It’s something that we’ve always tried to do here.”Credit Miller, all along, with snuffing any story line about who gets to close. Miller signed with the Yankees before last season and thrived as the closer despite having no experience in that role. He has made it clear he will pitch whenever Girardi wants; no sense complicating the basic goal of pitching.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.“I’m going to try to get whoever I’m facing out in whatever inning it is,” Miller said. “There’s one guy in this clubhouse that’s pretty much closed exclusively, or closed for the majority of their career, and that’s Chapman. Dellin can pitch from the fifth inning to the ninth inning. I’d like to say the same about myself. There’s nobody else that has a set role.”The Yankees hardly need to rush Chapman into action, with so much time to get him ready for his personal opening day of May 9. He did not pitch on Wednesday and, like most veterans, was long gone before the end of a 10-9 victory.AdvertisementIt was refreshing to get back to baseball, as sloppy as it was, and the Yankees always make a charming little fuss over their Florida opener. There was a marching band, a helicopter flyover, and actual regular-season pinstriped uniforms and caps (the Tigers, with a bright orange spring cap, looked ridiculous).The legends took a bow before the first pitch. There was no Core Four, but four cornerstones of the 1970s — Willie Randolph, Goose Gossage, Ron Guidry and Reggie Jackson — showed up, along with more recent stars like Orlando Hernandez and Hideki Matsui. The players wore patches with No. 8 on their sleeves to honor Yogi Berra.“I think we all have a chance now to focus on why we’re really here,” Cashman said, “which is baseball.”Luis Severino dazzled in the first and wobbled in the second, walking in a run and giving up a grand slam. The Yankees fell behind by seven, fought back for a lead, blew it in the top of the ninth, and won it in the bottom when Jason Krizan, the Tigers’ left fielder, dropped a fly ball.Awful start, rousing finish. The Yankees will hope for the same from Aroldis Chapman.A version of this article appears in print on March 3, 2016, on Page B11 of the New York edition with the headline: Yankees and Chapman Accept the Inevitable.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.See More »