AdvertisementSupported byBy Ben RothenbergROME — Nine months removed from her last title, Serena Williams won the Italian Open on Sunday and then played down the significance of ending the drought, one of the longest of her career.Williams, who had played in only four tournaments over that stretch, said her 7-6 (5), 6-3 victory over Madison Keys in Sunday’s final was satisfying but not necessarily a relief.“It’s only four tournaments, so it’s not like I was playing every week,” said Williams, 34, whose last WTA Tour title had come at the Cincinnati Masters in August. “So that’s kind of how I look at it. But it feels great to win a title, especially on clay.”Williams, who won the tournament for the fourth time and earned her 70th career singles title, had lost her two previous finals this year, at the Australian Open and in Indian Wells, Calif. She had not lost consecutive finals since 2004.Williams had another slow start in Sunday’s final, the first clay-court final between American women since Williams beat her sister Venus at the 2002 French Open and the first between two American women in Rome since 1970.Keys, 21, broke Williams at love in the opening game and extended her lead to 3-1. But Keys cooled as the temperature dropped and the wind kicked up, with the weather forcing spectators to reach for their jackets and hats. Keys double-faulted twice, and Williams broke back in the sixth game.Little separated the two from there, with Keys sometimes able to overpower Williams, especially on her forehand wing. But after Keys hit one of her best forehands to pull even in the tiebreaker at 5-5, Williams eked out the next two points, and she quickly pulled ahead in the second set.As the two met at the net after the match, Williams told Keys that she would one day be No. 1.“Yeah, too bad what she says doesn’t just happen,” Keys said, smiling. “But yeah, I mean, it’s always great to hear that from her. She’s obviously an amazing champion, and she’s won so many matches and tournaments. Hearing that is definitely something that makes me just want to work harder.”Williams’s own hard work was crucial in her victory, said her coach, Patrick Mouratoglou.“For me, she wasn’t there mentally — zero,” Mouratoglou said, referring to Williams’s play in March at the Indian Wells and Miami tournaments. “It happens. A career is long, especially hers, and you go through different stages, and you have to find solutions to different problems in certain stages. So that was one of those moments.“But the reaction here was really good. This win happened because of her focus, her motivation, everything.”Mouratoglou said he expected Williams’s strong form to carry into the French Open, where she will have another chance to tie Steffi Graf’s Open-era record of 22 major titles. Williams was defeated in her two previous chances to match the mark, at the United States Open last year and the Australian Open in January.“The last steps are always the most difficult,” Mouratoglou said. “But it’s not so difficult that she’s not going to make it.”He added, “She’ll get through it, whether at this one or the next one or the next one.”In the men’s final on Sunday, Andy Murray defeated a clearly tired Novak Djokovic, 6-3, 6-3.Djokovic had battled late into the night on Saturday to beat Kei Nishikori in a third-set tiebreaker. He had also needed more than two hours to oust fifth-seeded Rafael Nadal in the quarterfinals.On Sunday, with his energy flagging, Djokovic grew increasingly frustrated with the chair umpire, Damian Steiner, over court conditions he considered dangerously damp.Murray, who won his first Italian Open title and his 12th Masters title over all, had lost 12 of his previous 13 matches against Djokovic, including the final last week in Madrid.”I knew that physically I was fresh, but I also hadn’t been pushed that hard, whereas he had been,” Murray said. “That’s why I was really happy with the second set in particular, because he did have chances and I was behind in some of my service games and I responded well.”Advertisement