By ROB HUGHESMAY 15, 2016
LONDON — The English season finished as never before on Sunday. A match was abandoned and the 75,000 seat stadium was evacuated after a bomb scare at Manchester United. Leicester City ended up 10-points clear of the rest of the Premier League after finishing 1-1 at the London stadium of the previous champion, Chelsea.Arsenal leapfrogged Tottenham Hotspur to end up, as it always has since 1995, above its neighbor in the standings after Arsenal’s 4-0 thrashing of Aston Villa, and the Spurs’ implosion in a 5-1 loss at Newcastle United, a team already relegated after a sad season.And still, the ramifications came. Manchester City scraped a point in a 1-1 tie at Swansea, which meant that no matter what Manchester United achieves once Sunday’s abandoned game against Bournemouth is rescheduled, United cannot now qualify for the Champions League.But City does, albeit via the longer route of having to play preseason qualification round games when Pep Guardiola, the new coach, arrives to replace Manuel Pellegrini next month.AdvertisementAll of the above has one more important achievement to add. Southampton, the south-coast port city that has been turned around by the Dutch coach Ronald Koeman, beat Crystal Palace 4-1 and finished in the top six, which assures it of a place in the Europa League.AdvertisementWhether Koeman is still there to manage the Southampton ship going forward depends upon negotiations in the coming weeks. Everton wants him, maybe Manchester United will want him, and there are other admirers of the way the big Dutchman manages serenely to guide teams on a limited budget toward the top.Almost everything described above is the spoils of sport in the stadiums. The exception, of course, was what happened at Manchester’s Old Trafford stadium when a suspicious package was found in the stands, and the bomb disposal squad had to be called in to make a controlled explosion of it.This will have repercussions beyond England. It follows a similar incident in Hanover where a game between Germany and the Netherlands was abandoned shortly after the terrorist attacks on Paris last November. It comes less than a month before France hosts the Euro 2016 championships between 24 nations, at stadiums in 10 cities.And, when a date can be set for the postponed match against Bournemouth, the United players who were due to be called up for their national teams for the Euro tournament now have two United games to play before their release — the FA Cup Final next weekend, and the Bournemouth game.The priorities are obvious. Security comes first and the sad fact is that in the times we live in, it doesn’t just take terrorists to threaten our way of life, even a hoax call can do it.The bomb scare came less than a week after United was also involved in crowd disorder that many hoped was a thing of the past. Not since the 1970s have hoodlums dressed as soccer fans disrupted English soccer in the way that a group of so-called West Ham United fans did when they threw bottles and other objects, smashing the windows of the United team bus as it approached West Ham’s stadium last week. Their attack delayed the last game to be played at the Hammers’ Boleyn Ground stadium.On a more sporting level, the one point that Manchester City needed to secure Champions League status for next season came via a goal from Kelechi Iheanacho, a 19-year-old Nigerian youth.AdvertisementWith any luck, and if Guardiola gives him the chance, Iheanacho could be City’s future.He stands 6 feet 2 inches tall, and he has been on the radar of top clubs ever since he shined for Nigeria at the 2013 World Under 17 tournament. With a second given name of “Promise,” Iheanacho, who had trained with Columbus Crew SC in Ohio while City sought a work permit for him to play in Britain, has shown this season that he certainly knows how to score. That said, he squandered other chances to turn Sunday’s tie into victory. But so did Sergio Agüero, whom Pellegrini, the departing City manager, regards as an outstanding striker.Get the big sports news, highlights and analysis from Times journalists, with distinctive takes on games and some behind-the-scenes surprises, delivered to your inbox every week.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.As it turned out, Swansea fought back to make it 1-1 when a free kick struck by André Ayew deflected into the goal off the head of City’s midfield defender Fernandinho.By then, at opposite ends of England, the Spurs and Arsenal situation developed. Two weeks ago, the Tottenham fans dreamed of their first English title win in 55 years. When Leicester’s runaway success thwarted that hope, Tottenham folk consoled themselves with the belief that their team would at least finish above Arsenal for the first time since 1995.Even that fragile hope ended on Sunday. Arsenal’s four goals against hapless, doomed Aston Villa included a hat-trick from the often criticized center-forward Olivier Giroud.The Spurs game at Newcastle, 300 miles to the north, was in the balance for an hour. Then, after a red card for a horrendous foul tackle by Newcastle’s striker Aleksandar Mitrovic, the referee gave the home side a penalty kick after what looked like a contrived dive.Georginio Wijnaldum scored from it, his second goal of the game. Mitrovic had also scored before his bad foul, and late in the match, as the Spurs’ energy sagged, more Newcastle goals came through Rolando Aarons and Daryl Janmaat.Tottenham was crushed. Its spirit had evaporated. And in its 53rd game of the long season, it was left to rue the impression that it simply ran out of steam after chasing the European dream in the Europa League that so many covet — and that others regard as nowhere close to the Champions League.To the bitter end — or almost the end given the Manchester United-Bournemouth postponement — the English league is a window on the world. Mostly it is good, sometimes it is overrated, and this weekend it was on the edge of insecurity.We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.