By SETH BERKMANMAY 14, 2016
The Yankees’ season thus far has mimicked a game of Jenga. For every piece inserted to stabilize a rickety roster, another is pulled out just as quickly, creating more imbalance.The club’s best hope for creating a core to build around emanates from the bullpen, which was buttressed on Monday when Aroldis Chapman returned from a 29-game suspension imposed under baseball’s new policy on domestic violence.On Saturday, for the first time this season, Manager Joe Girardi was able to insert Chapman, the former closer Andrew Miller and the elite reliever Dellin Betances into the final innings of a game. The moves worked seamlessly, helping the Yankees secure a 2-1 win over the Chicago White Sox at Yankee Stadium.The three pitchers combined for three and one-third scoreless innings, allowing only one hit while accumulating eight of their 10 combined outs by strikeout. Betances struck out all four batters he faced.AdvertisementStarter Ivan Nova was also sturdy, allowing four hits before Betances replaced him with two outs in the sixth. Nova’s only noticeable blemish was a home run by Todd Frazier in the fourth inning.Advertisement“I feel comfortable with all the guys that we have, but those three guys especially, they’re strikeout machines,” Nova said. “Once you throw six good innings, you can kind of relax and know they’re going to get the job done.”The bottom of the Yankees’ order strung together a two-out rally in the second to score two runs, with Aaron Hicks and Didi Gregorius each driving in a run. Gregorius went 3 for 3 against Jose Quintana (5-2), whose earned run average went to 1.54 after he entered the day leading the American League at 1.38.The bullpen’s dazzling performance was a refreshing bracer on a day when the Yankees’ roster was again shuffled, largely as a result of the mild right triceps strain that sent starting pitcher Luis Severino to the 15-day disabled list after his loss on Friday night.Chad Green and Conor Mullee arrived together in the Yankees’ clubhouse at 10 a.m., both having signed major league contracts after being promoted from Class AAA Scranton/Wilkes-Barre.To make room, Gary Sanchez, who was recalled Friday, was optioned back to Scranton/Wilkes-Barre. The Yankees also transferred Bryan Mitchell and Greg Bird to the 60-day disabled list.Get the big sports news, highlights and analysis from Times journalists, with distinctive takes on games and some behind-the-scenes surprises, delivered to your inbox every week.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.Two hours later, the Yankees announced that they had acquired the right-handed pitcher J. R. Graham from the Minnesota Twins for a player to be named later or cash considerations. Graham was optioned to Class AA Trenton, and Mason Williams was transferred to the 60-day D.L.Green could temporarily replace Severino in the rotation. General Manager Brian Cashman also mentioned Luis Cessa as a candidate to start.AdvertisementSeverino, speaking with members of the news media on Saturday for the first time since the injury, said he felt a little sore but did not think the injury was serious. He added that he felt a pinch in his arm during the second inning Friday but did not think it was serious enough to reveal. Girardi, however, noticed Severino’s discomfort the next inning during an at-bat by Jose Abreu and removed him from the game.Cashman and Girardi said they did not think Severino was struggling because of any physical problems, noting that his command and inability to properly locate strikes had been the leading causes of his 0-6 start and 7.46 E.R.A. Cashman said Severino would probably make a rehab start before coming off the disabled list, but Cashman did not guarantee that Severino would remain in the Yankees’ rotation.“We’ll have to wait and see,” Cashman said, adding: “He’s not pitching anywhere close to his capabilities. So the most important thing is to try and get him going. That’s a decision we’ll have to make for another day.”The Yankees are still without Alex Rodriguez, and his absence was notable on Saturday — Alex Rodriguez bat day at Yankee Stadium. Instead of taking his own swings, Rodriguez handed out replicas of his black bat from behind a barrier to young fans. Rodriguez made no predictions on when he would return to the lineup.While Rodriguez remains on the 15-day disabled list with a strained right hamstring, another team pillar, Jacoby Ellsbury, got into a game for the first time since May 6, coming on as a defensive replacement in center field in the eighth inning.But Ellsbury barely tested his strained right hip, because Miller recorded two strikeouts in a scoreless inning and Chapman also struck out two in a flawless ninth.Catcher Brian McCann said there was “no doubt” that the back end of the Yankees’ bullpen could seep into opponents’ heads and change their batting approaches.Speaking through an interpreter, Chapman said: “We were ready to take on this kind of work. This is the outcome that we expect to have. It’s a really nice combination between Dellin, Miller and me, and the other guys in the bullpen.”Chapman added, “It’s a good formula that we have going on.”A version of this article appears in print on May 15, 2016, on Page SP3 of the New York edition with the headline: Betances, Miller and Chapman Shut Down White Sox as Easy as 1-2-3.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.