AdvertisementSupported byBy Tim RohanVIERA, Fla. — The Washington Nationals’ batting practice was coming to a close on Thursday morning, and Mets players and coaches began wandering onto the field. Daniel Murphy started hugging them, one by one. Most had not seen Murphy since the World Series, or since the Mets had let him sign with the Nationals in free agency. “All’s you can say is good luck,” Manager Terry Collins said.It was the Mets’ first Grapefruit League game, but it began another chapter in the Mets-Nationals rivalry. As the Mets adjusted to seeing Murphy wearing red, the Nationals beat them, 9-4, at Space Coast Stadium. Murphy drew a walk during a first-inning rally and played five innings of clean defense. After Murphy left the game, he stood against a wall in a narrow hallway, surrounded by cameras and members of the New York media who had covered much of his career. He joked about how crowded it felt. When asked about playing against his former teammates, Murphy deflected the question with a quip, saying he previously had faced the Mets in an intrasquad game.Until now, Murphy had spent nine years, his entire professional career, in the Mets’ organization. He helped lead the Mets to the 2015 World Series behind a record-setting barrage of postseason home runs.The Mets offered Murphy a qualifying one-year deal worth $15.8 million, but he declined, following his agents’ advice, so he could get a longer deal on the open market. Around the same time, the Mets were interested in signing Ben Zobrist, a better defensive player, to a multiyear deal. When Zobrist signed with the Chicago Cubs, the Mets pivoted and traded for Neil Walker, who they have to pay for only one season. Murphy said he took that as a sign that the Mets’ front office liked Dilson Herrera, a 22-year-old second baseman, and wanted to “leave it open for Dilson in the future.”“There was nothing malicious in it at all,” Murphy said. “They made a decision.”The Nationals pursued Zobrist, too, but settled on Murphy for a three-year, $37.5 million deal. If Murphy harbored any resentment toward the Mets, he did not admit it.Collins, though, expected Murphy to play with some added energy against his old team.“It’s human nature,” Collins said. “Not that you weren’t unwanted. You know, he was a big part. These are a lot of his friends, and there’s nothing like beating up on your friends.”When Murphy first came to bat on Thursday, Nationals fans gave him polite applause, but it was quiet enough to hear Mets fans heckling him. Standing in against Rafael Montero, he did not swing the bat once and drew a walk on five pitches. It did not seem to be a conscious effort to avoid pitching to Murphy; Montero was struggling to locate his pitches.The first five Nationals reached base against him, and they scored four runs in the inning. When Murphy crossed the plate, he was greeted by Bryce Harper with a high-five. The Nationals also seemed to be inadvertently picking on Herrera, flipping singles over his head. Reed Johnson slapped a single past a diving Herrera.Montero recorded only three outs in his first spring training game after spending most of last season on the disabled list. “It’s just key for me to be healthy right now, I’m happy with that,” Montero said through an interpreter. “I’m really just looking at it as, this was the first time going around, and hopefully everything will be better going forward.”Facing Gabriel Ynoa in his second at-bat, Murphy grounded into a double play, and Mets fans cheered in delight. It seemed Murphy, too, was adjusting to the change.Had he viewed himself as a National yet?“I’m going to go with baseball player,” he said.Advertisement