By THE ASSOCIATED PRESSMARCH 4, 2016
NASHVILLE —  Adam Henrique forced overtime with a late goal and then scored on a power play 1 minute 54 seconds into the extra period as the Devils beat the Predators, 5-4, on Thursday night, ending Nashville’s five-game winning streak.Henrique’s wrister with 39.7 seconds left in regulation tied the score, and his 22nd goal this season came 12 seconds after Nashville took a delay-of-game penalty, giving the Devils their first win in four games.“On both of them, guys made great plays there,” Henrique said. “Just find the rebound, all you can think of is you just pray that he is not going to stick his glove out there and stop that one. It was a huge win for us.”Travis Zajac also scored in the third for the Devils, Kyle Palmieri had a power-play goal and two assists in the game, and Devante Smith-Pelly had a goal and an assist in his Devils debut after being acquired Feb. 29 from Montreal.AdvertisementFor Nashville, Filip Forsberg had a goal and two assists, and Craig Smith and Mike Ribeiro each scored power-play goals and added an assist. The Predators set a franchise record with a point in their 11th straight game (7-0-4).AdvertisementForsberg, who scored 12 goals in February and had two natural hat tricks within three games last week, put Nashville ahead, 4-3, with his wrister with 2:04 left in regulation.But Henrique got the Devils to overtime. In the extra period, Nashville goalie Pekka Rinne came out into the slot to cover up the puck and was called for delay of game. Rinne saved John Moore’s shot, but Zajac kept the puck alive for Henrique, who scored on a wrister.Predators center Mike Fisher skated in his 1,000th career N.H.L. game, becoming the ninth player drafted in 1998 to reach that milestone. It was his 325th game with Nashville after playing 675 with Ottawa, and fans gave him a standing ovation during a timeout early in the first period.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.The Nashville captain Shea Weber also reached a milestone, becoming the franchise leader in power-play points with his assist on Smith’s goal, giving him 183 on the man advantage.But it was the Devils who got to celebrate as they started a two-game trip. Keith Kinkaid started in net so the Devils could save Cory Schneider for Dallas on Friday night.During a Predators power play in the first period, Weber slid a nice cross-ice pass over to Smith, who scored on a snap shot from the left circle for his 16th goal this season. The Devils tied the score at 1-1 off their own man advantage in the first when Palmieri’s wrister off a rebound of Jacob Josefson’s shot beat Rinne.The Predators took a lead less than 30 seconds later, after Moore held James Neal. Forsberg dropped a no-look pass to Roman Josi, and Ribeiro tipped the puck past Kinkaid.Gaustad put Nashville ahead by 3-1 with a backhander 2:39 into the second period for just his second goal of the season. The Devils closed the deficit to 3-2 when Smith-Pelly reached in and tapped the puck past Rinne off a shot by Jon Merrill. Nashville lost its challenge of goaltender interference on the goal.Zajac tied the score at 3-3 with a snap shot from the left circle when Mattias Ekholm went to the box for crosschecking.AdvertisementBefore the game, Smith-Pelly was fined $2,000 for diving/embellishment while playing for the Canadiens on Feb. 24. He was issued a warning after an incident in a game at Minnesota on Dec. 22, and his second infraction came in the second period at Washington. Capitals center Nicklas Backstrom received a minor penalty for slashing on the play.A version of this article appears in print on March 4, 2016, on Page B12 of the New York edition with the headline: Devils Top Predators in Overtime on Adam Henrique’s Second Goal.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.