By KAREN CROUSEMARCH 2, 2016
DORAL, Fla. —  At the Honda Classic last week, Rory McIlroy could sense what was wrong in his putting stroke even if he could not fix it in time to salvage his second round and survive the cut.He could feel his right wrist rotating, causing him to miss putts to the left. Over the weekend, McIlroy practiced using a putting drill that requires a left-hand-low, or cross-handed, grip. He liked how it felt, and the putts were dropping, so McIlroy decided to use the stroke in competition. He will unveil it Thursday at the Cadillac Championship, the World Golf Championships event at Trump National Doral’s Blue Monster course.The decision was McIlroy’s alone, he said. His longtime coach, Michael Bannon, has encouraged McIlroy over the years to take ownership of his game so that he can effectively teach himself.In 2007, when he turned pro, McIlroy was considered an outlier in golf. His choice to stay with the coach who had developed his game instead of upgrading to an instructor with a higher profile was a mortar shot that shook the foundation of the cottage industry that exists to serve, and feed, the insecurities of perfectionists trying to master an impregnable sport.AdvertisementAlmost a decade later, the third-ranked McIlroy has been joined at the top of golf’s rankings by No. 1 Jordan Spieth and No. 2 Jason Day, who have also had the same instructors since they were juniors.McIlroy, 26, who will play the first two rounds here with Spieth and Day, was on the front lines of what has become a mini-revolt against disposable coaches.The trend took off as tournament purses grew, affording players the luxury of entourages. McIlroy, Spieth and Day are throwbacks to the era dominated by Jack Nicklaus, whose coach, Jack Grout, taught him how to teach himself.“You know, if it’s not broke, don’t fix it,” McIlroy said. “I feel like with Jordan and with Jason, you’re seeing more and more guys adopt this approach that if it has worked all the way through your junior and amateur career, these are the people that got us to this stage — there’s no reason why it’s not going to work going forward.”Lydia Ko’s game was not broken when she left her childhood coach, the New Zealand-based Guy Wilson, after turning pro. Ko, then 16, switched to David Leadbetter and an assistant, Sean Horgan, who are based in Florida. The move, made in part because Ko’s father admired the swing of a player who had worked with Leadbetter and Horgan, has been fruitful. Since turning pro, she has ascended to No. 1 and won eight L.P.G.A. Tour events, including a major.AdvertisementMcIlroy said he considered changing coaches upon turning pro.“Honestly, yes, there was a part of me when I turned pro — I contemplated going elsewhere and maybe having someone that was already on the road a lot and someone that I could see more often,” he said. “But I had a think about it, and Michael knows my swing better than anyone and knows my swing better than me, basically.”When Day’s swing goes astray, his coach, Colin Swatton, can access a mental catalog of notes and a library of video dating to when he began working with Day, then 12, in Queensland, Australia. After all their years together, Swatton, who doubles as Day’s caddie, has a great grasp of his swing and a greater insight into his personality.“It’s helpful for knowing the player’s quirky idiosyncrasies and what buttons to push at the right time and also having the analog of swings for the last 16 years that we can go back to and refer to at different points,” Swatton said. “It makes it easy to find a problem and pinpoint it, whereas if he went with another coach, they’d have to then start collecting all that data and try to sort it all out.”After Day won the P.G.A. Championship in August in record-breaking fashion, he sobbed on Swatton’s shoulder. Anyone who witnessed that scene on the 18th green at Whistling Straits no doubt would be surprised to learn that Day had nearly separated from Swatton three years earlier.It was 2012, and Day was down. His wife, Ellie, had given birth to the couple’s first child and was battling postpartum depression. Day was battling his swing and struggling to strike a golf/life balance.“When a golfer’s struggling, usually the first thing to go is the caddie, then the coach, then maybe someone else, like an agent,” Day said. “And then the wife after that. Because this game of golf that we play is so difficult and so mentally frustrating that you look for things to blame other than yourself. You don’t want to own it.”As the year went on, Day said, “I was playing terrible golf, I hated being on the golf course, so I went, ‘O.K., I think I’m going to get rid of Col because we’re not having a good time playing golf.’ ”Day called a meeting of his inner circle and walked away wiser. He realized that the blame for his bad play started with him and that when the going gets tough, the tough cling tighter to those they trust.Get the big sports news, highlights and analysis from Times journalists, with distinctive takes on games and some behind-the-scenes surprises, delivered to your inbox every week.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.“The moment it starts to go bad, you’ve got to pull your whole team in closer to you instead of pushing them away,” Day said.AdvertisementSpieth, 22, started working with Cameron McCormick, who is based in Dallas, at age 12. Spieth speaks of their relationship as a partnership.“He’s been able to move me in the right direction to where we both can figure out a solution, wherever it may be, in my game,” he said.Spieth, who is coming off a missed cut at the Northern Trust Open two weeks ago, sent McCormick a couple of videos of his swing, taken Wednesday on Doral’s practice range. During the stretch on the West Coast, Spieth said, his swing became shorter, which threw off his timing.He asked McCormick some questions about his mechanics.“And he responded right back,” Spieth said, “and then it’s on me to get enough repetitions to do what he’s telling me to do.”A version of this article appears in print on March 3, 2016, on Page B16 of the New York edition with the headline: Top Three Stick With What (and Who) Works .  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.