AdvertisementSupported byBy Benjamin HoffmanGolden State Warriorsvs. Oklahoma City ThunderSeason head-to-head: Warriors, 3-0Series starts Monday at 9 p.m. EasternDraymond Green has become an heir apparent of sorts to Charles Barkley. People have long been intrigued by the idea that Barkley, listed at 6 feet 6 inches, was actually far shorter, which made his rebounding ability even more impressive. The same has proved true of Green, who, despite being listed at 6 feet 7 inches, typically plays power forward and moves to center in Golden State’s vaunted “death lineup.” His lack of height has turned into an atypical compliment.The difference between Barkley and Green is that with Green, we know the rumors are true. At the 2012 draft combine, Green was measured at 6 feet 5.75 inches barefoot, and thickly soled shoes boosted him to 6 feet 7.5 inches.The same combine measurements help explain how Green is able to play so much bigger than his height. His wingspan was measured at 7 feet 1.25 inches, and his standing reach was 8 feet 10 inches, numbers associated with players several inches taller.Like Barkley, Green also talks big and has remarkably diverse skills for a power forward. But his ability to play far bigger than would seem possible will be tested by the Thunder’s big and talented frontcourt.Green’s competition will be Steven Adams (height: 7 feet; standing reach: 9 feet 1.5 inches), Enes Kanter (6-11; 9-1.5), Serge Ibaka (6-10; no listed standing reach) and Kevin Durant (6-10; 9-2).The Warriors were 3-0 against the Thunder this season, and 6-1 against them over the last two years, but on Feb. 27 they had to survive being outrebounded, 62-32, by Oklahoma City in an overtime win, which is why many are citing size as such a big factor in this series.“They beat us to long rebounds, they beat us up inside with Adams and Kanter,” Coach Steve Kerr told reporters after Saturday’s practice in reference to the hard-fought 121-118 victory in February. “The other two games, we were solid.”Kerr added, “We probably won’t outrebound them, but if we can keep it relatively close, that’ll be important for us.”Andrew Bogut, Golden State’s starting center, is working his way back from an injured adductor, but that is unlikely to play much of a factor since Kerr can attack Oklahoma City’s size with the speed of his death lineup. That unit played a combined 17 minutes against the Thunder this season and thoroughly dominated, hitting nearly 60 percent of its field-goal attempts while outscoring the Thunder by 17 points and grabbing 53.1 percent of rebounds.In many ways, this series is a more difficult matchup for Golden State than the San Antonio Spurs would have been, and the Warriors’ ability to make their small lineups hold up will be tested with a great deal more exposure than they got during the season.Thus far, Kerr has known how to manage his rotation, and the killer instinct of Stephen Curry and Klay Thompson in crunchtime, combined with Green’s dirty work, should be enough to get the Warriors to the finals for a second consecutive season.Pick: Warriors in 6Cleveland Cavaliersvs. Toronto RaptorsSeason head-to-head: Raptors, 2-1Series starts Tuesday at 8:30 p.m. EasternThe Raptors flew below the radar for much of the season despite taking the No. 2 seed in the Eastern Conference with ease. They have a pair of All-Star guards, two effective young centers and the rapper Drake cheering from the sideline, which has somehow added up to many people overlooking them in favor of teams like the Miami Heat and Charlotte Hornets, who were perhaps a bit more exciting even if they were not quite as effective.Despite a few hiccups in the playoffs, the Raptors have shown that last season’s epic collapse is a thing of the past. It took them 14 games, but they eliminated the Indiana Pacers and the Heat, and for their trouble they now get to face LeBron James and the Cavaliers.The biggest question mark heading into the series is the health of Jonas Valanciunas, Toronto’s 24-year-old starting center. Before an ankle injury sustained in Game 3 of the Raptors’ matchup with the Heat, he was having a breakout performance in the playoffs, averaging 15 points and 12.1 rebounds a game. More important, he was doing his best work with the game on the line, which is a far cry from some of his teammates who have a reputation for wilting under pressure.If Valanciunas cannot return, he will continue to be replaced in the starting lineup by Bismack Biyombo, a defensive specialist who has thrived in a rotation with Valanciunas but would be in a bit over his head in a full-time role against the Cavaliers.While Toronto and the Heat were engaging in a seven-game war of attrition, which ended Sunday with the Raptors’ 116-89 victory, the Cavaliers have been sitting at home resting and hoping that their hot shooting can continue after nine days of inactivity.If Cleveland can continue to play as it did in the first two rounds, the Raptors are in trouble. The Cavaliers are 8-0 while averaging a whopping 117 points per 100 possessions, which tops even Golden State. Their defense has limited opponents to 98.4 points per 100 possessions, which is the third-best mark of the playoffs.They have done it by riding their outside shooting, hitting a league-leading 46.2 percent from 3-point range despite having averaged a remarkable 36.3 attempts a game, which is nearly five more attempts a game than Golden State took during the regular season.Expecting J. R. Smith to continue making more than 50 percent of his 3-point attempts is a bit absurd, but part of the strength of Cleveland’s offense is that on any given night, it can be dominated by Kyrie Irving, Kevin Love, James or even Smith. So even if one or more players hit a cold streak, the team has the depth to keep going.With Kyle Lowry’s shooting seeming to come around, and Toronto getting plenty of contributions from DeMar DeRozan and DeMarre Carroll, Toronto could be competitive against Cleveland — if Valanciunas can play. Without him, the Raptors may get crushed.Pick: Cavaliers in 4BENJAMIN HOFFMANAdvertisement