AdvertisementSupported byBy Matt HayesPONTE VEDRA BEACH, Fla. — For a brief moment in the second round of the Players Championship, dumpy and frumpy replaced lean and mean on the PGA Tour.But do not let the plummeting scores and the potential for a wild weekend distract from the story of Colt Knost.He is short; he is chubby; he is unshaven. He is not exactly a marketing firm’s dream.But if not for a blown 4-foot putt on the final hole Friday, Knost, the very definition of the Sunday municipal golfer, would have set the 18-hole record at T.P.C. Sawgrass’s Stadium Course with a round of 10-under-par 62.Knost, 30, finished the round only two strokes behind the clubhouse leader Shane Lowry (11 under) and five behind the leader Jason Day (14 under), who was on the 15th hole when play was suspended because of weather. The round had earlier been suspended two hours because of a storm.That Knost was among the leaders underscores the distinct difference between the young, athletic 20-somethings of the sport and the golfer whose major sponsor is, fittingly, Callaway’s Great Big Bertha golf club.Hello, 21st-century physical specimens. Meet Mr. Love Handles.“I’m a guy that enjoys the good things in life,” Knost said, smiling to savor the statement. “I don’t see that changing anytime soon.”If Knost were built like Rory McIlroy or Jordan Spieth or Day or even Tiger Woods in his prime, the golf world would have been abuzz with what was unfolding in the morning round. But when Knost — who has never won on tour and whose only previous starts here ended with him missing the cut in 2012 and withdrawing in 2013 — was on the green needing only a two-putt to par No. 18 and set the course record, the live television feed was focused on Dustin Johnson putting during a nondescript round.Knost, as if on cue, three-putted from 43 feet and bogeyed to tie the course record. Just like that, the story of the day moved from him, the golfer with a smile as wide as the famed Island Green who had nearly set the course record, to McIlroy, who was chasing a sub-60 round.McIlroy eventually cooled off but still had a chance to set the 18-hole record on his final hole of the day, No. 9. His approach shot fell short of the bunker, and it took him three shots to get up and down and finish with a bogey and a 64. He is eight under for the tournament.Golfers, led by gym rats like McIlroy, are in better physical condition than they have ever been. Clubs and balls are built for maximum performance.Players are so good, and the potential for low scores is so great every weekend, that many of the top courses have found ways during the past decade either to lengthen holes or to make them more difficult, with hazards or narrowing fairways.The constantly-changing records have been a sore point for many who follow the game, and for some former players. In the early 2000s, when Augusta National began Tiger-proofing its course to try to curtail low rounds, Mark McCumber said: “Every Olympics, most of the records in swimming are broken. Do they go back in the next Olympics and put currents in the pool?”If you are Knost, you enjoy the party and create your own. In his three previous rounds here before this tournament, he shot 78, 78 and 79. After shooting an even-par 72 on Thursday to begin the week, he gave no indication that a record-breaking round was possible on Friday.The wind was barely blowing during the morning round, and the greens were soft and slow. That left Knost, who hit all 18 greens in regulation, with short-iron shots to set up birdie putts. His 10 birdies included a run of nine in 13 holes.“In conditions like that, and I’m having so many wedges into the greens, you’re going to be able to get aggressive,” Knost said.It could have been much better. Knost missed a 5-foot putt for birdie on No. 4, missed an 8-foot birdie putt on No. 10 and finally lipped out that 4-foot putt on No. 18 that would have set the course record.Knost said trying to two-putt to set the record was “the worst thing I could’ve done.”“I should have just been aggressive and play it like I always do,” he added.Knost does not have a multimillion-dollar endorsement deal, and he is not the face for product placement on television. He is just a golfer grinding away, looking for his first tour win and enjoying the moment.“I like to party and have a good time,” Knost said. “This game is supposed to be fun, right?”No matter how long it lasts.“Hey, I work out,” Knost said with a laugh. “Not like Jordan or Rory or those guys.”He stopped in midsentence, smiled, and added, “I mean, I do a push-up here and there.”If he keeps playing this weekend like he did Friday, he might have to figure out how to lift the Waterford crystal trophy over his head.Advertisement