By HUW RICHARDSMAY 15, 2016
LONDON — After Saracens finally broke through with their first European championship, the team’s owner and coaches are determined to make sure the title marks a beginning, and not an end.“I don’t want to wish my life away, but the team is so young that I’m excited looking forward to what it will achieve in the next five years,” the club’s owner, Nigel Wray, told BT television after his team’s 21-9 victory over Racing 92 in the European Rugby Champions Cup in Lyon, France, on Saturday night.“If we can stay humble enough and hungry enough, there is plenty more to come,” promised Mark McCall, the coach of the London-based club.Saracens completed the first 9-0 season in the tournament since it adopted its current format, and they are the 11th different winners — and the fifth from England, and first since Wasps in 2007 — in the Cup’s 21 years.AdvertisementTwenty years ago, Saracens were playing in a public park. If the ball was kicked onto the roof of the small grandstand, spectators were showered with rust. The team was like a yo-yo, switching between strong seasons in England’s second division and struggles for survival when it was promoted to the top league.AdvertisementWhile Wray insisted Saturday night that he had gained far more from the Saracens than he had given the club, it was his money that enabled their progressive transformation. Among rugby owners, he has been conspicuous both for his durability — many other early investors soon departed — and his early recognition that it would be a long time before his investment paid off.In foul conditions in Lyon, Saracens adjusted tactically to the driving rain, while Racing did not. Saracens were in control from the start, taking charge of the conflicts at the breakdown, kicking superbly and using their fast and predatory defense to ensure that their French opponent’s dangerous backs were stifled. Racing’s players kept looking for space but never could find any, and while Saracens’ dominance did not make for much of a spectacle, it ensured that they would emerge victorious.Saracens took the lead in the 24th minute, when flyhalf Owen Farrell kicked the second of his seven penalties, and they led 12-6 at halftime. Racing looked briefly capable of breaking the stranglehold around the 60th minute, when Racing’s Johan Goosen kicked his third penalty to close Saracen’s lead to 15-9, but Farrell ended any doubts by kicking two more penalties in the final 10 minutes.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.Racing could argue that it suffered from bad luck after losing its two most creative players. The scrumhalf Maxime Machenaud left after 22 minutes with a concussion, while it was clear from the start that New Zealand flyhalf Dan Carter was not fully fit, with Machenaud and Goosen sharing the goal-kicking. Carter limped on until the 43rd minute, when he departed with what Racing’s owner, Jacky Lorenzetti, said was a calf injury.“They were just a bit better in every department of the game,” Lorenzetti told Reuters.“Sarries got to show us what a class team they are. They really suffocated us and really deserved it,” Racing’s veteran winger, Joe Rokocoko, told BT. “Losing players to injuries does not help, but like all good teams, Saracens can smell blood and suffocated us, particularly in the last 15 minutes.”The man of the match award went to the phenomenal Saracens lock forward Maro Itoje, who continued his rapid rise from promising rookie to one of the best players in the world. It followed similar awards for Itoje, 21, in the quarterfinals and semifinals.There were numerous Saracens players who could have won the award, though. In most games, Farrell’s kicking could have made him a shoo-in.“We were challenged and took it in our stride,” Farrell said. “We dug in and gave the calm performance we thought we would.”The award might have gone to Itoje’s second-row partner, George Kruis, or the energetic No. 8 Billy Vunipola — or, frankly, almost anyone on Saracens. It was as McCall said, a real team effort.Advertisement“I’m delighted not just for the players, but for all the staff and for Nigel Wray,” McCall told BT. “We didn’t just muscle up against a very good team, but we played a really clever, mature game. We were tactically good, and our halfbacks put real pressure on their backfield.”We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.