MAY 14, 2016
Boston’s David Ortiz moved into 20th place on the career home run list, then hit a game-ending double in the 11th inning as the Red Sox beat Houston, 6-5, on Saturday.Ortiz’s shot in the third inning gave him 513 homers for his career, passing Ernie Banks and Eddie Mathews. Three players are tied at 19th with 521 home runs: Willie McCovey, Frank Thomas and another Red Sox legend, Ted Williams.Houston led, 5-4, with two outs in the ninth when Ortiz hit a run-scoring triple to center. After sliding into third, the 40-year-old Ortiz got up and pumped both fists toward Boston’s dugout. It was his first triple since June 15, 2013.In the 11th, Xander Bogaerts singled with two outs against Michael Feliz (1-1) and advanced on a wild pitch before Ortiz hit a drive off the base of the center-field wall for his 600th career double.AdvertisementOrtiz, Hank Aaron and Barry Bonds are the major leaguers who hit at least 500 home runs and 600 doubles.AdvertisementArrieta stays unbeaten Jake Arrieta struck out 11 in eight innings, Anthony Rizzo drove in four runs and the Chicago Cubs beat visiting Pittsburgh, 8-2. Arrieta (7-0) improved to 18-0 in 20 outings since Aug. 1. The Cubs have won his last 21 starts, extending a franchise record.Arrieta, the reigning N.L. Cy Young Award winner, gave up two runs on three hits and now has a 1.29 E.R.A.Rizzo belted a towering three-run homer in the fourth and singled in Jason Heyward in the eighth. Heyward finished with three hits and Addison Russell hit a two-run homer as major-league-leading Chicago improved to 5-0 against Pittsburgh this year.Harper Drops AppealThe Nationals’ Bryce Harper dropped his appeal of a one-game suspension for his behavior after being ejected from a game against Detroit earlier this week.Harper opted to sit out Washington’s 7-1 loss in the second game of a doubleheader with Miami. The host Nationals won the first game, 6-4.Harper was suspended for returning to the dugout after his ejection on Monday. He ran on to the field with his teammates after pinch-hitter Clint Robinson’s game-winning homer, then pointed toward the plate umpire Brian Knight and cursed at him.Around Baseball Jonathan Schoop hit two home runs, including a grand slam, and host Baltimore defeated Detroit, 9-3, to win its seventh in a row. Miguel Cabrera homered for the Tigers, who have lost 11 of their last 12. • Drew Stubbs homered with two outs in the 10th inning, and Texas beat visiting Toronto, 6-5, after the Blue Jays had rallied with consecutive homers in the ninth. • Cameron Rupp held on to Tyler Goeddel’s throw to the plate during a violent collision with Cincinnati’s Eugenio Suarez for the final out of Philadelphia’s 4-3 win over the Reds. • Matt Andriese pitched a two-hitter for his first career shutout to give the Tampa Bay Rays a 6-0 victory over visiting Oakland.AdvertisementTop-ranked Novak Djokovic and Andy Murray will meet in a final for the second straight week after advancing at the Italian Open in Rome.Djokovic came back to beat sixth-seeded Kei Nishikori, 2-6, 6-4, 7-6 (5). Murray defeated Lucas Pouille, 6-2, 6-1.Djokovic beat Murray in three sets in last week’s Madrid Open final.Cristiane Justino, the Brazilian fighter known as Cyborg, needed 1 minute 20 seconds to knock out Leslie Smith of the United States in her first Ultimate Fighting Championship bout in Curitiba, Brazil.After the win at U.F.C. 198, Justino has a 16-fight winning streak since her 2005 debut. She has stopped 10 consecutive opponents and won titles in the Strikeforce and Invicta promotions.Domenico Scala, the audit and compliance chairman for FIFA, resigned in protest over a perceived power grab by FIFA’s president, Gianni Infantino, for control of independent panels that monitor soccer’s global governing body. Scala, who had monitored FIFA’s billion-dollar annual spending since 2012, resigned amid claims of tension between the men over Infantino’s salary.Tensions between Scala and Infantino were exposed Friday at FIFA’s annual congress in Mexico City, where member federations voted to give new powers to Infantino’s ruling council to fire Scala and ethics committee leaders who investigate corruption claims.Barcelona Wins Spanish Title Barcelona won its second straight Spanish league title after defeating visiting Granada, 3-0, with a hat trick by Luis Suárez in the final round. Barcelona finished 1 point ahead of Real Madrid, which defeated host Deportivo, 2-0, on two goals by Cristiano Ronaldo.Around Soccer Juventus celebrated its fifth straight Serie A title in style with a 5-0 thrashing of 10-man Sampdoria in Milan. • Gonzalo Higuaín’s hat trick for Napoli broke a 66-year-old scoring record in a 4-0 Serie A win over Frosinone. Higuaín’s third goal, an acrobatic bicycle kick, took him to 36 league goals, one more than Milan’s Gunnar Nordahl had in 1949-50. • The departing Bayern Munich coach Pep Guardiola was showered with beer by his players following their final home game. Bayern had already secured its fourth straight Bundesliga title before beating relegated Hannover, 3-1. Guardiola is leaving for Manchester City in the Premier League.AdvertisementCanada secured a place in the quarterfinals of the world ice hockey championship by beating Slovakia, 5-0, while Finland and host nation Russia also qualified with two games remaining.The Rangers’ Derick Brassard was one of five players to score for Canada as his team got its second shutout of the championship being held in St. Petersburg, Russia.Finland guaranteed itself a place in the quarterfinals after beating France, 3-1. Forward Patrik Laine, a contender for the No. 1 spot in next month’s N.H.L. draft, had a goal and an assist.Get the big sports news, highlights and analysis from Times journalists, with distinctive takes on games and some behind-the-scenes surprises, delivered to your inbox every week.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.Russia beat Switzerland, 5-1, for its fourth straight win as Washington Capitals forward Alex Ovechkin got an assist in his first world championship game since he arrived from the N.H.L. playoffs.Katie Ledecky turned in another strong performance to win the 400-meter freestyle at the Atlanta Classic by nearly nine seconds.Ledecky, who had already won the 200 freestyle, was out front as soon as she dove into the water, and she stretched the lead on every lap to finish in 4 minutes 0.31 seconds — less than 2 seconds off her world record time.Lochte Plays Coy About Trials Ryan Lochte placed second in the 100 backstroke at the Arena Pro Swim Series Charlotte, then clammed up when asked which events he planned to enter at the Olympic trials in June.“I have certain events that I want to do at trials, but I’m going to keep that myself and just wait until the day comes,” said Lochte, who is preparing for his fourth Olympics.AdvertisementSimon Pagenaud pulled away to win the Grand Prix of Indianapolis for his third straight victory and his second in three years on the road course at Indianapolis Motor Speedway.Pagenaud inherited the lead when Helio Castroneves, his Team Penske teammate, pitted with 20 laps to go, and beat him by 4.4748 seconds. Pagenaud is the first IndyCar driver to win three in a row since Scott Dixon in 2013.Hamilton Claims Pole in SpainLewis Hamilton edged his Mercedes teammate Nico Rosberg in Barcelona to earn pole position in qualifying for the Spanish Grand Prix. Hamilton qualified nearly three-tenths of a second faster than Rosberg at the Barcelona track.The American sprinter Justin Gatlin’s preparations for the Rio de Janeiro Olympics got off to a solid start with a commanding win in the 100 meters at the Shanghai Diamond League meet. Gatlin won in 9.94 seconds, several strides ahead of Qatar’s Femi Ogunode in second and Michael Rodgers of the United States in third.Bolt Cruises at Cayman Invitational The reigning 100-meter Olympic champion Usain Bolt turned in a modest 10.05 for an easy victory in his season-opening race at the Cayman Invitational in George Town, Cayman Islands.(REUTERS)A British sailer racing across the Atlantic abandoned his yacht and was rescued by a cargo ship after injuring his head.Richard Tolkien was sailing from Plymouth, England, to Brooklyn in the Transat bakerly race when he was hurt while trying to clear a sail after part of his yacht’s rigging was damaged. After speaking with his shore crew and race officials, he abandoned ship and boarded the Anton Topic cargo ship late Friday.A version of this article appears in print on May 15, 2016, on Page SP10 of the New York edition with the headline: Ortiz Blasts 513th Homer to Climb Career List.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.