By DAVID WALDSTEINJULY 15, 2017
WIMBLEDON, England — When Andy Murray pointed out during a news conference last week that American female tennis players were the gold standard in their events during the 21st century, he was referring almost entirely to Venus and Serena Williams.Beyond those two Grand Slam champions, Americans on the women’s singles tour have not had the same success at the highest levels. But the depth of American women’s tennis continues to expand, with many talented young players joining the top 100 in recent years.It had been a quarter of a century since an American girl had won the Wimbledon junior singles tournament. But that was going to change on Saturday no matter who won, with the final contested by two 17-year-old Americans.Claire Liu, the No. 3 seed, from Thousand Oaks, Calif., defeated unseeded Ann Li, of Devon, Pa., 6-2, 5-7, 6-2.AdvertisementThe last junior girl from the United States to win the event was Chanda Rubin in 1992, when Venus Williams was only 12. But there are indications that the United States is making progress with its female juniors.AdvertisementWimbledon was the second consecutive Grand Slam girls’ final between two Americans. Last month, Liu lost to Whitney Osuigwe, currently the top-ranked junior girl in the world, in three tough sets at the French Open.And Kayla Day, who was the No. 1 seed at Wimbledon, won the United States Open junior event in September, defeating Viktoria Kuzmova of Slovakia in straight sets.At Wimbledon, there were five Americans in the quarterfinals, including Sofia Sewing, Osuigwe, Liu and Day, who was upset by Li.Liu trains at the United States Tennis Association’s complex in Carson, Calif., and there has been a belief among top U.S.T.A. coaches that she will become the best of the group. She also won two clay-court Pro Circuit titles in Italy before Wimbledon.Sam Querrey, who made it to the semifinals in the men’s draw, is also from Thousand Oaks, and he said he frequently saw Liu at the training center in Carson.“I’m stoked for her,” he said. “She’s really good.”Liu said that training with the other young women in Carson, and also being on tour with other players in the U.S.T.A. program, had been beneficial because it had spurred competition in a teamlike atmosphere.“We are all pretty good friends,” she said. “We try to train together a lot with the U.S.T.A. It’s really good to have a good group of juniors pushing each other.”AdvertisementLiu is not physically imposing like the Williams sisters, or Garbiñe Muguruza, who beat Venus in straight sets in the women’s final on Saturday. But Liu plays aggressively, takes the ball early to attack her opponent and comes to the net, where her volleying is strong.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.Osuigwe, the daughter of a coach, trains at the IMG Academy in Bradenton, Fla. She is No. 1 in the International Tennis Federation’s junior rankings for now, and Liu is No. 2.Li trains at the U.S.T.A. center at Flushing Meadows. She does not have the pedigree of the others, but she showed great competitive grit Saturday, fighting off four match points before finally succumbing.“The crowd was getting into it, and that kind of got me going,” Li said. “I was pretty nervous at first.”The match was played in front of a healthy contingent of fans on No. 1 Court at the same time as Muguruza’s surprisingly easy win over Williams. At times during the match, the cheers of people watching the women’s final on a large video screen outside could be heard, and when unexpected scores flashed inside the stadium, spectators gasped.Liu won the first set easily and then served for the match at 5-4. She was up, 40-0, but nerves began to rattle her play. She hit a backhand long and sighed, and then she double-faulted. At 40-30, Li rocketed a forehand passing shot to get the game to deuce, and she eventually won the game with a blistering backhand.After Li won the next game to make the score 6-5, Liu complained to the chair umpire about the last disputed point of the game and argued for the entirety of the changeover. She did not even sit down, instead standing in front of Li to question the umpire.“I was just trying to mind my own business,” said Li, who broke Liu again to close out the second set in a thrilling game with five deuces.But in the third set, Liu recaptured the flow, getting low to the grass while firing groundstrokes to break Li in the first game. When Liu won the match, she dropped her racket and fell onto her back in a celebration that she did not want to end. Her plan was to go to an Indian restaurant with friends.Advertisement“I just keep smiling all the time,” she said. “I still can’t even believe it.”DOUBLES CHAMPIONS CROWNED Lukasz Kubot and Marcelo Melo won the men’s doubles title, beating Oliver Marach and Mate Pavic, 5-7, 7-5, 7-6 (2), 3-6, 13-11.The match lasted 4 hours 40 minutes, only 21 minutes shorter than the longest Wimbledon men’s doubles final in history. It ended under a closed roof because of darkness.With Saturday’s win, Melo, a Brazilian, will return to the No. 1 ranking in men’s doubles.That match was followed by the women’s doubles final, which Ekaterina Makarova and Elena Vesnina won, 6-0, 6-0, over Chan Hao-ching and Monica Niculescu in 55 minutes. (AP)A version of this article appears in print on July 16, 2017, on Page SP5 of the New York edition with the headline: American Claims Junior Singles Title, and Ends a Long Dry Spell.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.