By THE ASSOCIATED PRESSMARCH 1, 2016
Lindsey Horan has no regrets about her chosen path to the United States national team.Horan, a 21-year-old midfielder, made the unusual decision to skip college soccer and play professionally overseas for several years. Although that is common for men, it is rare for women.Now home, Horan was diplomatic when it came to her choice, which might become more common for women with the expansion of the development system in the United States.“It’s not for everyone,” she said, “but with my style of play and where I was at, at the time, I think going to play professionally suited me, and I don’t regret anything at all.”Growing up in Colorado, Horan was a soccer prodigy and joined her club team before she was a teenager, eventually forgoing her high school’s soccer team.AdvertisementShe was also a standout on youth national teams, scoring 15 goals in 17 appearances with the under-17 team. She helped the under-20 team reach a World Cup in 2012, but she missed the tournament because of knee surgery.AdvertisementHoran was among the top college prospects in soccer and was offered a scholarship to play for North Carolina. Instead, she signed a deal that was reported to be six figures to play in France for Paris St.-Germain.She did not even know how to speak French.“It was just what I’d wanted in my heart,” she said.Horan was successful with Paris St.-Germain, scoring 53 goals in 75 appearances from 2012-15. The team released her in January so she could return to the United States — a move that made it possible for Horan to try to make the Olympic roster.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.After making her national team debut for the Algarve Cup in Portugal in 2013, Horan was called up by Coach Jill Ellis for victory tour matches after the American women won the World Cup last summer. She then made the team’s Olympic qualifying roster — and the United States played its way to the Rio de Janeiro Games at the Concacaf qualifying tournament last month in Houston.Ellis moved Horan from her traditional role as a striker to midfielder as the team adjusted to the absence of Lauren Holiday, who retired last year.“I think Lindsey’s range of passing, I’ve said it before, is exceptional,” Ellis said. “Her vision, short or long passes, I think, is very, very good.”Horan has been developing chemistry with her fellow midfielder and friend Morgan Brian, also an alumna of the youth system.“Coming into it, playing a new position, it was hard for me at first,” Horan said, “but I think with these players, and playing with someone that I’ve played with for so long, I’m really comfortable.”A version of this article appears in print on March 2, 2016, on Page B13 of the New York edition with the headline: Unorthodox Path Leads to Spot on National Team.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.