By KAREN CROUSEMAY 14, 2016
PONTE VEDRA BEACH, Fla. — The venue did not change between rounds at the Players Championship on Saturday, so why did the golfers feel as if they were suddenly playing a different sport? The Stadium Course’s greens at T.P.C. Sawgrass became so fast and slippery in the third round that the putters in the players’ hands might as well have been hockey sticks.Jason Day, who equaled the course record Thursday with an opening nine-under-par 63, posted a 73 but remained comfortably ahead of the pack after 54 holes. Day, who did not make his first bogey until his 39th hole, recorded two double bogeys in the next five, the first on a four-putt. In his misery, Day had plenty of company; there were 149 three-putts or worse on an afternoon when 60 of the 76 players who survived the cut had at least one double bogey or worse on their scorecards.Day, the world No. 1, who is gunning for his third victory of 2016, has a four-stroke lead on Ken Duke (65), Hideki Matsuyama (67) and Alex Cejka (72). Duke, Matsuyama and Graeme McDowell (69) were the only players to break 70 in the hot, cloudless conditions.“What course was Ken Duke playing today?” Day said, adding: “To be able to shoot that score is better — I think that should be the course record. It was just an absolute joke. Sitting there looking at his score is just amazing.”AdvertisementDay’s fellow competitors could say the same for Day’s 54-hole total. After two rounds, his lead was also four as he made all others feel as if they were spinning their wheels in the mud in this erstwhile swamp. One spot removed from each other in the standings, Day and the second-ranked Jordan Spieth were separated by 14 strokes after two rounds. Spieth, playing in his first tournament since surrendering the lead on the final nine holes of the Masters, posted rounds of 72 and 71, missing the cut by one.AdvertisementDay and Spieth have played 25 competitive rounds together since 2013. Ten times they have been grouped together for the first and second rounds of an event. In those 36-hole competitions within the competition, Day has prevailed by more than 10 strokes on three occasions, all in the past nine months. The other times were 2015’s Deutsche Bank Championship (12 strokes) and the Barclays (11).Day’s dominance here seemed to steal the swagger from Spieth’s step. Spieth’s body language deteriorated as the second round wound down. On the par-4 15th, Spieth’s drive found the right rough. As he stood in the shade of the trees surveying his options, a few photographers angled for the best shot, prompting Spieth to ask them not to take pictures because he needed to compose himself.Spieth could barely contain his annoyance when his shot clipped a branch and advanced less than 50 yards. Spieth’s next shot came to rest 20 feet from the pin, and he two-putted for a rally-killing bogey (Day made a birdie, his third in a row). Spieth birdied 18, but as he said, “it just came a little late.”Get the big sports news, highlights and analysis from Times journalists, with distinctive takes on games and some behind-the-scenes surprises, delivered to your inbox every week.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.The 15th was the first hole that Spieth’s threesome finished after Saturday morning’s restart, and Spieth said he had made a mental error in deciding to try for the green with his second shot. Asked what his problem with the photographers was, he said, “They were just a little too much in the line, and I knew that as I looked up over the ball, I was going to pretty much look right into the cameras, and that bothered me.”When Spieth is dialed in, a stampede of wild horses could not distract him. But this weekend, a charging Day proved discomfiting.“It’s tough when you’re getting shellacked by 15 shots in the same group, you know?” said Spieth, who was slightly off in his math. “When somebody’s birdieing almost every single hole, every other hole, you start to wonder why in the world you aren’t making all of them.”He added: “For me, it was tough this week, without my putting being on. It just led to a lack of patience for me, seeing every hole being birdied and not being able to do much about it.”AdvertisementIt was Spieth’s 14th missed cut on the PGA Tour since he turned pro at the end of 2012. Only once has he failed to reach the weekend in back-to-back events, which bodes well for Spieth in his start next weekend in his hometown tour event outside Dallas. He has six top-10 finishes in his next event after missing a cut.“I’m beating myself up a little bit too much on the golf course, and it’s affecting me, and I realize that now,” Spieth said. His ball striking, he added, “feels great,” and the statistics backed him up. He hit three more fairways than Day in the first two rounds.“Just need to be a little bit more positive with myself on the course, and maybe kind of lower expectations a little bit and just kind of free myself up,” Spieth said. “It just seems I’m so tense and I just need to get back to the way I enjoy playing golf, and I’m not far off.”Maybe it was a blessing that Spieth missed the cut. Had he stuck around, the baked, balding greens might have beaten him up the way they did most of the 76 players who soldiered on. Matsuyama, one of 16 who did not have worse than a bogey on their scorecards, was asked how he did it.“I wish I knew,” he said.A version of this article appears in print on May 15, 2016, on Page SP8 of the New York edition with the headline: As Day Dominates, Spieth Disintegrates.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.