AdvertisementSupported byBy The Associated PressENGLEWOOD, Colo. — A rookie linebacker wearing No. 57 reminded Wade Phillips, the Denver Broncos’ defensive coordinator, of someone. The player’s tenacity, his never-quit motor on the field were all very familiar.Go back nearly three decades. Think of a nose tackle instead of a linebacker. Swap No. 57 for 71. The name was Kragen.In 1989, Greg Kragen became a Pro Bowler in the Denver system during Phillips’s first go-round with the Broncos. On May 6, Kyle Kragen, 23, followed in his father’s footsteps and joined the Broncos’ roster.Phillips, 68, felt his age.“If Kyle Kragen has kids, maybe I’ll coach them, too,” Phillips said, laughing.It will take some work for Kragen to make the Broncos, the defending Super Bowl champions and a team that already has the talented outside linebackers Von Miller and DeMarcus Ware. But if anyone can help Kragen, it is Phillips, who did wonders for Kragen’s father.After a career at Utah State, Greg Kragen made the Broncos in 1985 and had four solid seasons before Phillips’s arrival as defensive coordinator in 1989. Kragen then took his game to another level. Over the next four seasons, under the tutelage of Phillips and the coaching staff, he had six fumble recoveries, 13 sacks and 352 tackles.At 6 feet 3 inches and 263 pounds, he was an undersize nose tackle. His son is in a similar spot as a 6-2, 245-pound linebacker.“There’s no question Kyle is in a place where these height and size requirements, they’re not etched in stone in Wade’s defense,” Greg Kragen said. “It’s up to Kyle to show what he can do on the field.”The younger Kragen went undrafted a few weeks ago after a senior season at California in which he led the Golden Bears in tackles for loss, sacks and quarterback hurries. He was all set to head to minicamp with Green Bay when the Broncos extended an invitation. The offer was too tempting to pass up.“It’s really cool, because I grew up rooting for the Broncos, watching the Broncos with my dad,” Kragen said.Naturally, his favorite player — other than the Packers’ Clay Matthews and the recently retired Broncos quarterback Peyton Manning — was his father. He modeled his game after his, too.The younger Kragen would have liked to wear No. 71, but it is not a linebacker’s number.“It’s a lot of emotions you go through seeing him there,” said Greg Kragen, 54, who also spent time with the Kansas City Chiefs and the Carolina Panthers during a 13-year career. “At the same time, there’s the reality to it as well. He’s got a tough, tough climb ahead of him.”Kyle Kragen did not start playing tackle football until high school. It had nothing to do with his father’s fear of concussions; he simply did not want to push his son onto the field.So the younger Kragen played basketball until he could no longer resist the lure of the football field. At first, he was a quarterback.“But there’s no quarterback lineage in the family,” said Greg Kragen, who is now a defensive line coach at Foothill College in Los Altos Hills, Calif.Kyle eventually switched to defense in high school and blossomed. Last season with Cal, he had a 14-tackle performance at Utah, and a 2 ½-sack day against Washington State.“My dad taught me to overcome not being the best athlete with hard work,” he said. “It’s going to take zero mental mistakes and incredible effort and succeeding on special teams.”A few years ago, the Kragens ventured to Denver and toured the Broncos’ training complex. It had changed quite a bit since those days when Greg Kragen ran onto the practice field.“Life’s crazy that he’s now there and on the same fields that I used to slog it out on,” he said.Same defensive coordinator, too, who is saying similar things about the son that he once said about the father.“Greg was a go-getter, the kind of guy you wanted on your team,” Phillips said. “Kyle’s a go-getter; you can tell that right away. He definitely got that from his dad.”Advertisement