
Keeping Score By                     
 DAVE CALDWELL
 
MAY 14, 2016
The most spectacular save of the Stanley Cup playoffs so far was probably made by Washington Capitals forward Jay Beagle, who lunged into a vacated crease to swat away a shot by Pittsburgh defenseman Trevor Daley with the shaft of his stick.Beagle was credited merely with a blocked shot at 2 minutes 48 seconds of overtime Tuesday in Game 6 of the teams’ second-round series, and the Penguins eliminated the Capitals less than four minutes later, anyway, when Nick Bonino scored on a rebound.But Beagle’s dive kept Washington’s season alive just a little longer, and it was yet another example of how slim the margins are between victory and defeat for N.H.L. teams chasing the Stanley Cup.To get to that overtime, the Capitals had rallied from a two-goal deficit in the third period, scoring the tying goal on a 5-on-3 power play after Pittsburgh was called for three delay-of-game penalties in 122 seconds for hurriedly sending the puck over the glass.AdvertisementTeams make it to the playoffs by being able to take leads and protect them. The 16 teams that led the league in most victories when scoring first in the regular season were the same 16 teams that made the playoffs.AdvertisementOf the best 16 teams at holding the lead after the second period in the regular season, 14 qualified for the playoffs. (Boston and Calgary were the exceptions.) But it is harder to hang onto leads in the playoffs, because opponents are better and there is much more on the line.“The salary cap has promoted parity; so has advanced scouting,” said Mike Milbury, the former Boston Bruins defenseman and Islanders general manager, who is now a hockey analyst for NBC. “The battle level rises significantly in the playoffs, as does pre-scouting. Individual and team tendencies are noted, and strategies to thwart them are implemented.”For teams that take leads into the third period of a regular-season game, victory is all but assured. This season, teams that led going into the third period compiled a record of 804-61-78, a winning percentage of .853, according to N.H.L. figures. Teams that trailed after two periods were just 139-716-88.Get the big sports news, highlights and analysis from Times journalists, with distinctive takes on games and some behind-the-scenes surprises, delivered to your inbox every week.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.But during the first two rounds of the playoffs, teams that took a lead into the third period were 47-25, a much lower winning percentage of .653. About 29 percent of games (21 of 72) were tied after two periods, compared with 23.3 percent of regular-season games (287 of 1,230).The first goal of a game still has value in the playoffs: Teams that scored first were 47-25 (.653) in the first two rounds. But that is a lower success rate than in the regular season, when teams that scored first were 853-251-126, a winning percentage of .694.Over all, playoff games this year are headed to overtime at the same rate as regular-season games. Through two playoff rounds, 16 of 72 games, 22.2 percent, were decided in overtime, compared with 275 of 1,230 regular-season games, 22.3 percent.But according to the N.H.L., the nine overtime games in the second round were the most in that round since the 16-team format was introduced in 1980.AdvertisementIn addition, there was not a sweep in 12 series in the first two rounds — the first time that has happened since 2010. (There were three sweeps in the first two rounds in 2011; two sweeps last year; and one each in 2011, 2012 and 2013.)Perhaps no team this postseason was more aware of the precariousness of a third-period lead than the Islanders. They eliminated the Panthers in the first round by overcoming a third-period deficit in the final minute of regulation and winning in the second overtime. They led only two of their five playoff victories after two periods.But the Islanders never seemed to recover from blowing two one-goal leads in the third period of Game 3 of the second round against the Lightning, which the Islanders lost in overtime. They entered the third period of Game 4 with a one-goal lead and again lost in overtime.Then there was the first-round playoff game on April 24 between the Dallas Stars and the host Minnesota Wild. The Stars scored the first goal less than six minutes in, then pumped in three more before the end of the second period to pad their lead to 4-0.With the Wild facing elimination, though, the game went haywire. Minnesota scored three third-period goals, then another after Dallas made it 5-3. The Wild pulled their goalie for an extra attacker in the final two minutes, and the Stars held on for a 5-4 victory.It was hardly the desired result in Minnesota, of course, and Dallas had followed form by winning after scoring first and leading after two periods. But the third period was unforgettable, and it probably will not be the last hair-raising finish of the spring.A version of this article appears in print on May 15, 2016, on Page SP4 of the New York edition with the headline: Postseason Sets Stage for Parity and Comebacks.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.See More »