AdvertisementSupported byBy The Associated PressSOELDEN, Austria — Lara Gut got the defense of her overall World Cup title off to a shining start on Saturday.Gut, the first women’s champion from Switzerland in more than two decades, dominated the season-opening giant slalom on a sun-soaked Rettenbach glacier.On an icy slope under crisp blue skies, Gut held on to her first-run lead to clinch a comfortable win, leading Mikaela Shiffrin by 1.44 seconds for her 19th career victory. Shiffrin, an American, also finished second here last year after winning the race in 2014“It’s a good start,” Gut said. “Soelden is always a special race. It’s very steep, it’s very difficult. You have to charge and not think too much. I had to fight against my head as I had been thinking too much in the past 24 hours. I don’t know why. Usually I just ski and enjoy what I am doing. I am the one who laughs.”Gut said she thanked the men’s overall champion, Marcel Hirscher of Austria, for giving her some useful advice.“Marcel told me yesterday, ‘You just have to ski,’ she said. “I knew I could be fast but you still have to deliver. Today wasn’t my easiest day. It was a fight against myself. What I am going to take with me from today is that I was stronger than my head, I was stronger than that what I was thinking.”Gut held a 1.42-second lead over Shiffrin after the first leg, and was put under pressure by Shiffrin’s near-flawless second run. Gut lost two-tenths early in her second run, but her victory never came under threat.“The second run was a battle,” Gut said.Shiffrin said she could handle being runner-up again after being beaten by Federica Brignone of Italy last season.“It’s a big relief. I can be happy with it but I also know I can be better,” Shiffrin said. “I really wanted to start off the season strong. It’s always better to win, but Lara was very strong, just like Federica last year. Today she raised the level.”Shiffrin praised Gut for holding herself together.“She is like the queen of hammering the course and risking and really, really racing. I am getting close to it but I have a lot of respect for her to be able to come through the first race of the season.”Marta Bassino of Italy was the only other skier to finish within two seconds of Gut to earn her first top-three result. It was the 100th podium finish in giant slalom by a woman from Italy, behind only Austria, Switzerland and France.“I just tried to ski like in training,” Bassino said through an interpreter. “This is an amazing result, it means a lot to me.”The former world champion Tessa Worley of France placed sixth, 2.88 off the lead. Eva-Maria Brem of Austria, who took the giant slalom title last season, came 5.14 behind in 26th after two disappointing runs.Petra Vlhova of Slovakia started 55th but posted the fastest second-run time to finish eighth.Several top contenders sat out the race. The American standout Lindsey Vonn said she would focus more on the speed events downhill and super-G this season, while the two-time former overall champion Anna Veith of Austria and the 2010 Olympic giant slalom champion Viktoria Rebensburg of Germany were recovering from injuries.Organizers said the race was attended by 14,000 spectators, including the 77-year-old Heinrich Messner, who won the inaugural World Cup race in 1967 — a slalom in Berchtesgaden, Germany. A men’s giant slalom on the same course is scheduled for Sunday.Advertisement