
Extra Bases By                     
 TYLER KEPNER
 
JULY 14, 2017
Maybe Corey Dickerson should have brought a cellphone with him when he went to the plate at the All-Star Game. That is what Nelson Cruz did, and his photo with the longtime umpire Joe West was the most indelible impression of the night. Cruz is a five-time All-Star who just hit his 300th homer, and much more famous than Dickerson, anyway. The snapshot only emphasized the point.
            "But first, let me get a picture" Nelson Cruz had to get a pic with Joe West! #ASG pic.twitter.com/SbqXprETKl But the record will show that Dickerson — not Cruz — supplanted the retired David Ortiz as the starting designated hitter for the American League. The fans recognized Dickerson’s sizzling performance for the Tampa Bay Rays, who entered the second half on Friday holding the second A.L. wild-card spot.“We fully believe that we’re the best team in the American League East,” starter Chris Archer said. “Just give us some more time.”The Rays are brimming with confidence, and Dickerson fits right in. He batted just .245 last season, his first with Tampa Bay after a trade from Colorado, but said he envisioned his starting All-Star role last winter.Advertisement“I always had those expectations,” he said. “I hold myself very high. The things that I want to accomplish are higher than what people even can consider me doing. This won’t satisfy me. I expect more of myself as a player.”AdvertisementDickerson hit .312 with 17 home runs before the break, and his 107 hits ranked third in the A.L. He said he put pressure on himself last season after the trade, which followed a miserable 2015 season with the Rockies in which plantar fasciitis and broken ribs limited him to just 65 games.“I tried to make up those at-bats,” Dickerson said. “I kept trying to change, be somebody else, do other things. I made a commitment to be who I am and be healthy.”To give himself the best chance, Dickerson changed his diet and lost 25 pounds last winter, dropping to 200 pounds for the first time since 2010, when the Rockies drafted him in the eighth round out of Meridian Community College in Mississippi. Dickerson, who stands 6 feet 1 inch and plays about half his games in left field, said he feels better when he shows up at the ballpark. He gets better jumps in the field, he said, and turns more singles into doubles on the bases.Dickerson struck out 79 times before the break, yet pitchers find him challenging because he can hit almost anything. Baseball generally discourages “bad ball” hitters in favor of those who work the count, but Dickerson can handle pitches outside the zone.“He doesn’t always think the same thing as everyone else,” said the Rockies’ Charlie Blackmon, a former teammate. “His approach can sometimes be unique, but his ability to make hard contact and get off really good swings is very impressive. He can crush bad balls. It’s hard to be as aggressive as he is sometimes and still hit balls hard, but he’s got a simple stroke, a good bat path and really good hand-eye, so he can do it.”To stay properly aligned at the plate, Dickerson still sometimes uses an unorthodox technique in the batting cage. He learned in the minors from a coach, the former Baltimore Orioles infielder Lenn Sakata, who thought Dickerson could add power with a leg kick to help his rhythm and timing.“So he put me on a two-by-four, and he would soft-toss to me,” said Dickerson, who stood on the wood with both feet to ensure an even stride. “I’d hit it off the tee, and it made me feel really grounded. When I got off of it, in practice, I felt like I was really into the ground, I was balanced, and that really helped me drive the baseball to all areas of the field.”AdvertisementNow, Dickerson said, “whenever I start getting out of my legs or getting too big with my swing, I’ll go back to it and it kind of grounds me back.”Dickerson has found new ground this season: a spot among the game’s elite as a star for a surprising contender.Two of the best relievers in the National League have been Brad Hand of the San Diego Padres and Corey Knebel of the Milwaukee Brewers. Both followed winding paths to their teams while using secondary pitches that took a while to learn.Hand got his break when the Padres claimed him off waivers last April. He had spent five seasons with the Marlins, dividing his time between the rotation and the bullpen while going 9-25 with a 4.71 E.R.A. In two seasons with San Diego, Hand has pitched only in relief, with a 2.71 E.R.A. through the All-Star break and a much better strikeout rate.With the Padres, Hand strikes out 11.3 batters per nine innings. With the Marlins, he fanned just 5.9. The difference is his slider, which he throws almost 45 percent of the time. He shelved his old changeup and rarely throws a curveball anymore.“Out of the bullpen, I felt like I needed a smaller breaking pitch because I wasn’t getting many swings on my curveball,” Hand said. “They would take it because it’s so big, and it was a harder pitch for me to throw for a strike. So I just kind of found something that was a smaller breaking pitch that would be in the zone longer.”Hand tried many grips before settling on one that baffles fellow pitchers.“Everybody that I’ve talked to has no idea how I throw it the way I do,” Hand said. “It’s almost basically like my two-seamer, but just turned a little. It’s kind of weird. It works, though.”So does Knebel’s curveball, which he never threw in high school and did not use with confidence until his final year at the University of Texas. He has been traded twice — from Detroit to Texas for Joakim Soria, and then to Milwaukee for Yovani Gallardo — and has broken through this season, with a harder fastball and an ever-improving curve.AdvertisementLike Hand, Knebel initially had too much of a loop in his curveball, which made it easier for hitters to detect. He stuck with it, though, applying a few basic principles.“It’s tough — with the curveball, if you try and do something with it, do a little extra, it’s never really going to do what you want,” he said. “You can’t think you’re throwing the curveball. You got to think ‘fastball’ until the very end. That’s when you spin it.”Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.He drew on an analogy from his college pitching coach, Skip Johnson, who is now the head coach at Oklahoma.“If you try to cast a fishing rod out in the back, it’s going to be a terrible cast,” Knebel said. “Snap your wrist at the end — that’s when it’s going to go out further.”Among all N.L. pitchers with at least 30 innings through the All-Star break, Knebel had the best strikeout rate, at 15.9 per nine innings. He has even set a major league record: 43 consecutive appearances (and counting) with a strikeout. That broke the single-season record of 39 set by the Hall of Famer Bruce Sutter in 1977.“It’s crazy,” Knebel said. “You never think of something like that. I’m not out there trying to strike people out. I’m just trying to get outs, and that’s how it’s worked out.”Francisco Mejia arrived at the Futures Game last Sunday with a .339 average, the best among Class AA players in the event. It has been an impressive follow-up season for Mejia, a Cleveland Indians catching prospect, after a whirlwind summer of 2016.Last season Mejia had a 50-game hitting streak, which lasted from May 27 to Aug. 13 and spanned a promotion to high Class A from low Class A. It also overlapped with the nonwaiver trading deadline, when the Indians included him in a trade package that would have brought them catcher Jonathan Lucroy from Milwaukee.The deal needed Lucroy’s approval, and he declined, keeping Mejia with the organization that signed him from the Dominican Republic at age 16.Advertisement“I was real happy I was still with Cleveland, because it’s like family,” Mejia said. “I want to stay there. I don’t want to lose my best friends and go to another team. If you get traded, you have to find new guys, new family.”Before his streak, Mejia said, he was unaware that the major league record was 56, set in 1941 by the Yankees’ Joe DiMaggio, who also had a 61-game streak in the minors. Mejia’s streak was the longest in the minors since Roman Mejias had a 55-game streak for a Pittsburgh Pirates affiliate in 1954.“I feel, like, so proud and amazed I could do that,” Mejia said. “I was a little sad because I wanted it to continue, but it’s part of the game. I remember I hit a line drive in the gap in right-center, and the guy slid and got it.”Mejia, who called himself a line-drive hitter with a strong arm, said the distraction of playing such a demanding position did not help him stay focused during his streak. He is concentrating more now on rapport with pitchers, he said, but he always thinks about hitting.“I love to hit,” he said, “more than maybe everything else.”Mejia would have needed another 20 games to break the record for longest minor league streak: 69 games, by Joe Wilhoit for a team in Wichita in 1919. In parts of four seasons in the majors, though, Wilhoit’s longest hitting streak was nine.A version of this article appears in print on July 16, 2017, on Page SP2 of the New York edition with the headline: Breakout Season for Tampa Bay.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.See More »