AdvertisementSupported byAlabama 33, Texas A&M 14By Marc TracyTUSCALOOSA, Ala. — During Alabama’s stretch of dominance — going back to the 2009 season, when the Crimson Tide won their first of four national championships under Coach Nick Saban — the team’s typical midautumn foil has been Louisiana State. But with the Tigers flailing, at least by their standards, Saturday afternoon’s showdown against No. 6 Texas A&M figured to be the top-ranked Tide’s biggest test before the postseason.Although the game was close at times, Alabama overcame the Aggies, 33-14, to head into a bye week with an 8-0 overall record and pole position in the Southeastern Conference’s West Division at 5-0. Alabama has now won 20 in a row.The highlight came with just over six minutes left in the third quarter, with Alabama leading by 20-14 but looking shaky on offense. On a third-and-26 from Texas A&M’s 38-yard line, linebacker Ryan Anderson forced Aggies running back Keith Ford to fumble. Defensive end Jonathan Allen recovered the ball and ran 30 yards for a touchdown. A 2-point conversion attempt failed, but Alabama led, 26-14.The touchdown was the ninth this season by Alabama’s defense — compared with 10 in 15 games last season. Alabama has now scored a touchdown on defense or special teams in 10 straight games, the longest streak in the last 10 seasons of the Football Bowl Subdivision, according to ESPN Stats & Info.Texas A&M (6-1, 4-1) showed resilience, using red-zone grit to hold Alabama’s offense to 13 points in the first half and taking a 14-13 lead on the first drive of the second half.But with the game-changing defensive end Myles Garrett most likely headed for a very high pick in the N.F.L. draft after this season, the Aggies may look back on Saturday’s game as a missed opportunity as they try to reach the conference championship game for the first time in their five-year SEC tenure.Alabama sustained a more immediate loss on Saturday: The senior Eddie Jackson, who was named the most valuable defensive player in January’s national title game, broke his leg when he was tackled on a punt return in the fourth quarter, an injury that will almost certainly end his college career.“He was an all-American player as a safety, at least in my book,” said Saban, who also played safety when he was in college. He added, “He’s done a fantastic job for us, and I’m just sick for him and his family.”The makeup of the Alabama machine is fundamentally the same as it was when the Tide won the national titles for the 2009, 2011, 2012 and 2015 seasons: a stifling defense and a run-first offense. Last season’s championship team, for instance, had the Heisman Trophy winner, Derrick Henry, at tailback.But Saban, in his 10th season with Alabama, has adjusted along with the sport. Under Lane Kiffin, the team’s third-year coordinator, the offense has run at a faster pace, and this season also features in Jalen Hurts something previously unthinkable: a run-happy true freshman at quarterback.On Saturday, Hurts completed 15 of 25 passes for 164 yards and two touchdowns, and he gained 93 rushing yards on 23 carries, including a 37-yarder for a score in the fourth quarter. Tailback Damien Harris added 128 yards on 17 carries.Saban’s defense has also transformed, switching its focus from size to speed and making up the difference with aggressive substitutions.The Texas A&M senior Trevor Knight is the type of quarterback who used to be able to beat Alabama. Like Cam Newton, who led Auburn to victory in 2010, Knight is a speedy and smart rusher. Like his Aggies predecessor Johnny Manziel, who memorably beat the Crimson Tide in Tuscaloosa in 2012 en route to the Heisman Trophy, Knight is a masterly improviser. And if he bears a special resemblance to the quarterback who passed for 348 yards and four touchdowns as Oklahoma beat Alabama in the 2014 Sugar Bowl, well, that was Knight, who transferred in the off-season as a graduate student.Knight entered Saturday’s game with nine rushing touchdowns and an average of nearly 100 rushing yards per game. But Alabama’s defense — which entered Saturday allowing 63.9 rushing yards per game, the best mark in the F.B.S. by more than 20 yards — held Knight to 24 yards on 13 carries, and the Aggies to 114 rushing yards. Knight made a couple of big throws, but he was sacked five times and completed only 14 of 31 passes, for 164 yards.Saban eagerly greeted the unusually late bye week. “I want the players to get some rest, relax and get healthy,” he said.“But,” he added, “we can’t be relieved.”Alabama is scheduled to play at No. 25 L.S.U. and, as usual, to end the regular season against No. 21 Auburn, which routed No. 17 Arkansas, 56-3, on Saturday.“We’ve got lots of games against a lot of good teams coming up when we start back playing again,” Saban said. “That can have a tremendous impact on what kind of season that we have.”Advertisement