AdvertisementSupported byBy Mike VorkunovPISCATAWAY, N.J. — As Rutgers and Michigan State stationed themselves in their locker rooms during halftime Wednesday night at the Rutgers Athletic Center, the Scarlet Knights’ mascot walked over to the Spartans’ bench, grabbed Coach Tom Izzo’s clipboard and pretended to scribble a play. If the mascot had done so for Rutgers Coach Eddie Jordan, it would not have seemed that odd. Losses have come by the dozen, and few have been close. Rutgers’s best player was suspended, and last month the team was stripped down to seven scholarship players. Jordan seems likely to be fired at season’s end, and with a poetic twist. Jordan made his name at Rutgers as the point guard who guided the 1975-76 team to an undefeated regular season. This season he could end up winless in the Big Ten.If he and Rutgers were hoping for a respite to their woes Wednesday, No. 2 Michigan State (25-5, 12-5 Big Ten) offered them nothing. Rutgers (6-24, 0-17) lost, 97-66, extending its Big Ten losing streak to 31 consecutive games — the second-longest run in conference history.The Scarlet Knights, who have also lost a program-record 17 straight over all, could soothe themselves with a moral victory, but that will not buttress them in the conference standings.Michigan State did not pull away until the second half, when the Spartans proved too big, too bruising and, plainly, too good. They went on a 16-2 run and handed Rutgers its ninth loss of 25 or more points.“No disrespect to Rutgers, but we let the worst team in the conference come out and play like that,” Spartans guard Denzel Valentine said. “We totally disrespected the game.”Bryn Forbes, the Spartans’ senior sharpshooter, hit 11 3-pointers — a Big Ten record — and scored 33 points, frequently muzzling any rally by Rutgers. After Rutgers’s Bishop Daniels missed a forceful dunk 2 minutes 27 seconds into the second half, Forbes hit a 3-pointer, and Erron Harris followed with another. Suddenly, Rutgers’s deficit had ballooned to 15, from 9.Corey Sanders, who returned from a four-game suspension for violating team rules, could not stem the tide alone despite scoring a team-high 19 points for the Scarlet Knights.For Michigan State, the result could be chalked up as another ho-hum victory — even with the momentary lapse that had it nearly equal with Rutgers for nearly 20 minutes.And the game was more of the same for the Scarlet Knights, too. They have made bungling defeats and eyesore box scores a routine. The university, which has already fired its football coach and its athletic director in the last four months, is seemingly primed to do the same with its basketball coach. “I’m going to be here tomorrow, and we’ll see,” Jordan said when asked about his job status. “Again, that’s not my concern. My concern is coming in tomorrow and getting better tomorrow and getting better the next day and see if we can win a game on Saturday. I’m not into predictions. I know it’s a process. We all knew it was not going to be just two years, not just three years; we knew that coming in.”Jordan’s return to his alma mater was supposed to be the story of a favorite son lifting a downtrodden and scandal-ridden program out of the gutter it found itself in in 2013 after the former coach Mike Rice was seen on video hurling homophobic slurs and basketballs at players and was fired. Instead, Jordan’s tenure has been ignominious.It began with the revelation that he had not actually earned a degree from Rutgers as a student and was still a few credits shy of graduating. And his record has only gotten worse in each of his three years at the helm.Rutgers lost by 50 points to Iowa at home in January and on Saturday dropped a game by 39 at Northwestern — a program that has never made the N.C.A.A. tournament.Jordan earned the scorn of the fans last month when he responded to cries of discontent by proclaiming apathy.“I don’t care about the reaction,” he said when Rutgers’s conference losing streak was a mere 26.Advertisement