By PAT PICKENSMARCH 2, 2016
At the trading deadline three years ago, Derick Brassard was part of a deal that sent him to the Rangers from the Columbus Blue Jackets. In some reports, Brassard’s name was more or less ignored because Marian Gaborik’s departure from the Rangers was deemed more important. In other articles, Brassard was called an obscure player.Fast-forward to the 2016 trading deadline, and Brassard is hard to ignore. He has been a consistent force during the Rangers’ tumultuous season and is one of the team’s most valuable players as it prepares for a postseason run.With 19 games left in the regular season, Brassard, 28, has already set a career high for goals in a season with 22 and is on pace to surpass his high for points, 60, which he established a season ago. He is second on the Rangers in points with 46, one behind his linemate Mats Zuccarello. Brassard has helped carry the scoring burden caused by Rick Nash’s slump and long-term leg injury.“I think it’s just the evolution of a young player,” Rangers Coach Alain Vigneault said. “As he’s played here in New York, his role has gotten bigger. I think his confidence in himself and his abilities have gotten bigger; I have seen his skill progress, and hockey sense.”AdvertisementBrassard, the sixth overall pick in the 2006 draft, was not exactly an obscure player in Columbus, either. He was a top-line center for Nash and the Blue Jackets for much of his 309-game tenure there, posting consecutive 40-point seasons. Nash was dealt to the Rangers in the 2012 off-season, and Brassard followed nine months later.Advertisement“It’s part of the sport; it’s part of the game,” Brassard said. “The only thing you can control is your play and the way you compete on the ice.”Brassard has come of age in New York, but he credits his success this season — after off-season wrist surgery to correct a lingering ailment — to the trainer Ben Prentiss.“I couldn’t do a lot of things, but with Ben’s experience, we could work around it,” Brassard said of training while he recovered. “I was kind of worried with the surgery and everything to have a slow start or a slow season.”John Tortorella, Brassard’s first coach with the Rangers and Columbus’s coach now, said this week that he was impressed with Brassard’s progress.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.“You could see, obviously, his talent level; you could see that he wants to make a difference,” Tortorella said. “I’m glad for him. He came from the team I’m coaching, so sometimes you get a change of scenery, it works.”After a scorching start, the Rangers were scuffling into January, and Nash’s bone bruise in his left leg, sustained Jan. 22, could have further derailed them. But Brassard has picked up the pace, posting 16 points in 16 games, with seven goals, to help the Rangers go 11-4-1.Besides scoring more, Brassard is shooting more. He is on pace to set a personal record for shots in a season, but he insisted he was not making an effort to put the puck on the net more.“I don’t have more goals because I shoot the puck more this year,” Brassard said. “The pucks are going in a little bit more, and obviously I’m going to try to shoot a little bit more. That’s just the way I play.”AdvertisementThis year the Rangers again added a center at the trading deadline: Eric Staal. In his first game Monday against Columbus, Staal started at center but ended up on the left wing on a line with Brassard and Zuccarello.After two big wins last week over top teams in the Western Conference, the second-place Rangers face three games against division rivals in the next four days. They play at Pittsburgh on Thursday and at first-place Washington on Friday and then host the third-place Islanders on Sunday.With Staal in the mix and Nash expected to be back in 10 to 14 days, Brassard is hoping for another run that will have a happier ending than each of the last two, when the Rangers fell short of the Stanley Cup.“We believe in ourselves,” Brassard said. “We believe we can go all the way this year with the experiences we got the last two years. Eric is probably the missing piece that we needed.”A version of this article appears in print on March 3, 2016, on Page B12 of the New York edition with the headline: Brassard Breaks Out; Team Hopes to Follow.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.