

 Michael Powell
 

SPORTS OF THE TIMES
MARCH 27, 2017
As it happened, I was on the telephone with Mayor Libby Schaaf of Oakland on Monday when the N.F.L.’s chief pirate called to say that his fellow corsairs would steal away her city’s beloved Raiders.It was early afternoon and the mayor had been describing her efforts to convince Commissioner Roger Goodell that a public gift of 55 acres, major improvements and private financing added up to a heck of a deal for his private enterprise crew.“My argument,” she told me, “is yes, we cannot put the same kind of public dollars into this as Las Vegas. But ——”Her phone rang and she checked her caller ID. It was Goodell. He told her that the N.F.L. owners, fantastically wealthy men all, just had voted to commit grand theft franchise and plop the Oakland Raiders in a patch of desert just south of Las Vegas.AdvertisementTheir conversation lasted a minute or two. No need for tears. Shaking down cities and sticking in the shiv is a patented move for the league. It’s not personal; it’s strictly business.Advertisement“I was not surprised, but I was entirely disappointed,” Schaaf told me afterward. “I do not regret that we stood firm on no public funding for stadium constructions.”In the N.F.L.’s world, displays of principle and common economic sense are for chumps. Las Vegas and Nevada adopted the league’s preferred stance: They rolled belly up. Politicians raised taxes to provide a historic $750 million public subsidy.This led to unremarked-upon cognitive dissonance in Las Vegas. Even as politicians increased taxes for stadiums, Clark County school officials voted last spring to increase public class sizes and to close a school for at-risk students. There was simply no money. “This is the last thing we ever want to do,” Linda Young, president of the school board, said at that time.It’s a shame the school board did not build a football stadium, perhaps with a public school annex.One team owner, Stephen M. Ross of the Miami Dolphins, voted against the relocation. “We as owners and as a league owe it to the fans to do everything we can to stay in communities that have supported us,” he said in a statement.That was so sweet of him; I hope he has put a few food tasters on his staff.The N.F.L. makes two demands of its owners: Build ever-grander stadiums with as many public dollars as you can find; and never, ever feel shame.Goodell had pressed Schaaf to evict the Oakland A’s of M.L.B. — the football and baseball stadiums would have been neighbors under the proposed arrangement — and declare her loyalty to the financial well-being of the Raiders. She saw no reason to sever a relationship with a baseball team that also was entwined with her city’s identity.Advertisement“Asking us to terminate their lease now,” she wrote to the league this past weekend, “is unnecessary and unreasonable.”Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.Building football stadiums with public dollars is in fact a mug’s game. With eight regular-season games, pro football rarely if ever pays for itself, no matter how many fictional economic impact reports the league’s captive economists and chamber-of-commerce sorts churn out.“I’ve studied the economic impact, and it doesn’t warrant a public investment because it doesn’t pay off,” the mayor said of football.Baseball, with its 81 home games, can offer a better deal, although public officials remain advised to count their fingers after shaking hands with an owner of any sports franchise.Still, the mayor had taken a risk. For her to suggest that another sport merited equal footing with football smacked of foolish independence. The N.F.L. may preside over a game that destroys bodies and brains at a frightful rate, but its lords view themselves as the crown princes of sport. Every other professional league operates in its shadow.The other curiosity is the Las Vegas deal. Despite the enormous outlay of tax money, it is, in almost every way, not so great. The league is deserting the sixth-biggest television market in the United States, one of the nation’s most pleasant climates and a city much on the upswing, for head-throbbing heat in a much smaller TV market in a city where there are fewer foreclosures than there used to be.So great is the blasted heat that Las Vegas officials had to guarantee that the new stadium would come with an expensive roof.Las Vegas also is synonymous with gambling, a sin Goodell and the N.F.L. profess to abhor. Myself, I would place a fair bet that Goodell discards his hair shirt for a high-roller’s linen number in a few years. There’s simply too much money at stake with gambling, and money is what the N.F.L. does very well.Theoretically, Schaaf and Goodell engaged in negotiations these past many months. She, however, refused to pour more public dollars after bad. (In 1995, an earlier generation of Oakland city officials had made a humiliating and ruinous agreement to build a new stadium for the Raiders in exchange for the team’s return from a 13-year sojourn in Los Angeles.)AdvertisementLast Friday, Goodell wrote the mayor the league equivalent of a Dear Jane letter. “I want to personally thank you for your leadership,” he began. This was followed by lots of rambling that ended with “no viable solution.”“It is disappointing to me and our clubs to have come to that conclusion,” he wrote.I asked the mayor if she found solace in having stood on principle. She had refused to hock her city’s finances to make a $14 billion league happier.There was a long pause at the other end of the telephone. Then she spoke slowly.“This team was blue-collar and born and raised here, and the pride and passion that Oaklanders feel about this team is in our blood,” she said. “It breaks my heart to lose this team.”You hope Goodell reads that as he drifts off to sleep tonight.Email: powellm@nytimes.comA version of this article appears in print on March 28, 2017, on Page B8 of the New York edition with the headline: The Business of Ripping Out the Heart of Oakland.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.See More »