By COREY KILGANNONJULY 14, 2017
The four-city extravaganza this week to promote next month’s showdown between Floyd Mayweather Jr. and Conor McGregor has become a hurricane of playground hype, pulling the fiercest of fight purists into the arena of taunts and insults and other distractions.At events billed as news conferences but conducted like low-budget carnivals, questions about fight styles and training regimens seem secondary to entertainment-related ones, such as where McGregor bought his latest gaudy robe, or how many private jets Mayweather owns, or as McGregor keeps bringing up, how many strippers Mayweather has on his payroll.The reports from the so-called “World Tour” to promote an intriguing fight or a goofy gimmick, depending on your perspective, tend to chronicle who outpointed whom in the taunt department. The tour stopped at Barclays Center in Brooklyn on Thursday, and a reporter asked McGregor to give his own rankings of the events, like so many rounds in a championship bout.McGregor gave himself the edge for the two previous events, in Los Angeles and Toronto, but called Thursday night’s insult-fest at a crowded Barclays arena a draw — then took it back and said he probably won that as well.The tour has not been without controversy. McGregor has been criticized for making racially tinged statements, and Mayweather directed a gay slur toward McGregor during the final stop Friday in London.AdvertisementBut amid the avalanche of insults between the undefeated Mayweather and McGregor, the mixed martial arts fighter who is a U.F.C. champion and its biggest star, there are more sincere assessments among the bluster of how the fighters are preparing. Those who listened carefully heard a bit about what might transpire when the fighters touch gloves in the ring on Aug. 26 in Las Vegas.AdvertisementMayweather, who retired in 2015 with a 49-0 professional record, has not snapped into fighting shape as quickly as he used to, said Leonard Ellerbe, who runs Mayweather Promotions. He told reporters Mayweather was initially plagued by soreness, uncertainty and timing loss, in the early weeks of training.“He’s 40 years old. It’s no secret,” said Ellerbe, who ambled into an interview room Thursday evening while picking from a plate of fruit.Get the big sports news, highlights and analysis from Times journalists, with distinctive takes on games and some behind-the-scenes surprises, delivered to your inbox every week.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.He assured reporters this would be a good matchup, that Mayweather would not necessarily cruise to victory just because the fight was being conducted under boxing rules, and with 10-ounce boxing gloves instead of the smaller U.F.C. glove.He did acknowledge that the key for Mayweather, one of the great defensive fighters, would be to avoid McGregor’s devastating knockout punches.Sure, McGregor has no professional boxing experience and will be barred from the kicking or wrestling used in mixed martial arts. But other than those little details, he said, McGregor has the advantage.“Everything leans toward him on paper,” including age and size, Ellerbe said. (Mayweather is 40, while McGregor turned 29 on Friday.)Ellerbe said Mayweather had been working out intensely. He emphasized that Mayweather was returning to the ring only for the chance to fight McGregor and to be paid well for it.AdvertisementMayweather is expected to earn at least $100 million, with McGregor making $75 million. The fight, a $100 pay-per-view event for Showtime, is expected to be among the most lucrative fights ever.Later in the interview room on Thursday night, McGregor was besieged with questions about his tattoos, his wardrobe and his gum-chewing habit.In a stray moment, he halted the hyperbole and mentioned that he was taking the challenge to hone his boxing skills and was sparring at least 12 rounds at a time, while rotating in fresh sparring partners and using a referee to officiate, to acclimate himself to the new format.When asked about the prospect of fighting one of the best boxers ever, with little time to learn the sport, he turned the brashness back on.“That’s confidence, right in your face,” he said, then repeated his claim that mixed martial arts was a much more difficult style to master. As usual, he made fun of Mayweather’s defensive style and lack of power.“This game is easy,” he said of boxing. “I’m telling you right now.”Over his shirtless, tattooed torso, McGregor had draped a white robe with a serpent insignia that he bought hours earlier during a shopping spree on Fifth Avenue.When a female reporter asked if he was chewing gum to calm his nerves during the face-to-face showdowns with Mayweather, McGregor cackled.“Look at me — I’m topless with a mink coat,” he said, adding a couple of expletives. “Nothing fazes me, lady.”AdvertisementMcGregor exited and Mayweather entered. He backed off earlier declarations promising a knockout.“Either he’s going to get me or I’m going to get him,” he said. “It’s going to be what it’s going to be.”In turns vulnerable and boastful, Mayweather said he had gotten over the initial thrill of making big money and buying lavish clothes and luxury cars. In this spirit of modesty, he said, it was time to consolidate his three private jets to one.He introduced young fighters in his entourage and had his publicist and lawyer onstage. He had his lawyer show off the expensive watch Mayweather had bought him for his loyalty.Mayweather said he did not want to come out of retirement, but he did so because he saw it as the biggest payday in sport.One day, he said, “They’re going to talk about this business move at Harvard.”A version of this article appears in print on July 15, 2017, on Page D5 of the New York edition with the headline: McGregor and Mayweather Fling Taunts, and a Touch of Honesty.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.