By KAREN CROUSEJAN. 18, 2017
ORLANDO, Fla. — Sam Saunders lifted the cologne off the desk, removed the cap and sniffed its contents. It was as if he had liberated a genie from its bottle. The spirit of his grandfather Arnold Palmer, in the form of a musky scent, filled the second-floor office at the Bay Hill Club and Lodge.The cologne, a container of digestive powder, two pairs of reading glasses, three scrolls of golf course designs and other detritus from Palmer’s long and lustrous life were just as he had left them. It all created the comforting illusion that Palmer was not really gone, but had merely ducked out for a cold can of the part-tea, part-lemonade refreshment that he made famous.It has been nearly four months since Palmer died of complications from heart problems, and more than 100 days since Saunders stepped out from Palmer’s immense shadow to deliver a moving eulogy at his grandfather’s public memorial in Latrobe, Pa. Yet Saunders said he felt as close to his grandfather as ever.On Thursday, he will resume his quest to claim his first PGA Tour victory, at the CareerBuilder Challenge outside Palm Springs, Calif. In 1973, when the tournament was known as the Bob Hope Desert Classic, that was where Palmer secured his 62nd and final tour title.AdvertisementBack at his hotel room between rounds, Saunders will read a few more pages of “A Life Well Played,” Palmer’s best-selling memoir, which was published two weeks after his death. It has a mix of information that is new to Saunders and lessons long ingrained in him. For Saunders, the book is the next best thing to falling asleep to the sound of Palmer’s voice.AdvertisementSaunders once felt burdened to be the grandson of the golfer known as the King, but now he is happy to embrace Palmer’s legacy, which includes seven major championships and an army of followers beguiled by his humility and his grace.“I just want to be a part of it and do my part to carry on how he treated people,” Saunders said this month.He was speaking the day before he left for his first tournament of 2017, a Web.com Tour event in the Bahamas. He had driven to Bay Hill, in Orlando, Fla., earlier in the day from his home in St. Augustine, on the state’s east coast.He planned to spend the night with his parents, Amy and Roy, who live in the surrounding neighborhood and oversee the club’s day-to-day operations, before leaving out of the Orlando airport early the next morning.Saunders’s reason for driving two hours out of his way to catch a flight would have resonated with Palmer, a child of the Great Depression whose estimated net worth at the time of his death was more than $600 million.“The flights are a lot cheaper out of Orlando,” Saunders said, adding, “My granddad was not wasteful in any way, and that’s something — as a family, we’ve also tried not to be wasteful in any way with money or time.”A keen appreciation for the value of a dollar was one of many lessons Palmer taught Saunders, who is trying to instill the same values in his two sons with his wife, Kelly, whom he married in 2012. Saunders, 29, does not want his children to grow up spoiled or sedentary. So when the couple’s older son, Cohen, Kelly’s child from a previous relationship, recently asked for an Xbox for his seventh birthday, Saunders told him no way.Advertisement“You can play outside and ride your bike,” Saunders said he told him. “You’re not going to sit inside playing video games.”As a youngster, Saunders won multiple club championships at Bay Hill — but he also raked the bunkers and mowed the fairways and greens as part of the maintenance crew.“The way our family operated was, nothing was given to you,” Saunders said. “Arnold wanted all of us to be successful on our own, and my parents were the same way, and I’m so grateful for that. If you’ve always been handed things, when life gets hard, you won’t know how to handle it.”In the fall, life landed a few punches to Saunders’s gut. First, there was a health issue, since resolved, involving his younger son, Ace (who was named after Palmer’s term of endearment for Saunders); that prompted Saunders to drop out of the Web.com Tour playoffs to return home. He was caring for Ace on Sept. 25 when Kelly reminded him to check in with Palmer, who was in a hospital in Pittsburgh preparing for surgery.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.Saunders knew his grandfather would appreciate hearing from him. Since the death in 2003 of Mark McCormack — Palmer’s friend and business manager, who slipped into a coma after going into cardiac arrest while having minor surgery at a dermatologist’s office — Palmer had stubbornly resisted any medical procedure that required anesthesia, including hip replacement.“For a guy who seemed so tough, he was scared of that,” Saunders said.Palmer answered on the first ring, and their brief conversation sounded no alarms with Saunders, who said he was caught completely off guard when his father called a few hours later to relay the news that Palmer, 87, had died.All along, Saunders said, he had been bracing for a similar phone call about his other grandfather, Robert Saunders, who had been in poor health for several years. As it happened, that call came exactly four weeks later. Palmer’s death set off a worldwide wake, but Robert Saunders’s represented no less of a loss to Sam Saunders. He described Robert as “one of the great men you could have as an example.”Robert Saunders, also 87, was a former state senator in Florida and oil distributor for Shell in the Gainesville area. He was an entrepreneur who later bought three cemeteries and a funeral home. For more than a decade, he had been slowed by health problems, including macular degeneration that left him blind, but Sam Saunders said his grandfather never lost his zest for life or his appreciation for his family.“He was always a guy I called when I was feeling down on myself,” Saunders said, adding, “He was every bit as good an example as Arnold was but in a very behind-the-scenes way.”AdvertisementAt Palmer’s public memorial, Saunders described how Palmer had taken his phone call while standing in the Oval Office. At his other grandfather’s private service, Saunders smiled when he remembered a 70-year-old Robert performing back flips off the diving board.As the holidays approached, Saunders’s sense of loss was acute, but he knew that neither grandfather would have wanted him to sit around and sulk. Palmer had always been there to help him with his swing, and it was no different in December.Saunders turned on Golf Channel, the cable network that Palmer co-founded in 1995, and saw matches from decades earlier that featured Palmer. As he watched Palmer’s swing, Saunders identified a problem in his own.“One of the things he was big on with me was staying down and through the shot,” Saunders said, adding: “I was watching the old videos, and I could see how hard he was working on that. That put it back into play for myself because I had gotten away from it.”Saunders tied for eighth at the Web.com event in the Bahamas. His swing is back to feeling the same, but Saunders feels undeniably different.“I feel more comfortable in my own skin,” he said.His grandfathers, he realized, gave him the greatest gift of all: the ability to carry on in their absence.A version of this article appears in print on January 19, 2017, on Page B11 of the New York edition with the headline: Heir to Palmer Has Inherited His Lessons.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.