AdvertisementSupported byBy Allan KredaThe Islanders fired Coach Jack Capuano on Tuesday, halfway through a disappointing season.Capuano will be replaced on an interim basis by Doug Weight, one of his assistants, who is also the team’s assistant general manager.Capuano has the second-most wins in franchise history, with 227, behind Al Arbour. He led the team to three playoff appearances in the past four years and two 100-point seasons. His final game was Monday’s 4-0 victory over the Bruins in Boston.“We need to turn this ship around,” General Manager Garth Snow said. “I don’t know that Jack fell short of expectations. When you’re a head coach in this league, sometimes you’re a victim of different circumstances.”The Islanders (17-17-8), who are in last place in the Eastern Conference, have been inconsistent this season after adding the free agents Andrew Ladd and Jason Chimera, who have not met expectations. Two weeks ago, the starting goalie, Jaroslav Halak, was sent to the minors, even though he is owed more than $7 million.Snow, who has been the general manager since 2006, will have the chance to search for a permanent coach while Weight guides the team, starting with Thursday’s home game against Dallas.“I don’t imagine system-wise we will change too much,” Snow said. “A tweak here and there that Doug may want to implement. At the end of the day, sometimes a new voice in the room can be a difference, a little bit of a spark for a team. We’re trying to create that, and we’ll see where it goes.”Capuano coached the Islanders’ American Hockey League team in Bridgeport, Conn., before taking over for Scott Gordon behind the bench on Nov. 15, 2010.The Islanders have struggled to find the right pieces to build around their superstar forward John Tavares, who can become a free agent after next season.Snow took responsibility for the myriad personnel decisions he has made since the end of last season, when the Islanders won their first playoff series in 23 years with a first-round victory over Florida.They let the longtime Islanders Kyle Okposo, Frans Nielsen and Matt Martin leave via free agency. They signed the former Islander P. A. Parenteau to play alongside Tavares, only to waive Parenteau days before the season started. Ladd, who is the team’s highest-paid player, making $8 million, has scored only eight goals.“Obviously, I’m not hiding from the fact that it starts with me,” Snow said. “One hundred percent.”Despite having one playoff series win to show for his 10-plus seasons as general manger, Snow said he was not fearing for his job under the new owners Jon Ledecky and Scott Malkin.“I don’t even worry about that,” Snow said. “I just worry about what I have to do on a day-to-day basis. As managers, we can’t control anything else than what we do on a day-to-day basis.”Advertisement