By THE ASSOCIATED PRESSJAN. 17, 2017
FRISCO, Texas — Those closest to quarterback Tony Romo on the Dallas Cowboys are not ready to discuss his future, probably because they know what the final answer is likely to be.After 156 games and franchise records of 34,183 passing yards and 248 touchdowns, Romo’s career in Dallas appears to be over after he sustained a preseason back injury and lost the job he held for 10 years to the rookie sensation Dak Prescott.The question is, What is next?“There’s several cards to be played,” Jerry Jones, the Cowboys’ owner and general manager, said on his radio show Tuesday. “Don’t think for one minute if you see something written or something said about what and where Romo is going to be relative to our team that there’s any credibility to it.“There’s only one that can make that decision, and there’s been no decision made.”Whether he is traded or released, Romo, 36, figures to have at least some say in where he goes because of his strong relationship with the Jones family and Coach Jason Garrett. And logic says it will be a playoff contender needing a quarterback.AdvertisementIt is hard to think about a Romo-less Dallas roster for Garrett, who has frequently been seen at sporting events with Romo during the off-season in recent years. Garrett did not want to discuss the specifics of Romo’s future.Advertisement“We certainly want the best for him, whether he is here or whether he is somewhere else,” Garrett said Monday. “He has been such an inspirational guy to me and everybody who has been fortunate enough to be around him. So good things will happen for Tony Romo. A lot of things will be discussed over the next few weeks.”Tight end Jason Witten came into the N.F.L. with Romo in 2003 and is his best friend on the team. Romo and Witten did not appear in the locker room a day after the Cowboys’ 34-31 playoff loss to Green Bay. But immediately after the Packers won, Witten was asked whether his friend had played his final game for the Cowboys, and he recalled the only time Romo spoke publicly all season, when he read a five-minute statement that conceded the job to Prescott and did not take questions.Sign up to receive an email from The New York Times as soon as important news breaks around the world.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.“I’m sure in the next few weeks, we’ll have a time to talk,” Witten said. “But I’m proud of him and how he handled that, going back to when he had his press conference and the way he was able to kind of take the lead and eliminate the distraction for our football team. That wasn’t easy to do. I think we’re all better because of that.”After declining to discuss the Prescott-Romo decision in detail all season, Garrett finally opened up when the season was over.Garrett, who was Romo’s offensive coordinator for three and a half seasons before taking over as head coach, said the difficulty was in realizing how successful Romo was in the previous two seasons — when he was not out with a twice-broken collarbone in 2015.Romo was 16-5 in his final 21 starts, including two playoff games in 2014. But the Cowboys were in the middle of an 11-game winning streak, a team record, with Prescott when Romo was ready to return after breaking a bone in his back in the third preseason game.“So when he had his opportunities based on the merits, there’s a compelling argument to be made that that guy should be your quarterback,” Garrett said. “What happened when Tony got hurt, Dak stepped in and this team got going. It went on a run, and what we needed to do was somehow, someway stay on that run.”AdvertisementPrescott most likely eliminated any lingering doubt by leading the Cowboys back from 18- and 15-point deficits, the latter in the fourth quarter, against the Packers. Dallas tied the score twice in the final 4 minutes 8 seconds.Romo made his only appearance at Philadelphia in the regular-season finale, when the Cowboys had already locked up home-field advantage in the N.F.C. playoffs. Romo, a four-time Pro Bowler, led a touchdown drive in his only series.“I really believe that Tony Romo will play in a Super Bowl,” Jones said. “Now try that one on. I know that if he’s healthy enough, he’ll be in a Super Bowl. I strongly believe that.”But Jones did not say which team he would be playing for when it happened.A version of this article appears in print on January 18, 2017, on Page B10 of the New York edition with the headline: Romo’s Future Remains Uncharted.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.