By JOHN CLARKEJAN. 17, 2017
As the Vendée Globe, a nonstop solo sailing race around the world, speeds to a tight finish this week in Les Sables d’Olonne, France, it is hard to imagine the skippers having downtime.Twenty-nine skippers from 10 nations set sail from Les Sables d’Olonne, a resort town in western France, on Nov. 6, chasing the record time of 78 days 2 hours 16 minutes, set by François Gabart in the 2012-13 race.For most of the race, which covers 26,000 miles, skippers spend time driving boats, battling winds, making repairs, strategizing — in short, trying to survive the voyage. In an event that requires both speed and endurance, more than one-third of the sailors have dropped out with dismasted boats, cracked keels, damaged hulls, busted foils and onboard fires.For thousands of miles of ocean solitude and lonely hours, the participants kept themselves busy by any means necessary and looked for motivation where they could find it.AdvertisementEnda O’Coineen, an Irish skipper who abandoned the race Jan. 1 after his mast snapped near New Zealand, sailed with a trumpet, a tin whistle, an Irish drum called a bodhran, Irish porridge and a bottle of whiskey.“In an event like this, there are times of intense activity where you have no personal time and it’s full-on either making repairs, surviving a storm or whatever,” he said in an email.AdvertisementBut then there are those days when you have nothing but time, when the movement of the boat and the ocean is too violent and there is nothing you can do, O’Coineen said. In those cases, he played his trumpet.“It’s such a noisy instrument, and this is one of the few places where there is nobody within earshot to suffer your practice,” he said.He also busied himself with a few songs he knows on the tin whistle and thumped the bodhran on occasion.Recording  videos to post online served as another time killer.“Most of all, this is a unique personal and psychological journey,” O’Coineen said. “Memories you did not know existed surface, and your brain is also rebooted with lots of new ideas for your return. It’s rare in our lives that you get opportunities like this.”Sébastien Josse of France thought about food, a major factor in his morale and his performance in this endurance competition. In a past around-the-world race, he managed to keep an orange until he reached New Zealand.“It looked and felt like a treasure and tasted just magical,” he said.For this race, he hired a Michelin-starred chef, Julien Gatillon, to cook meals that were freeze-dried and carried on board.AdvertisementJosse also relied on two iPhone 7s to enjoy photos, videos, music, podcasts and audiobooks. One contains more than 6,000 songs.“Music takes you away from your routine,” Josse said. “You often select it according to the sailing conditions and your state of mind, too. Sometimes, it can even make you cry.”He preferred listening with speakers rather than headphones, which cut listeners off from their environment.“Given the noise of the boat, you have to pump up the volume,” said Josse, who quit the race Dec. 4 after a foil on his boat was damaged in extreme weather.The New Zealander Conrad Colman, who was in 10th place after surviving an onboard fire, uses noise-canceling headphones with a playlist ranging from classical music to the Kiwi rock band Fat Freddy’s Drop. As if he needed them, he has e-books about adventurers. He also has an espresso machine.Sign up to receive an email from The New York Times as soon as important news breaks around the world.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.The Dutch skipper Pieter Heerema, who was in 17th place, races with a four-leaf-clover coin and a medal that belongs to his best friend, who got it from his father, an English bomber pilot during World War II. The two friends made a deal that Heerema would return the coin when he finished the race.The French skipper Eric Bellion, in ninth, has primarily read when he has had the time. His list — with 30 books — includes “The Black Dahlia,” by James Ellroy; “Pirate Latitudes,” by Michael Crichton; “The Pillars of the Earth,” by Ken Follett; “11/22/63,” by Stephen King; and “The Dog Stars,” by Peter Heller. Some of the books are more than 850 pages.Fabrice Amedeo, who was in 11th, has a slingshot given to him by his team manager, Yvon Berrehar. It is a reference to the French sailor Bernard Moitessier, who, during the Golden Globe race, decided not to cross the finish line and continued on his way to Polynesia. He used a slingshot to send a piece of paper to the deck of a passing cargo ship to inform his family, writing that he had to continue “to save his soul.”AdvertisementAmedeo plans to make the finish but likes the freedom the slingshot represents, he said.According to an article by ESPN, the American skipper Rich Wilson brought along his favorite snack, Fig Newtons, to scarf down daily, as well as an iPod — loaded with performers including Benedictine monks and Bruce Springsteen — and a motivational movie playlist featuring “Chariots of Fire” and “Miracle.”Alex Thomson of Britain keeps it simple: He does not listen to music and does not take many personal items with him while he races. He has a few pictures of his family to motivate him, and only on occasion will he watch movies on the boat’s computer.This onboard austerity has worked for Thomson. After setting a record this week, covering 536.81 nautical miles in a 24-hour period, he is now close behind the leader, Armel Le Cléac’h, who has been in first since Dec. 2.Both should finish Thursday, just hours apart.An earlier version of this article omitted the source of the description of the items Rich Wilson brought with him for the Vendée Globe. The information was from an article by ESPN.A version of this article appears in print on January 18, 2017, on Page B8 of the New York edition with the headline: Respites From Solitude of an Ocean Voyage.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.