
Sports of The Times By                     
 JULIET MACUR
 
AUG. 19, 2016
RIO DE JANEIRO — Across the city from the Olympic Park, in a community sports center called Vila Olímpica Greip, though it doesn’t have a thing to do with the Olympics, a group of teenage girls has arrived to play handball. They want to play handball. They need to play handball.Some have traveled an hour and a half by bus to get to this aging center, where the front gates are adorned with Olympic rings fashioned out of rubber tubing tied together with fishing wire. At the outdoor concrete handball court, the water fountains have cobwebs but no water, and a wooden situp bench is so rotted that you can fit your hand through the holes in it.But these 10 girls are here to play and to learn, and the girls take this commitment seriously.“Handball has brought me everything,” said Bruna Santos, 15. “I was nobody. I didn’t think about being anybody.”What would their lives be like without handball? What’s it like for the girls in their neighborhoods who don’t play sports?Advertisement“They’re all pregnant,” said Helen Téofilo, who is 16 and lives in the most dangerous part of the Cidade de Deus, or City of God, one of Rio’s most violent favelas.Before a scrimmage against a top local boys’ team last Tuesday — which they won, by the way — these girls sat on folding chairs in a classroom with peeling paint and bare walls, and talked. Not just about the Olympics, and how the judoka Rafaela Silva won Brazil’s first gold medal at these Games and how she has inspired them because she once was one of them. She, too, grew up in the City of God.AdvertisementThey talked about being girls, and what it’s like to be a girl who plays sports in Brazil, where many still believe that athletics are for boys and men, or that playing sports will turn girls into lesbians, and where the bullying of girls who try to play is common.That mentality is not a surprise: From 1941 to 1979, girls and women here were barred from playing soccer, professionally or even recreationally. While Brazilian stars like Silva and the soccer star Marta show that there has been progress, there is still a cultural bias against girls and women playing sports, and there continues to be a dearth of sports programs for girls.“The population still thinks that if you do sports, you’re not a real girl,” Santos said. “The way people see it is that girls are supposed to sit at home and take care of the house because your family needs you, or because girls aren’t strong enough for sports. I see it a way to improve your life.”Santos’s father recently left his job as an ironworker because he has hepatitis, putting pressure on her and other family members to earn money. Her mother cleans houses, leaving at 3 a.m. and returning at 9 p.m. Téofilo said other members of her family work in a grocery store and have said that it is time for her to work there, too.“But I tell them, ‘No, I don’t want to work in the grocery store!’” she said, throwing her hands in the air and making the other girls laugh. “I want more than that.”All the girls are here because they want more. It is a simple desire — just not simple to fulfill here. It helps that the International Olympic Committee has recognized that need.AdvertisementFor the Rio Games, the I.O.C. joined U.N. Women, an arm of the United Nations that promotes gender equality and the empowerment of women, for a program called One Win Leads to Another. That is why these handball girls, and about 400 girls from around the city, have gathered twice a week for the past three months to discuss gender issues and subjects like domestic violence. Afterward, they head to practice in their sports.The goal of the program is to encourage more Brazilian girls to play sports, and to stay in sports, and to extend the same program to more city-run community centers in the area. A trained facilitator moderates the discussions.One Win Leads to Another is the I.O.C.’s single legacy program here that focuses solely on girls and sports, but it may be the most important of its initiatives.“We first tried to put the program in the schools, but there was so much resistance, so we had to give up,” said Thays Prado, a project coordinator for U.N. Women. “People were saying: ‘Why are you being so sexist? Why don’t you involve boys? Or if you talk about gender, are you saying that it’s normal to be gay?’ They didn’t even see the need for it.”The good news is that the program got started anyway, albeit on its small scale. The better news is that while the funding for the program will run out next spring, the I.O.C., which gave nearly $700,000, is considering reinvesting in it.Already, the program has been priceless for the girls involved. The ones who play handball at this sports center, a hub for girls’ handball in the city, all have scholarships to private schools. If not for that aid, their education would be hit or miss, as the girls said that the teachers at their public schools had been on strike since March. But cultural bias continues to loom over the entire project.“The problem that I’ve seen, still, is that there is no incentive within the family for the girls to play sports,” said Alzira Pires, 42, the program’s facilitator and an administrator at this sports center. To get girls to play handball, she scours the surrounding neighborhood and asks friends to find players, too.Even after girls sign up, though, their participation isn’t guaranteed. Some players have missed practice to wait out shootouts between the police and drug gangs near their homes.In those moments, Marcelly Victoria Cidri, 15, huddles in her bedroom in the City of God. She shares a single bed, with faded sheets depicting male superheroes, with one of her sisters. Two other siblings sleep on a mattress on the floor. A cup in the bathroom of the two-bedroom house holds eight toothbrushes, for the eight people who live there.AdvertisementWhen the gunshots ring out, Marcelly closes her eyes and tries to think of better things.“I feel desperation,” she said.Marcelly began playing handball when she was 11, after the soccer team she had joined folded. She likes that sports take her to a safer place, and she is fortunate that her parents, Jorge Braga and Daniela Cidri, are progressive for these parts.Daniela, 36, remembers playing volleyball on the streets as a young girl, and enjoying it, but when she was 12 she had to leave the game behind to start working at a candy factory. She vowed that if she had daughters, they would stick with sports because she considers athletics a quicker way out of the favela than doing well in school.Now her five daughters, who are 4 to 15, are all interested. More than a dozen medals hang on their living room wall from Marcelly’s handball playing, or competitions in track and field (she is a state high-jump champion). Several of her sisters compete in judo and jujitsu.“At first, my dad was saying, ‘Look, all your girls are lesbians,’ but I gave him a hard time about that,” Daniela said. “I know how sports gives girls the incentive to do great things.”Playing sports has already changed Marcelly’s life. It keeps her in school. It fills her mind with positive thoughts. And on Sunday, sports will take her to the closing ceremony of the Rio Olympics. U.N. Women chose her to represent their program when a group of Games organizers receive an Olympic award.From favela to front and center. It should happen more.“Someday, I do want to be in the Olympics,” Marcelly said. “Now that’s a real dream.”Email: juliet@nytimes.comA version of this article appears in print on August 20, 2016, on Page D3 of the New York edition with the headline: Giving Girls a Chance to Play Ball.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.See More »