
Sports of The Times By                     
 JULIET MACUR
 
MARCH 17, 2017
After nearly two decades working for U.S.A. Gymnastics, including 12 years as its president, Steve Penny resigned on Thursday, smack in the middle of a sexual assault scandal that involves dozens of young gymnasts.With his departure, let’s take a moment to marvel at his career, during which he accomplished so much.Penny, from Mercer Island, Wash., started in the marketing and promotions department of the Seattle Mariners before becoming an Olympic sports researcher for Turner Broadcast System. With a new love for the Olympics, he took a job as director of media and public relations for U.S.A. Cycling in the early 1990s, just as the sport was struggling here in the United States.Penny was especially successful at hawking the sport and its budding star, Lance Armstrong, and was at his best in 1993, when Armstrong won a million-dollar racing series that turned out to be fixed — as Armstrong admitted in a book I wrote about him. Penny was so good at selling cycling back then that Armstrong started calling him Dime.AdvertisementFlash ahead to Penny’s career at U.S.A. Gymnastics: One of his responsibilities there was to evaluate sexual assault accusations and determine if they warranted being reported to the police.AdvertisementThis is how the world of Olympic sports in the United States has operated for years: No one thought it strange that a sports marketer was in the role of sex crimes investigator.Now Olympic officials are waking up, thanks to high-profile lawsuits against U.S.A. Gymnastics and abuse scandals in U.S.A. Swimming.The United States Olympic Committee is touting its new U.S. Center for SafeSport, which began operations this year and focuses on educating athletes, parents and coaches on how to report a coach or an official’s misconduct. (Step 1, in the case of child abuse: notify law enforcement. Step 2: See Step 1.) It comes many decades too late, after too many molestation cases in too many sports — U.S.A. Gymnastics and U.S.A. Swimming and U.S.A. Taekwondo and U.S. Speedskating and more.Scott Blackmun, chief executive of the Olympics organization, said the program would streamline the reporting process for sexual abuse in Olympic sports.Now that U.S.A. Gymnastics’ latest abuse scandal has escalated into a crisis — more than 80 gymnasts have come forward with sexual abuse allegations against Larry Nassar, a former national gymnastics team doctor who worked in all levels of the sport, including with Olympians, from 1995 to 2015 — the old model of how national sports governing bodies deal with sex abuse has finally been deemed inadequate.What took everyone so long?According to court documents released this month, in response to a request by The Indianapolis Star, which Penny called “a witch hunt,” U.S.A. Gymnastics had complaint files on 54 coaches, from 1996 to 2006. Those coaches were accused of misconduct, including sexually assaulting their athletes, and the federation had empowered itself to investigate those cases before deciding whether to contact law enforcement.Get the big sports news, highlights and analysis from Times journalists, with distinctive takes on games and some behind-the-scenes surprises, delivered to your inbox every week.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.In a deposition in one lawsuit brought against U.S.A. Gymnastics by a gymnast charging abuse, here’s Penny’s explanation for his failure to act: “To the best of my knowledge, there’s no duty to report if you are — if you are a third party to some allegation.”AdvertisementSo when he learned that Nassar, the team doctor, might have been molesting athletes, Penny and U.S.A. Gymnastics spent five weeks on an internal investigation before reporting Nassar to the authorities. That delay was ingrained in the system.In 2011, U.S.A. Gymnastics received a detailed account of abuse involving Marvin Sharp, a former coach of the year, but Penny and the federation didn’t report it until 2015. There was a lot to be suspicious about.About 15 miles from U.S.A. Gymnastics’ headquarters, Sharp had a photo studio in his Indianapolis gym. On the gym’s website, he offered “portrait sittings and ‘action’ portraits.” Sharp, who coached the Olympian and world champion Bridget Sloan, would ask parents to leave the room for a closed-door, two-hour session when he took pictures of the gymnasts. In many cases, the parents complied.In August 2015, Sharp was arrested after a 14-year-old came forward with claims of abuse. He was later charged with child pornography, child molestation and sexual abuse with a minor. In a raid of Sharp’s house and gym, the police found more than 1,000 digital photos of girls dressed in leotards, adult shirts, bathing suits and dresses, with no underwear and with their genitals exposed. These girls were as young as 5.Less than a month after his arrest, Sharp was found dead in his jail cell. He had killed himself.How many crimes could have been prevented if Penny had reported Sharp to the police back in 2011, and if U.S.A. Gymnastics did what was right in each report of sexual abuse it received — protect its athletes, not its organization? John Manly, a lawyer representing more than 70 clients in the case against Nassar, the former team doctor, has an idea.“Hundreds of children would have been saved,” said Manly, who has also represented many clients who said they were abused by Roman Catholic priests. “An organization shouldn’t do the investigation, and we know why. We know it’s a failed model because that’s the Catholic bishops model from 2000. The best thing to do is, if you suspect child abuse, you pick up the phone, call the police and file a report.”Penny and U.S.A. Gymnastics, accused of negligence, are named as defendants in several civil lawsuits. Manly called it “a long time coming.”Just before the 2008 Beijing Olympics, at Martha and Bela Karolyi’s national team training camp in Texas, Penny gathered several reporters, including me, in a hotel conference room to show them U.S.A. Gymnastics’ policy for reporting sexual abuse.AdvertisementLook, he said, U.S.A. Gymnastics cares about the athletes. No one does more to protect them. No one would want children hurt, especially him. He was a father of triplet girls, for goodness’ sake.Our talk came amid a sexual abuse case in New England, in which gymnasts had accused a coach, Steve Infante, of having sex with them when they were teenagers. U.S.A. Gymnastics received that information in 1997, and subsequently found it credible enough to bar Infante for life. But the organization didn’t go to the police. And Infante continued coaching. A decade later Infante was charged with raping one of his former athletes. In 2010, he was convicted.In an interview with The Boston Globe in 2007, Penny said U.S.A. Gymnastics didn’t go to the police with the information about Infante because it didn’t know if a crime had been committed.Penny was right. U.S.A. Gymnastics didn’t know. It wasn’t its job to know. That’s a job for the police.Email: juliet@nytimes.comA version of this article appears in print on March 18, 2017, on Page D1 of the New York edition with the headline: A Swift Success Marred by Scandal.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.See More »