By MIKE VORKUNOVJAN. 16, 2017
As the final seconds of another loss wound down at Madison Square Garden on Monday afternoon, the Knicks put up one shot after another — three in all, any one of which could have given them a victory.But none fell, and as the Atlanta Hawks raced down the court with the ball and the final buzzer sounded, the Knicks painted a portrait of a team stuck in disarray.Carmelo Anthony stood by the team’s bench in the far corner, having missed one of the final three attempts, chagrined again at another defeat. Jeff Hornacek, the coach, waved his arms feebly on the sideline, trying to draw the attention of the referees for a call before the final horn. And Joakim Noah chased the ballhandler, Thabo Sefolosha, in vain, as if mere effort could save the Knicks.But it would take much more to correct the Knicks’ manifold troubles. Triaging them is a test of steel and prioritization: There is a superstar, Anthony, who feels the need to insist he is not in a feud with the front office; there is a leaky defense that appears to be beyond repair; and now there is a burbling of dissatisfaction after a lineup switch that Hornacek hoped could bring about a changing tide.AdvertisementAmid all that, the Knicks continue to lose in an unnerving manner. In a matinee on the holiday that honors the Rev. Dr. Martin Luther King Jr., they fell, 108-107, to the Hawks, who were without a resting Dwight Howard. The Knicks have now lost 11 of their last 13 games — but are still only three games out of the East’s final playoff spot — mixing in embarrassing blowout defeats with last-second dejections.AdvertisementThis time, they held a lead in the final minute that could not be preserved. After Derrick Rose hit a layup to give the Knicks a 107-105 lead with 43.1 seconds left, Dennis Schroder responded with a 3-pointer 21 seconds later. Hornacek was unhappy with his team’s defense on the play, criticizing Rose afterward for not closing out on Schroder with enough zeal.Still, the Knicks came close to stealing a win in the final seconds. Rose, who had 18 points and 9 assists, had an open lane after the Hawks’ defense broke down defending the pick-and-roll, but Paul Millsap came from the weak side to block Rose’s shot with 5.9 seconds left. Anthony grabbed the loose ball out of midair but missed a short jump shot inside the lane, and then Noah hit the front rim with a putback.“That’s a shot that I think I can hit in my sleep,” Anthony said.His lamentations only further underlined the Knicks’ woes at this point. It is a team attempting to merely stabilize itself before it gets too late.Get the big sports news, highlights and analysis from Times journalists, with distinctive takes on games and some behind-the-scenes surprises, delivered to your inbox every week.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.Monday, Hornacek chose to rejigger the starting lineup. With Kristaps Porzingis out for a third straight game because of a sore Achilles’ tendon, Hornacek put Ron Baker and Mindaugas Kuzminskas on the court and moved Courtney Lee to the bench. Baker and Kuzminskas are two fan favorites who have received inconsistent playing time, while Lee signed a four-year, $50 million contract in the off-season.Baker hit four 3-pointers, and Kuzminskas scored 14 points in 38 minutes, though Baker came out of the game with a bloodied tongue, and Kuzminskas sustained a bruised right eye.Although Hornacek made the change in part to strengthen the second unit and in part to make Lee a bigger offensive threat, Lee scored just 7 points and sat for most of the second half. The lineup change did not seem to engender unanimity, either.“When you come in here, you don’t really know what’s going to happen,” Brandon Jennings said. “So there’s kind of no consistency. It’s really tough right now.”AdvertisementIt may hint, however, at a larger philosophical shift by the coach. Hornacek mused that if Porzingis were healthy, he might have started at center and Anthony at power forward. Anthony did end up playing at power forward for large swaths of the game on Monday and finished with 30 points, shooting 10 of 16.“In the long run, we’ve got to look at, hey, when K.P. comes back, do we change everything altogether?” Hornacek asked, referring to Porzingis. “What it will do? Sometimes it’s a chance you have to take. But we need to look at where we’re at. We just need to mix it up a little bit more.”Much of the intrigue with Anthony, though, comes off the court. The organization is embroiled in still another distracting story line, with Charley Rosen, a friend and confidant to the team president, Phil Jackson, criticizing Anthony in an article and suggesting he is nearly washed up; and Anthony responding by wondering aloud whether it was time for him to leave the Knicks.Anthony said Monday that he had not spoken with Jackson or General Manager Steve Mills since the article was published. It has created a palpable unease around Anthony and the Knicks. He maintains a no-trade clause in his contract, and Anthony reiterated that he wants to stay with the team.Nor is he looking for clarity from Jackson.“If they want to come talk to me, I’m around them guys every day,” Anthony said. “I don’t want this to be kind of going-back-and-forth matchup between me and the front office and management, because it’s really nothing. I responded to an article that I read, and that was that. There’s nothing between myself and management at this point.”A version of this article appears in print on January 17, 2017, on Page B11 of the New York edition with the headline: With Late Collapse, Knicks Fall to Hawks, and Deeper Into Despair.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.