

 Marc Tracy
 

ON COLLEGE FOOTBALL
JAN. 1, 2016
ARLINGTON, Tex. — So good was Alabama’s running game, led by the Heisman Trophy-winning tailback Derrick Henry, entering Thursday night’s College Football Playoff semifinal at the Cotton Bowl that one Michigan State coach charged with stopping it did not mind divulging the Spartans’ strategy to a reporter two days earlier.“They know, and we know, that we’re going to have to put a lot of people in the box to stop Derrick Henry,” said Mike Tressel, a defensive coordinator who has helped engineer Coach Mark Dantonio’s dominant defenses during Dantonio’s nine-season run at Michigan State.“There’s going to be a number of times where they throw the ball deep,” Tressel added. “If we make plays on those balls, we’ll be in good shape. If we have trouble making plays on the deep ball, there it is.”And so it was, and the result was Alabama’s 38-0 blowout of No. 3 Michigan State (12-2) that tidily ended while it was still 2015 on the East Coast. The No. 2 Crimson Tide (13-1) advanced to the national championship game, set for Jan. 11 in Glendale, Ariz., where they will play No. 1 Clemson (14-0), which handled Oklahoma, 37-17, earlier Thursday in the Orange Bowl.AdvertisementClemson could become the first 15-0 team in Football Bowl Subdivision history. Yet an Alabama win would complete what might be an even more impressive accomplishment: It would give Nick Saban’s Tide their fourth national championship in seven seasons. Not even Bear Bryant did that.The Cotton Bowl was won perhaps above all by quarterback Jake Coker, a redshirt senior, who exploited the one-on-one coverage that both teams knew talented pass catchers like receiver Calvin Ridley and tight end O. J. Howard would receive.Advertisement“They were a run-stopping defense anyway; we saw that on tape, we knew that’s what they were going to do,” Alabama’s offensive coordinator, Lane Kiffin, confirmed on the field after the game.Coker completed four passes of more than 25 yards — all of them from midway through the second quarter, after the Spartans’ defense had been softened by a series of short screens to receivers on the perimeters, to the end of the third, when the victory was in hand. Coker finished 25 of 30 for 286 yards and two touchdowns, both of them caught by Ridley, a freshman who had eight catches for 138 yards.Alabama’s ability to connect down the field, paired with the threat of Henry rumbling out of the backfield, made for what Dantonio labeled an unenviable Catch-22. With Michigan State never wavering from its commitment to limit Henry, who finished with 20 carries for 75 yards, for his second-worst per-carry rate of the season, the operative word was “catch.”For now, the highest possible compliment to be paid to the Crimson Tide, skipping past the particulars of the game — the backbreaking 57-yard punt return by Cyrus Jones in the third quarter; the dominance that led to chants of “SEC!” and the blasting of “Sweet Home Alabama”; and the feeling by the end of the game that it should have been stopped by some sort of mercy rule — is that Alabama beat Michigan State. The Spartans were the season’s most resilient team, with dramatic wins over three top-10 teams and one against its archrival, No. 12 Michigan, on a one-of-a-kind, last-second play.Entering Thursday, there had appeared to be a fearful asymmetry between the semifinal games. The Orange Bowl featured two teams, Clemson and Oklahoma, that run the kind of fast-paced, explosive offensives increasingly in vogue in college football. They entered ranking 15th and 13th in plays per game.
            Get the latest tweets from @NYTSports, including breaking news, analysis and live updates.        By contrast, Alabama and Michigan State stepped onto the Dallas Cowboys’ home field still favoring, almost stubbornly, pro-style offenses that seek to control possession by establishing the run, converting third downs and dominating the line of scrimmage on defense.AdvertisementAt first, the games proceeded accordingly. The Orange Bowl was an explosive blowout, particularly once Clemson figured out how to stop Oklahoma’s attack (the Tigers outscored the Sooners, 21-0, in the second half). The Tigers ran 90 plays. They rushed for 312 yards.The Cotton Bowl began as trench warfare. The first seven drives ended in punts; in the first quarter, both teams averaged precisely 3.1 yards per play. Alabama tried screens to its speedy receivers on the outside; Michigan State threw passes at its tight ends. The 10-0 score at halftime would have been closer had Spartans quarterback Connor Cook not thrown an interception near the goal line with less than 20 seconds left in the half.But the Tide began to really roll in the second half, with a drive that culminated with an end zone fade to Ridley that was so pretty and subtle the officials had to review it.Two drives later came Jones’s fourth touchdown punt return of the season, an Alabama record. The score was 24-0, the dam had broken, and it wasn’t even over.It is a tribute to Alabama’s offense that there seems barely time to mention its defense, which entered the game ranked third in the F.B.S. in yards and points allowed and first against the run, and which held the Spartans to 210 yards in the air and 29 on the ground.Get the big sports news, highlights and analysis from Times journalists, with distinctive takes on games and some behind-the-scenes surprises, delivered to your inbox every week.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.Alabama appeared even more dominant against Michigan State than Clemson had in thumping Oklahoma (11-2) for the second year in a row.Oddsmakers quickly installed the Tide as favorites by about a touchdown in the title game. Given the way the two contenders won — with Clemson able to impose its will but Alabama able to dominate even with Henry, its best weapon, being held in check — the talk will undoubtedly emerge that Alabama will simply outgun, outman and outplan the Tigers.Maybe. But maybe not.Not only is college football flukier than many other sports, it presents an epistemological roadblock. There are so many teams, drawing from so many pools of talent, playing so many styles, competing in so few games — mostly against a few other teams that draw from the same talent pools and play similar styles. The result is that once it is established that two teams are very good, it is very difficult to predict confidently what will happen when they meet.AdvertisementFor a telling example, one need only look back a year. Oregon’s 39-point margin of victory in a national semifinal over then-undefeated Florida State was 1 point greater than Alabama’s triumph over Michigan State on Thursday night. But Oregon turned around and lost to underdog Ohio State in a game not as close as the 42-20 final score suggests.Ohio State had beaten Alabama, of course, to get to that game. Coker, who rode the bench most of last season, remembered it well, according to Ridley, and had one message for his offense in the huddle Thursday.“The thing he kept saying,” Ridley said, “was, ‘Finish.’ ”A version of this article appears in print on January 2, 2016, on Page D1 of the New York edition with the headline: Bottle Up Rushers? Tide’s Offense Is a Catch-22.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.See More »