By THE ASSOCIATED PRESSMARCH 29, 2016
Kyle Okposo scored the only goal during a shootout on Tuesday night, and the Islanders rallied for a 2-1 victory over the Carolina Hurricanes at Barclays Center.Derek Ryan put the Hurricanes ahead, 1-0, late in the second period, but he hit the post on his shootout attempt in Carolina’s 16th overtime loss, which leads the N.H.L. The Hurricanes have points in four straight games (2-0-2).Thomas Greiss made 26 saves, and Anders Lee scored his 13th goal of the season for the Islanders, who won for the third time in four games.“We really had to battle for it,” Islanders center Frans Nielsen said. “It was tough. It would’ve been a tough loss, but I liked the way we never panicked.”AdvertisementCam Ward had 30 saves for Carolina.After two sluggish periods, the Islanders awoke in the third and pulled even at 12 minutes 8 seconds on a power play. Brent Pesce was charged with goalie interference; then Lee redirected a shot by John Tavares past Ward.AdvertisementAfter he was called up from Charlotte of the American Hockey League earlier Tuesday, Ryan netted his second goal in four career N.H.L. games. His linemate Nathan Gerbe forced a turnover by Islanders forward Josh Bailey, and Ryan picked up the puck and snapped a wrist shot past Greiss.PENGUINS 5, SABRES 4 Sidney Crosby and Phil Kessel beat Chad Johnson in a shootout, and host Pittsburgh inched closer to a 10th straight playoff berth by knocking off Buffalo.Ben Lovejoy, Conor Sheary, Tom Kuhnhackl and Nick Bonino scored during a furious second period as the Penguins rallied from an early three-goal deficit. The rookie goaltender Matt Murray overcame a shaky start to finish with 26 saves.Ryan O’Reilly had a goal and an assist for the Sabres.STARS 5, PREDATORS 2 Radek Faksa and Jason Spezza scored 46 seconds apart in the second period, and host Dallas routed Nashville.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.The Stars won for the fifth time in six games to keep pace with St. Louis for the Western Conference lead.Jamie Benn scored two goals for Dallas.BLUES 3, AVALANCHE 1 Brian Elliott made 20 saves, Vladimir Tarasenko scored his 36th goal, and host St. Louis defeated Colorado for its fifth straight victory.David Backes and Troy Brouwer also scored for the Blues.Mikhail Grigorenko scored late in the first period for the Avalanche.WILD 4, BLACKHAWKS 1 Jared Spurgeon, Erik Haula and Nino Niederreiter scored in the third period, as host Minnesota overwhelmed Chicago, stretching the Wild’s winning streak to six games.AdvertisementMarian Hossa had the goal for the Blackhawks, the 499th of his career.MAPLE LEAFS 5, PANTHERS 2 Nazem Kadri scored two of his three goals during second-period power plays, and visiting Toronto thumped Florida.Michael Grabner and Pierre-Alexandre Parenteau also scored for the Maple Leafs.Toronto’s Jonathan Bernier made 32 saves.CANADIENS 4, RED WINGS 3 Max Pacioretty’s second goal of the night propelled host Montreal past Detroit.Paul Byron and Sven Andrighetto also scored for the Canadiens, who blew a two-goal lead and trailed, 3-2, heading into the third period. Mike Condon had 39 saves.A version of this article appears in print on March 30, 2016, on Page B15 of the New York edition with the headline: Okposo’s Goal in Shootout Lifts Isles Over Hurricanes.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.