By BRUCE WEBERMARCH 29, 2016
Vince Boryla, who buoyed two National Basketball Association franchises three decades apart — the Knicks as a player and coach in the 1950s and the Denver Nuggets as the general manager in the 1980s — died on Sunday at his home in Englewood, Colo. He was 89.The cause was complications of pneumonia, his son Mark said.A postwar college star at Notre Dame and the University of Denver, Boryla, a 6-foot-5 center with a deadly right-handed hook shot, played for the Olympic team that won gold in London in 1948.He joined the Knicks in 1950, and the bigger players in the professional game, men like the 6-foot-10 George Mikan of the Minneapolis Lakers, dwarfed him in the middle, forcing Boryla to change his position to forward and develop new ways to score.He learned a left-handed hook and a set shot. Old-time New York fans will remember a meme by the radio broadcaster Marty Glickman, who would describe a shot from the perimeter as a “Boryla bomb” and give a nod to the program’s hot-dog sponsor: “Good! Like Nedick’s.”AdvertisementBoryla became one of the Knicks’ top shooters, appeared in the 1951 N.B.A. All-Star Game and played five seasons before a wrist injury that affected his shooting sidelined him for good. He averaged 11.2 points per game for his career. His Knicks teams, which included Harry Gallatin, Carl Braun, Sweetwater Clifton, and Al and Dick McGuire, went to the N.B.A. finals in 1952 and 1953, losing both times to Mikan and the Lakers.AdvertisementBoryla was not yet 29 when he succeeded Joe Lapchick as the coach of the Knicks in February 1956.In an interview with The New York Times shortly after he was hired, Boryla said he took the job because “it was a challenge, one which would round out” his career.“I have not the slightest intention of making this my life’s work,” he said. “To me the motives will be the same as those which influenced me to become a professional player originally, a chance to build up a nest egg for the future.”In a bit more than two full seasons as coach, his record was 80-85. He then resigned and went back to Denver and various business interests, which would eventually include basketball.Vincent Joseph Boryla (the name rhymes with gorilla) was born on March 11, 1927, in East Chicago, Ind. His parents, Vincente Boryla, a bricklayer, and the former Felixa Pilipczuk, were Polish immigrants.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.After high school he went to Notre Dame, where he set a program scoring record as a freshman. His college career was interrupted by a stint in the military, which he served in Denver, where he also played for the Denver Nuggets, then an amateur team with an avid following, and became something of a local celebrity.When his service was complete, he enrolled at the University of Denver, where he averaged 18.9 points per game in the 1948-49 season and became the only consensus all-American in the college’s history.Boryla’s first wife, the former Catherine Brogan, known as Cappy, died in 1988. In addition to his son Mark, he is survived by his wife, Mary Jo Stanbrough; a daughter, Karen Toof; three other sons, Mike, Matt and Vince; 15 grandchildren; and six great-grandchildren. His son Mike played three seasons as a quarterback for the Philadelphia Eagles.Boryla served briefly as a front-office executive for the Knicks and, in the early 1970s, for the Utah Stars of the American Basketball Association.AdvertisementHe became a prominent Denver businessman, real estate investor and philanthropist, but local basketball fans probably remember him best for his three-year stint as general manager of the Nuggets, from 1984 to 1987.A month after he took the job, he engineered a blockbuster trade, sending a young star, the sharpshooting forward Kiki Vandeweghe, to the Portland Trail Blazers in a swap for three players — the center Wayne Cooper, the guard Lafayette Lever (better known as Fat) and the forward Calvin Natt — and two draft choices.The next season the Nuggets improved from 38 wins to 52, finished first in the N.B.A.’s Midwest Division and made it to the Western Conference finals for the first time in seven years. They lost to Magic Johnson and the Los Angeles Lakers, the eventual champions, but the Nuggets had one more triumph. Boryla was named the N.B.A. executive of the year.Frank Litsky contributed reporting.A version of this article appears in print on March 30, 2016, on Page A18 of the New York edition with the headline: Vince Boryla, 89; Held Several N.B.A. Positions.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.