By BILLY WITZJUNE 15, 2016
DENVER — It had to be nostalgic for Joe Girardi when he arrived at Coors Field on Tuesday. In the other dugout was Colorado Manager Walt Weiss, who developed a close friendship with Girardi when they were members of the expansion franchise and helped the Rockies to the playoffs in 1995, their third season.Those were the days before baseballs were placed in humidors and when the thin mountain air, the canyon-like outfield gaps and bulked-up hitters made the place a horror house for pitchers.But Girardi was surely reminded of those no-lead-is-safe evenings when the Rockies outlasted the Yankees, 13-10, on Tuesday night.The Yankees rallied from a 12-3 deficit with seven runs in the eighth inning, and they had the tying run on base when Didi Gregorius, who earlier in the game had hit a three-run homer, grounded out against reliever Jason Motte to end the inning.AdvertisementThe Rockies added to their cushion in the bottom of the eighth when Carlos Gonzalez blasted a home run to center field off Andrew Miller. It was the third home run of the night for the Rockies, including a 454-foot homer by Trevor Story deep over the center-field wall. The Rockies had five other extra-base hits.AdvertisementCarlos Estevez, the Rockies’ seventh reliever of the game, pitched a drama-free ninth to finally finish the Yankees off, sending them to their third consecutive loss. The 13 runs the Yankees allowed were a season high.“This is a crazy place to play,” Girardi said. “If you’ve got a 10-run lead, you’d like to say you feel pretty good about it, but that’s not always the case here.”The Yankees found themselves fighting uphill against Colorado starter Jorge De La Rosa, who continued his mastery of the Yankees, who must be thankful that they rarely see him in the American League. Temporarily banished to the bullpen last month, De La Rosa improved to 4-0 against the Yankees, and he has not given up a run in 22 innings in four career starts against them.Get the big sports news, highlights and analysis from Times journalists, with distinctive takes on games and some behind-the-scenes surprises, delivered to your inbox every week.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.The Yankees did not get a similar outing from Nathan Eovaldi. He was outstanding in winning five consecutive starts in May, but Eovaldi has allowed 16 runs in his last three starts.Eovaldi has had trouble with his split-fingered fastball in all three starts. “That’s his big pitch,” Girardi said. “That’s the pitch that he gets swings and misses. Right now, he’s struggling with it.”When De La Rosa left, Gregorius provided a brief spark, lining a two-out, full-count, three-run homer to right that brought the Yankees to within 6-3 in the sixth. Aaron Hicks followed with a single before pinch-hitter Alex Rodriguez grounded out. Carlos Beltran, who leads the Yankees with 16 home runs, was unavailable after waking up with a swollen left knee. He had the knee drained and is unlikely to play on Wednesday.But the Rockies pushed across three more runs against Kirby Yates and Richard Bleier in the bottom of the sixth and added three more in the seventh against Bleier, two scoring on Daniel Descalso’s triple. That 12-3 lead was a necessary surplus.AdvertisementThe Yankees’ rally in the eighth had an unusual element, especially here. The Yankees simply strung a series of singles together — eight in all, along with a hit by pitch.“Obviously, when you’re down nine runs, you need to hit a lot,” said Chase Headley, who was here with the Padres when the Rockies scored three runs in the bottom of the 13th to beat San Diego closer Trevor Hoffman in a one-game playoff in 2007. “But there’s a lot of real estate to get hits.”Rob Refsnyder had two hits in the Yankees’ rally, which also included a pinch-hit single by Ike Davis, the former Met who was making his debut for the Yankees.We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.