AdvertisementSupported byBy Neal E. BoudetteDETROIT — They came by the thousands to honor Gordie Howe, but this time they did it with silence instead of cheers.Four days after Howe died at 88, hockey fans streamed somberly into a darkened Joe Louis Arena to say goodbye to Mr. Hockey, the prolific goal-scorer who played here for a quarter-century, made the Detroit Red Wings a dynasty in the 1950s and is considered by many to be the greatest player hockey has ever known.Red Wings faithful waited an hour or more to reach the arena floor, where they proceeded down a red carpet to Howe’s brown, closed coffin, which was topped and flanked by large arrangements of roses — red, of course.In what is normally one of the most raucous arenas in the N.H.L., the only background noise was the murmur of hushed voices.“I just keep losing it,” said Paul Bigler, 54, tears streaming down his cheeks, a white Howe jersey hanging from his burly frame. He said he grew up watching Howe and attending Red Wings games with his father.Now living in Knoxville, Tenn., Bigler drove 10 hours to pay his last respects to his idol.“He was just the epitome of what every kid wanted to be,” Bigler said.That was a view that was shared by Wayne Gretzky, the superstar who broke Howe’s goal-scoring and points records and served as a pallbearer in a private ceremony at Joe Louis Arena before the doors were opened to the public.“Canada has lost a really good person,” Gretzky said. “He never asked for anything from anybody, but he would do anything for anyone.”The event was attended by Howe’s three sons, Mark, Marty and Murray, and his daughter, Cathy, as well as the former Red Wings Steve Yzerman and Kris Draper and the former Detroit coach Scotty Bowman. The Tigers great Al Kaline, a contemporary of Howe’s, also served as a pallbearer.A funeral for Howe will be held Wednesday at the Cathedral of the Most Blessed Sacrament in Detroit.Mark Howe said he was moved by the outpouring of affection for his father.“He meant a lot to a lot of people,” he said. “What you’re seeing today is what we’ve seen all our lives.”Among fans and some in the Detroit news media, calls are increasing to rename the Red Wings’ new arena after Howe. Now named Little Caesars Arena, after the pizza chain that built the fortune of the Red Wings owner Mike Ilitch, the new stadium is still under construction and is scheduled to open for the 2017-18 season.Ken Holland, the Red Wings’ general manager, said it was “early times” for any such decision.“We expect to do something to honor him and what he meant to this city,” Holland said. “At some point, we will get together, the Red Wings and the Ilitch family.”Mark Howe said he has not been involved in any talks about renaming the new arena. Calling it Little Caesars Arena is fitting “in view of all the Red Wings and the Ilitch family have done for this city,” he said.Regardless of whether the new arena will be named after Howe, the Hall of Famer is already set to be honored in the region. A new bridge linking Detroit and Windsor, Ont., is under construction and has been named the Gordie Howe International Bridge. Located just south of downtown Detroit, it is expected to open in 2020.Gordie Howe played 26 years in the N.H.L., all but one with Detroit, compiling 801 goals and 1,049 assists. In his late 40s, he played six seasons in the World Hockey Association. When he finished his final season in 1980, with the N.H.L.’s Hartford Whalers, he was 52 years old.“He was everything to me; he was a father figure and a great friend,” recalled Gretzky, who came to know Howe when he was playing junior hockey in Canada. Howe took a liking to the rising talent, and they two formed a strong bond.When Gretzky joined the W.H.A. as a 17-year-old, Howe told him he would have to work even harder as a pro.“Gordie never thought he was better than anyone else,” Gretzky said. “He wanted to prove that he was. He had an ambition he’s going to be the best player every night.”Pressed to name the best player of all time, Gretzky said it’s a close call between Howe and Bobby Orr, but admitted he had an opinion. “I happen to be a little biased because I was a forward,” Gretzky said. “I’ll take Gordie.”Long after his playing days ended, Howe remained in the Detroit area and was a regular at Wings games, book signings and charity events, forging ties with younger generations which never saw him play.“He’s called Mr. Hockey for a reason,” said Paul Kinney-Cade, an 18-year-old from Wyandotte, Mich. “Without him, this city wouldn’t be what it is today.”For both fans and players, Howe represents a link to a bygone era, a simpler time, before million-dollar salaries, lockouts and expansion to Sun Belt cities. He was the Babe Ruth of hockey, the sport’s greatest star when the N.H.L. consisted of six teams and almost every one of the players was Canadian.Al Pelgus, a retiree from Sterling Heights, Mich., wearing a red No. 9 jersey, said his farewell to Howe was emotional. “I just remember my youth and Gordie doing his thing,” he said.He added he cherishes a stick that Howe signed for him nearly 50 years ago. Pulling out his cellphone, he showed a picture of it hanging on a wall in his home. “That stick is my prized possession; I’ll have that forever,” he said.Advertisement