AdvertisementSupported byAnalysisBy John DoyleTORONTO — A month ago, Italy Manager Antonio Conte made it clear that forward Sebastian Giovinco of Toronto F.C. and midfielder Andrea Pirlo of New York City F.C. would not play for Italy in the current European Championships. That is, he named his roster and they weren’t on it.Nobody in Italy cared much; Pirlo is 37, and Giovinco was not a regular when he played for Conte at Juventus. But when somebody asked Conte about the players’ exclusion, he was witheringly dismissive of Major League Soccer, which currently employs both of them.“We evaluated him and Giovinco,” Conte said in response to a question about Pirlo. “It’s normal that if you choose to go and play there then you can pay the consequences in footballing terms.“We evaluated them technically. We didn’t leave anything to chance. Anyone who thinks otherwise is wrong.”The comments sent the North American soccer machine into a giant sulk. Hurt feelings abounded. Important men talked in hushed, hurt tones about Conte being so wrong, so misguided. M.L.S. deserved respect. Pirlo wasn’t past it, and Giovinco was a top goal scorer, and, well, they seemed to be saying to Conte, you will be sorry when these other people you like so much better turn out to be losers.But if Italy’s magisterial dismissal of Belgium on Monday, and the manner in which it was achieved, proved anything, it was this: Conte was correct.His Italy team — which, to be fair, baffled even some in Italy when it was revealed — was expertly chosen to meet and conquer the three opponents it would face in Group E: Belgium, Sweden and the Republic of Ireland. Belgium was thought to be the strongest of the three, by far, yet in Lyon on Monday, Italy stifled the Red Devils, 2-0, with canny efficiency, surprising athleticism and a pragmatic tactical approach that served as an emphatic retort to any critics of Conte’s approach.This was teamwork done with a fanatical insistence on unifying to close down any space Belgium might covet and on replying with a lightning-fast counterattack. Emanuele Giaccherini’s opening goal was the product of a glorious 50-yard pass, and it left Belgium looking bewildered that such a move was even possible.While Belgium mustered promising moves for a period in the second half, the result was never in doubt. A series of cynical but efficient Italian fouls stopped any possible breakaway thrusts, and when Graziano Pellè sealed the victory in stoppage time, the result was so emphatic and expert that it looked ridiculously easy.The tactics Italy employed were simple but merciless. Conte’s preferred 3-4-3 formation calls for midfielders pressing forward and both midfielders and strikers hustling for the second ball that returns from an attack. In this method, there simply isn’t room for a small, nimble player of Giovinco’s style. Time and space are everything, and Giovinco would have neither. Conte talked about needing “warriors” to fulfill his plan, and Giovinco is far from that.In truth, neither Giovinco nor Pirlo belongs on Conte’s Italy team. Pirlo’s strength is a stately control of midfield, precise passing and imposing delivery of free kicks. This current Italy team, while not young, is all about speed and physical rebuff of the opposition. There’s nothing stately about it.Giovinco, at 29 and in his prime, is the core issue. After his arrival in Toronto last year from Juventus, he scored 22 goals in his first season and was named the league’s most valuable player. This season, he has added eight more (though he still has only one in 21 games for Italy). In M.L.S., he has sprezzatura, the spirit of casual artistry, that makes him charismatic.In this forceful and muscular Italy team, though, there is no place for sprezzatura. Giovinco, fleet of foot but slight of frame, might easily be suppressed by taller, stronger, ruthless defenders from Belgium, Sweden or Ireland.Besides, since Conte managed Giovinco with both Juventus and Italy, his assessment was based on experience, not mere snobbery about M.L.S.After Monday’s win, Italy looks capable of storming through the group stages of Euro 2016.After the tournament, Conte becomes manager of Chelsea in England’s Premier League. There, he may become a mini Jose Mourinho of ruthless prudence, tactical judiciousness and blunt talk.The incoming Italy manager, Giampiero Ventura, is 68 and has managed 17 teams in Italy. Perhaps Giovinco and Pirlo can try to impress him, to make their case for future inclusion with the national team. Perhaps they need not bother.A man as experienced as Ventura can see what Conte is achieving at Euro 2016 and conclude that Conte’s judgment about Italy’s M.L.S. players was correct.John Doyle is a columnist for The Globe and Mail in Toronto and the author of “The World Is a Ball: The Joy, Madness and Meaning of Soccer.”Advertisement