By ROB HUGHESJUNE 14, 2016
LONDON — Did Italy fool everyone, even themselves, about how prepared they were for the European Championships?Italy Coach Antonio Conte had spoken for months about his team’s first opponent, Belgium, and how it had a “golden generation” of talent that might go all the way and win the tournament. At the same time, others wrote off Conte’s group of players as Italy’s worst in 50 years.Teams should know by now to be wary of Italians who come to the party wearing pessimism like a cloak of deception. They flatter opponents and lure them in, and then strike them down on the field.Italy’s 2-0 win over Belgium in Lyon, France, on Monday was the first unexpected result of this year’s Euros. France, Germany and Spain all won their opening games, but the fourth of the pretournament favorites, Belgium, could not.AdvertisementIt was more what Italy did than what Belgium failed to do. Emanuele Giaccherini, who was maybe Italy’s fourth choice to play the midfield role, epitomized the team’s effort on Monday with his determination to convert a chance that no one expected him to get.AdvertisementGiaccherini stands just a little over 5-foot-5. He is 31, which is par for Italy’s lineup. And he spent his past 12 months playing on loan with Bologna.He is there because Italy no longer has a playmaker like Andrea Pirlo, who instead is counting down his career with New York City F.C. in Major League Soccer. Nor does Italy have anyone as creative as Alessandro Del Piero or Roberto Baggio were for teams of the past.But Giaccherini’s heart is big and his lungs are sound. In the 32nd minute, he burst forward, perhaps in hope rather than expectation. Leonardo Bonucci, whose main job is to defend, spotted Giaccherini’s run through the Belgian defense and struck a pass from the halfway line. It caught Giaccherini in stride, and he controlled the ball with his left foot, waited maybe half a second for Belgium’s goalkeeper, Thibaut Courtois, to rush toward him and then calmly struck with his right foot for a goal.After that, it was down to Belgium to prove that it was the sum of its lauded parts. Where was Eden Hazard, the most gifted of this new generation for Belgium? Where was Kevin De Bruyne, the player described as a “mastermind” by Belgium’s injured captain, Vincent Kompany?Where, indeed, was the Belgian gold?The answer is that they were outfought, outrun and outplayed by the Italians. “I’ve been repeating from the beginning that this is a group first and foremost of men — and then of footballers,” Coach Conte said at the postgame press conference. “You need an alchemy of people who get on well together, and the biggest satisfaction for me tonight is to see how happy they all were, including those on the bench.”Marc Wilmots, his coaching counterpart for Belgium, had no answers for the reporters. He said his main striker, Romelu Lukaku, “didn’t have a great night” and that his main playmaker, De Bruyne, “maybe was tired after a long season.”Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.Tired? De Bruyne, 24, is a decade younger than some of the Italians who managed to channel his running into areas where he could not pose a threat. Unless he is sold, Hazard, 25, will come under Conte’s demanding rule next season when he takes over at Chelsea. On Monday, Hazard’s play looked pretty on occasions, but it also lacked effort compared to some of the veteran Italians.“The coach told us we had to prove ourselves on the pitch,” Giaccherini said. “And today, we did. We have to know how to suffer, how to help each other and be united and compact.”AdvertisementOne imagines that message is one that Wilmots could pin up on the wall of the locker room for the Belgians to read and digest.Once Belgium did gain some momentum after halftime, Italy regrouped with its customary defense. It had elements of none-shall-pass brusqueness. Four Italians — Bonucci, Giorgio Chiellini, Thiago Motta and the striker Eder — were more than happy to receive yellow cards for basically denying the Belgians the right to run at their defense with the ball.And then, in the dying moments of added time at the end, Graziano Pellè volleyed in the second goal, just to nail down the message that Italy could score with less opportunity than Belgium had throughout the night.This second strike, similar to what Germany did to Ukraine the previous day, was a message of ruthless finality. An indication that experienced winners do not often let opponents off the hook.“We have big intentions, and our objective remains the same, to get into the last 16,” concluded Conte. “We’ve got to be happy today, and a bit happy tomorrow. And then we have to prepare for Sweden because the memory of two years ago remains a wound in our minds.”Two years ago, Italy beat England in its first game at the World Cup in Brazil but lost the next game to Costa Rica.Conte reminded his men of that, while Wilmots insisted his golden generation is far from done. “If you make mistakes at this level,” Wilmots told reporters, “you pay dearly. But nothing is lost. We’ve got two games more to reach the knockout stage.”A version of this article appears in print on June 15, 2016, in The International New York Times.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.