AdvertisementSupported byBy David PollakSAN JOSE, Calif. — During the Stanley Cup playoffs, the Pittsburgh Penguins’ captain, Sidney Crosby, did not have as many goals or points as his teammate Phil Kessel. He had one fewer assist than another Pittsburgh center, Nick Bonino. He did not come out of nowhere to save the day like the rookie goaltender Matthew Murray.But when the Penguins defeated the San Jose Sharks, 3-1, to capture the Stanley Cup on Sunday night, it was Crosby who was named the winner of the Conn Smythe Trophy, which is given to the postseason’s most valuable player.Nobody had to explain to those who played with Crosby why he was a deserving winner.“He’s a special player for a reason. He can adapt and change his game to different things,” said Pittsburgh forward Chris Kunitz, a sometimes linemate of Crosby’s over the past eight seasons. “Early in his career, he went out and got points and did everything, but that didn’t make him satisfied. He had to go out and lead through example and became a better player.”Conor Sheary, the rookie Penguins forward, spoke of Crosby similarly. “He’s our leader,’’ he said. “If he’s not scoring goals or putting up points, he’s our guy in the locker room. I know the Conn Smythe means the best player, and he’s been our best player and he has been all year.”Some might take issue with Sheary’s statement. The Penguins and Crosby struggled early in the season. In mid-December, he was scoring at a 0.68-of-a-point-per-game pace — respectable enough for most players, but well below the standard he has set for himself with a 1.3-points-per-game average over 11 seasons.But a coaching change on Dec. 12, when Mike Sullivan replaced Mike Johnston, seemed to change everything for Crosby and the Penguins.Pittsburgh, which was 15-10-3 when Sullivan took over, went 33-16-5 the rest of the way. Crosby, who had six goals and 13 assists in 28 games before Sullivan arrived, recorded 30 goals and 36 assists in his next 52 games.“Our core guys, they can all really skate; they want to play fast,” Sullivan said Sunday in explaining the changes he enacted that benefited Crosby and others. “They want to come through the neutral zone with speed,’’ Sullivan added. “We tried to implement a game plan that allowed them to play to their strengths.”Crosby’s defensive game improved, too. In the Penguins’ Cup-clinching victory over the Sharks, he blocked four shots, including one against the heavy-firing defenseman Brent Burns that led to Pittsburgh’s empty-net goal by Patric Hornqvist.Crosby did not score a goal against San Jose, but his two assists in Game 6 gave him four for the series. Over all, Crosby finished the postseason with six goals and 13 assists.Not long after that empty-net goal, Crosby hoisted the Stanley Cup high over his head as the Penguins — who are for sale — celebrated their fourth championship.As captain, he controls the order in which the 35-pound Cup is passed from player to player. He defied convention by giving it first to the injured defenseman Trevor Daley, who came to Pittsburgh in a midseason trade and missed the San Jose series after breaking his left ankle in the Eastern Conference finals.Daley, Crosby said in explaining his handoff choice, had taken time off after being injured to visit his ailing mother.“She wanted to see him with the Cup,” he said. “That was important to her. I think that kind of stuck with me after he told me that. We were motivated to get it for him, even though he had to watch.”After giving the Cup to Daley while TV cameras were focused on the moment, Crosby also made two more nontraditional choices — forward Pascal Dupuis, who was forced to retire in December because of a medical condition related to blood clots, and Marc-Andre Fleury, the starting goalie who was replaced by Murray after being concussed and could not win his job back.“He just handled it better than you’d expect,” Crosby said of Fleury. “All three guys, it’s about your team. Those guys showed it the best way you can.”Sullivan agreed that Crosby deserved the Conn Smythe Trophy.“His numbers don’t indicate the impact he had on helping this team win, or the impact he had on a game-to-game basis,” Sullivan said, adding, “I could tell as we went through this postseason that he knew that our team had something special. He was going to will this thing.”Advertisement