AdvertisementSupported byBy Victor MatherMike Trout landed his second Most Valuable Player Award on Thursday. He has now finished in the top two in the voting for five straight years and established himself as the game’s best player.And after only five full seasons in the majors, he may have achieved something else. You can make a strong case that he is the greatest Angels player ever.There is a curious thing about the Angels franchise. Most other teams are associated with easily conjured superstars. Cardinals: Stan Musial. Phillies: Mike Schmidt. Giants: Willie Mays. But the Angels lack a marquee historical star. Throughout their history, they seem to have relied more than most teams on transient players and free agents who spend only a portion of their career in sunny Southern California.This is not just because the team is relatively new as franchises go. The other teams that also started in the early 1960s have all produced big stars. The Astros have Jeff Bagwell and Craig Biggio. The Mets have Tom Seaver. The Rangers have Ivan Rodriguez and Rafael Palmeiro. But who is the best Angel?It just might be Trout. He is the team’s career leader in both on-base average and slugging and has crept into the top 10 in counting statistics like home runs, stolen bases and walks, despite having far fewer at-bats than many of the others on the charts.Many of the other candidates fall short in one way or another.The first legend whom most people associate with the Angels is Nolan Ryan. Though he threw four of his record seven no-hitters with the team, he played only eight of his 27 seasons with them. And his record with the team, 138-121, does not scream “best in history.”Ryan’s number has been retired by the Angels. Besides the owner Gene Autry, Jackie Robinson and Jimmie Reese, who played with the Angels in the 1930s, when it was a minor league team, there are only two others with retired numbers to consider.Rod Carew was certainly a great player, but his greatness came almost entirely with the Twins. He joined the Angels at age 33, and though he continued to be a solid singles hitter, his days of leading the league in batting average, or anything else, were over.The last player whose number was retired, Jim Fregosi, is an intriguing candidate. Though remembered by younger fans primarily as a manager, Fregosi had a long, consistent career, including seven years in the prime of his career with the Angels, with five consecutive All-Star appearances. But stack those years against Trout’s first five and they fall far short.There are other candidates. Bobby Grich was a versatile player beloved in sabermetrics, and Brian Downing was a durable catcher and designated hitter. Many players came to town for six or eight years and could have been the greatest if they had stuck around longer: The solid starter Frank Tanana began his career in California, and the slugger Vladimir Guerrero came to town after eight years in Montreal. But there are no Mike Trouts in that bunch.Baseball-Reference.com’s wins above replacement, a catchall statistic, ranks Trout as the second-greatest Angel. (Behind him in its top 10 are Fregosi, Tim Salmon, Ryan, Downing, Jered Weaver, Grich, Tanana and Darin Erstad.)The No. 1 Angel by that stat is probably not the first name you would think of. Chuck Finley pitched the first 14 years of his career in California. A workhorse who seldom missed a start, he posted a 165-140 record with the team, which ranks him first in wins, and he is also the Angels’ leader in innings pitched. He was a fine player, but one who has been overlooked in part because he appeared in just one postseason with the team — in his rookie season, when he was still a reliever.Though there may be some disputing it, Trout’s five stellar seasons put him right at the top of the Angels’ stars. And one or two more Trout-like years should remove any doubt. The Angels might want to make room for a retired No. 27. And maybe place it above all the rest.Advertisement