By SETH BERKMANNOV. 18, 2016
Columbia University said Friday that it would punish members of its wrestling team who had shared lewd and racist text messages and that the remainder of the team had been cleared to resume competition.The university said in a statement that its investigation had found that the messages “were written, sent and viewed by a distinct group within the wrestling team.” Those responsible, it said, have been suspended from competition for the rest of the season and for the 2016-17 academic year, while others were barred from competing until the beginning of the spring semester.The wrestling team had continued to practice but was forbidden to compete until the investigation was completed. Those found not to have been involved in the group messaging were cleared to resume wrestling, starting this weekend at the New York State Intercollegiate Championships at Cornell.In its statement, Columbia did not name the wrestlers who were disciplined or disclose how many had been punished.AdvertisementColumbia’s announcement came hours after members of the wrestling team apologized for their “inappropriate, vulgar and hurtful” speech in a letter posted late Thursday night on Bwog, an independent, student-run Columbia news website. Bwog first revealed the offensive messages when it posted images of the texts, which included the use of racist, misogynistic and homophobic language.AdvertisementThe letter was addressed to the Columbia community and said the team was prepared for any potential punishment from the university. It was signed “Remorsefully” by “the members of the Columbia Wrestling team.”Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.In the letter, unidentified members of the team apologized for the damage the incident had caused to the university’s reputation, the athletics department, university alumni and their coaches. “More importantly,” the letter said, “we want all people who were insulted or felt threatened by the messages to know that we could not be more remorseful for the harm that this situation has caused.”The “irresponsible behavior,” as described by the team, was deemed a “wake-up call” in the letter. The wrestlers also said: “A culture change was obviously needed — and, rest assured, it will take place. We are prepared for any deserved repercussions from our actions.”Columbia withdrew from its season-opening meet last Sunday at Binghamton. The team’s season was then left in limbo Monday as university officials investigated the texts. On Monday night, a group of Columbia students protested inside Dodge Fitness Center, where the university’s athletic teams have offices and the wrestling team holds its matches.“While I am exceedingly disappointed in light of these circumstances, we, as a program, take full responsibility,” Columbia’s wrestling coach, Zach Tanelli, said in a statement Friday afternoon. He added, “Not only do we demand that the harming and offensive language end; we want Columbia wrestling to be a part of the solution toward cultural competency and systemic change.”A version of this article appears in print on November 19, 2016, on Page D5 of the New York edition with the headline: After Texting Scandal, Columbia Allows Some Wrestlers to Return.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.