By THE ASSOCIATED PRESSMARCH 4, 2017
CAMBRIDGE, Mass. — It is no longer enough for a basketball team to know how many shots a player makes, or even where he or she was standing when a successful shot was released.Sports data is going biometric, tracking players’ heart rates, movements and energy levels to get a better picture of what goes on inside their bodies as they run, jump and even sit on the bench. Furthermore, the device-makers say, the technology can help coaches decide who needs a rest, who needs more work, or who might be most at risk for injury.“Do you have eyes on every single athlete, every single session?” said Calvin Torres, a sports scientist with the tracker and data company Catapult, who has plenty of complaints from old-time coaches who insist that they can make the same assessment with their eyes and their instincts. “If you put a monitor on them, you do.”Catapult is already working with 16 teams in the N.F.L., 15 in the N.B.A. and four in the N.H.L., along with more than a thousand in high school and college, as well as national and pro teams in dozens of countries and in sports that include rowing, rugby and badminton.AdvertisementThe company had a booth this weekend at the M.I.T. Sloan Sports Analytics Conference, an annual gathering for those trying to use math and technology to reshape the way games have traditionally been played. The conference attracts 3,500 people — many of them math-savvy students trying to break into sports or simply learn about the latest innovations from panelists like N.B.A. Commissioner Adam Silver and the data journalism pioneer Nate Silver.Get the big sports news, highlights and analysis from Times journalists, with distinctive takes on games and some behind-the-scenes surprises, delivered to your inbox every week.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.Panel titles included “Football Analytics: Please Stop Punting” — held in the Bill James Room, of course — “Data Driven Storytelling” and “eSports Emergence.” Researchers presented papers on baseball bullpen strategies, “Marijuana as Medicine” and “The Science of Sleep.”AdvertisementA day before the two-day conference opened Friday, Catapult wired up a handful of reporters at M.I.T.’s Rockwell Cage, a typical Division III gym with pullout bleachers and an image of a fierce beaver mascot decorating center court. On the other side of a curtain pulled across the middle of the gym, M.I.T. students practiced badminton and archery.After arriving, the reporters were fitted with a harness that was too short to be a tank top but a bit longer than the Seinfeldian “mansiere.” In the back at the neck was a pocket for the actual tracker, which is about two inches square.The devices detected movement and effort and broke them down into four load levels. P1 and P2 were perhaps best characterized as walking and jogging; a full-out sprint put you in P3. No one in the group recorded any of the most extreme effort, or P4.“That’s a tough band to get into,” said Torres, the sports scientist.According to Torres, an N.B.A. practice could hit a total load of 800-1,000. (The league doesn’t allow players to wear the devices during games.) The devices measure variations through a practice.Torres said those numbers have a lot of potential. If a coach sees a player’s load decrease at the end of practice, that could indicate the player needs rest, more work to build up conditioning or a check for a small physical problem that could turn into a serious injury.“Each team is different, because each coach is different,” Torres said. “Knowing how to apply the data makes the average user a really good user.”We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.