By PAT BORZINOV. 16, 2016
ST. CLOUD, Minn. — In nearly every hockey-playing state, the name Herb Brooks elicits one memory: the Miracle on Ice, in which Brooks coached the United States to a victory over the powerful Soviet Union team at the Lake Placid Olympics in 1980.But in Minnesota, where Brooks was born and raised, his legacy touches all five of the state’s universities that play Division I hockey.In 1986, only the University of Minnesota, which Brooks coached to three N.C.A.A. titles, and Minnesota Duluth fielded Division I teams in the state. Brooks and his mentor — the former Minnesota coach John Mariucci, a Hockey Hall of Famer — felt more were needed to accommodate the growing number of skilled Minnesota high school players.So Brooks, fired by the N.H.L.’s Rangers the year before, took a bold, unconventional step. At Mariucci’s urging, he accepted a coaching job at St. Cloud State, a Division III program 70 miles northwest of Minneapolis.AdvertisementSt. Cloud State aspired to move up. Mariucci figured that with Brooks coaching, the program might accelerate its timeline and persuade more Minnesota universities to follow.“It was kind of his dying wish to my dad to get that going,” Dan Brooks, Herb’s son, said of Mariucci, who died of prostate cancer in 1987.Brooks stayed for only the 1986-87 season, leading the Huskies to their first N.C.A.A. Division III tournament berth (and a third-place national finish) and then returning to the N.H.L. with the Minnesota North Stars. Before leaving, though, Brooks and university officials successfully lobbied the State Legislature to fund a campus hockey arena. St. Cloud State jumped to Division I ahead of schedule in 1987. That encouraged Minnesota State, then known as Mankato State, to make the move in 1996, and Bemidji State in 1999.“At that time, I remember there was talk of a five-year plan,” said Bob Motzko, a student assistant to Brooks and the coach of St. Cloud State since 2005. “Five years? No way. He did it in one. Only Herb could do that, with his connections and his power.”Now all five Minnesota programs are thriving, fulfilling the vision of Mariucci and Brooks, who was killed in a car crash in 2003. From 2009 to 2014, every one except Minnesota State reached the N.C.A.A.’s Frozen Four, with Duluth winning it all in 2011.AdvertisementThis season, for the first time, all five have appeared in the USCHO.com national poll. Duluth is No. 2 this week, with Minnesota at No. 7, St. Cloud State No. 12, Bemidji State No. 13 and Minnesota State No. 15.“Herb just had a vision of what was needed and what should be done,” said Bob Peters, a former coach at Bemidji State and a close friend of Brooks’s. “It happened. I just wish he was here to relish the moment.”The growth of college hockey in the state gives Brooks’s alma mater, Minnesota, more competition for in-state recruits, but the longtime Golden Gophers coach Don Lucia is fine with it.“I think it’s a good thing,” he said. “I said that from the beginning. The stronger hockey is in our state, the better it is, not just for the collegiate programs but all the way down to youth hockey. They have something to look forward to.”At St. Cloud State, Brooks’s influence lives on. The team’s renovated arena was renamed Herb Brooks National Hockey Center in 2013; Herb Brooks Way runs past it. Inside, on a far wall overlooking the ice, a likeness of Brooks welcomes visitors to the rink.In an unintentional nod to Brooks, the only beer sold in the arena is domestic. Dan Brooks said that was all his father drank.The Huskies have had only two head coaches since Brooks left, and both were on his staff: Craig Dahl, who coached for 18 seasons, and Motzko, who succeeded him. Motzko still has a Brooks-devised defensive drill in his playbook called Herb Two-on-Two.“We actually did it last week,” Motzko said. “Hockey coaches are thieves. I’ve never made up a drill. I’ve stolen every drill I have. That’s what we do. They all have the name of who you stole it from.”AdvertisementMotzko finished playing at St. Cloud State in 1986 and was considering coaching when rumors spread that Brooks might be coming.“It was crazy at that time,” Motzko said. “He’s Herb Brooks. He’s coaching the New York Rangers, he’s the Olympic coach, and we’re a Division III hockey program.”It is not clear where the idea of pursuing Brooks originated. Many at St. Cloud State credit the former president Brendan McDonald, a former Huskies hockey player with Division I plans for the program. Brooks was also friends with the university vice president Bill Radovich.“My dad knew a guy at St. Cloud,” Dan Brooks said, meaning Radovich. “Bill kind of jokingly said, ‘Let’s call Herb Brooks.’ It was kind of a lark. And my dad was serious about it. Next thing you know, he was going up there.”Radovich, though, said he had learned of Brooks’s interest when a mutual friend called to tell him.“I said to her, ‘What have you been smoking or drinking?’” Radovich recalled. “‘Why would Herb Brooks want to come to St. Cloud State?’”Get the big sports news, highlights and analysis from Times journalists, with distinctive takes on games and some behind-the-scenes surprises, delivered to your inbox every week.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.Brooks initially turned down McDonald before accepting the job for a reported salary of $23,000, about one-ninth what he had earned with the Rangers. He brought in Dahl, a young Division III coach at Wisconsin-River Falls, as lead assistant. Motzko, hired by Dahl, did not meet Brooks until the first staff meeting in the fall.“I was in the coaches’ room with Craig,” Motzko said. “Herb comes walking into the room and goes, ‘You must be Bob.’ He knew my name before we even got introduced. It made you feel awful special.”AdvertisementBrooks commuted to St. Cloud from his home in Shoreview, Minn., a St. Paul suburb, sleeping some nights in the spare bedroom of Dahl’s apartment near campus. When the Huskies traveled through the Twin Cities for away games, Dahl said, the bus picked up Brooks on the way.Yet Brooks did not skimp on his involvement. He quickly dispelled a campus rumor that he would show up only on weekends.“That was so far from the truth,” Motzko said. “He was there every day, a lot of times first guy at the rink and the last guy to leave. He was into it.”Many coaches devoted one practice a week to the power play and penalty kill, Dahl said; Brooks insisted on it every day. The 25-10-1 Huskies set a team record for victories that lasted until 2001. Years later, Brooks called it the most enjoyable year he had had in coaching.“He was having a ball,” said Dahl, a financial adviser in Rochester and a volunteer assistant at Division III Nazareth College. “The limelight wasn’t really big. He was working with kids who were probably not going to play pro hockey. There were no prima donnas. He was just having fun.”Thirty years later, the dream Mariucci and Brooks shared — five thriving Division I programs in the state — has come to pass.“He did talk about that fact that it’s crazy that Michigan had seven teams, out East had so many, and that more Division I programs were needed in our state,” Motzko said of Brooks. “We were just fortunate that, outside of the two, we were the first to go.”A version of this article appears in print on November 17, 2016, on Page B15 of the New York edition with the headline: Olympic Coach’s Miracle in Minnesota: Spreading Division I Hockey.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.