

 Scott Cacciola
 

ON PRO BASKETBALL
NOV. 18, 2016
OKLAHOMA CITY — After Russell Westbrook made his entrance to the theme song of the Harlem Globetrotters, he thanked God, his family and Michael Jordan, who had introduced him. Jordan’s presence, Westbrook said, meant a great deal to him.And then Westbrook, the last of six new inductees into the Oklahoma Hall of Fame, peered into a black-tie crowd that filled a large ballroom at Cox Convention Center on Thursday night.“I don’t know how to read off a teleprompter,” Westbrook said, “so I’ve got this piece of paper.”He wanted to make sure that he got it right. The evening, just days removed from one of the most divisive presidential elections in modern history, had been largely without talk of politics. There was one joke about President-elect Donald J. Trump’s colorful language, but that was about as far as anyone seemed willing to go.AdvertisementInstead, it had been a night for Oklahomans to express pride in their state and to honor those among them who had made contributions to their communities. The inductees included a federal judge, a former commander of the Oklahoma Air National Guard, a businessman, a television personality and a Broadway star.AdvertisementBut Westbrook, the high-motor point guard of the Oklahoma City Thunder, stood apart. He stood apart because he had grown up in Los Angeles. He stood apart because of his job. He stood apart because of his race. And he stood apart because of the message he chose to deliver.“After witnessing the divisions and challenges of our nation that we’ve been facing over the last several months, I’ve realized this honor is not about me, nor is it about the people in this room,” he said.“Oklahoma is an unbelievable community. I’m so appreciative of the fact that the people of Oklahoma have been so supportive of welcoming my family and I. However, there’s always room to grow. I can be better, you can be better, and we can be better together.”He went on: “Our state is made up of unbelievable, talented individuals, and I look forward to celebrating them no matter their race, gender or creed. I accept this award for all the kids who are told because of the color of their skin, where they come from or what talent they don’t have, they somehow can’t achieve.”Westbrook received several ovations, and Gov. Mary Fallin thanked him on behalf of the entire state for “staying in Oklahoma.” (You may have heard that Westbrook signed a contract extension over the summer, not long after a high-profile teammate left for a lucrative job in the Bay Area.) Fallin’s line got another huge round of applause.But the dynamic was striking. In Oklahoma, Trump won 65.3 percent of the popular vote — one of the most lopsided results in the country. Fallin, a conservative Republican, endorsed him. And Trump often campaigned using inflammatory rhetoric about race, gender and religion, going so far as to call for a ban on Muslim immigrants.After the election, Westbrook told reporters that he did not vote for Trump, but he declined to elaborate. On Thursday, without explicitly referring to the election or to Trump, Westbrook made his feelings clear. There was nothing about his speech that was particularly controversial. He called for unity, for understanding and for equal opportunity.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.But given the political climate and his outsize celebrity here in one of the country’s reddest states, everything Westbrook said seemed to mean something more. Many N.B.A. players and coaches have been speaking out about social issues in recent months, and Westbrook, while receiving one of the state’s highest honors, chose to add his voice to the chorus.Advertisement“I challenge each of you to join me in being productive citizens and in seeking to bring hope and healing to every community,” he said. “Regardless of our backgrounds and our upbringings, we can work together to impact the lives of every young person in the state and across this nation.”A year ago, Westbrook was introducing Kevin Durant before his induction into the Oklahoma Hall of Fame. His induction did not dissuade Durant from spurning the Thunder in free agency months later to sign with the Golden State Warriors.Perhaps the selection committee is hoping for better luck with Westbrook, whose contract extension has an opt-out clause in 2018. In the meantime, he appears determined to take a sledgehammer to the rest of the league. After Friday’s victory here over the Nets, Westbrook was averaging over 31 points, 9 rebounds and 10 assists a game.Jordan, a five-time N.B.A. most valuable player who now owns the Charlotte Hornets, said he came to Thursday’s ceremony at the invitation of Clay Bennett, the owner of the Thunder.Jordan said the people of Oklahoma City ought to be proud of the “sense of loyalty” that Westbrook had shown them, and then he took a mild swipe at Durant.“I’m not here to bash anyone that’s not here,” Jordan said to the delight of those in attendance. “I’m not saying that you don’t have a choice. Everybody has a choice.”Throughout his professional life, Jordan has largely avoided using his platform to wade into the realm of politics. That has always been his prerogative, his choice.On Thursday, he catered to the crowd — “I’m not from Oklahoma, but I feel like I’m from Oklahoma,” he said — and described Westbrook as a “very, very special kid.”Before long, Jordan wrapped up his introduction and ceded the stage to a player from a different generation, to a young man with something to say.A version of this article appears in print on November 19, 2016, on Page D3 of the New York edition with the headline: Westbrook, Honored in a Red State, Issues a Plea for Unity.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.See More »