By JAMES WAGNERNOV. 17, 2016
Continuing their transformation into a younger and financially leaner team, the Yankees traded Brian McCann and cash on Thursday to the Houston Astros for two raw pitching prospects, Albert Abreu and Jorge Guzman.With the trade, the Yankees shed $23 million of McCann’s contract over the next two years, while paving the way for Gary Sanchez to be the everyday catcher after his short but impressive turn with the team last season.“Getting the additional money to play with on our end gives us a lot of choices in the trade and free agent market,” Yankees General Manager Brian Cashman said. “Does it mean we’re absolutely going to do something? No. It doesn’t mean we have to reallocate it immediately, but we’re going to be open to doing so.”McCann, 32, had become expendable and expensive as a backup catcher and part-time designated hitter for the Yankees next season, but in Houston he will have the opportunity to catch more.AdvertisementIn Houston, McCann can play for a potentially contending team, with the chance to be a larger part of the everyday lineup. The Astros could use McCann as their primary catcher and an occasional designated hitter, with the right-handed power hitter Evan Gattis, who was Houston’s main designated hitter last season, as his backup behind the plate.Advertisement“I want to catch every day,” McCann said in a conference call with reporters on Thursday night. “I still feel like I have a lot of good years left behind the plate. In New York, I was going to catch once a week and D.H. against righties.”Because of his full no-trade clause, McCann had to approve the trade, which was bittersweet for him because he had hoped to finish his career in New York when he signed a five-year, $85 million deal before the 2014 season.As the Yankees’ youth movement began this summer by releasing Alex Rodriguez and trading away players such as Aroldis Chapman, Andrew Miller and Carlos Beltran, Cashman entertained the idea of also trading McCann. Nothing materialized.But as Cashman received more interest in McCann than first expected early this offseason, he spoke with McCann’s agent, B.B. Abbott, about what attributes McCann might want in a future home.Get the big sports news, highlights and analysis from Times journalists, with distinctive takes on games and some behind-the-scenes surprises, delivered to your inbox every week.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.Abbott said that Houston was on “an extremely short list” that he and McCann did not share with Cashman. When Cashman came to Abbott and McCann about a trade proposal to Houston on Thursday, they agreed.“To Cash’s credit, he did what was right by the Yankees, but also considered the player and person that Brian McCann is,” Abbott said in a telephone interview on Thursday night.The Yankees, who missed the playoffs last season, can now rely more heavily on Sanchez, who finished second in the American League Rookie of the Year voting after a season in which he hit .299 with 20 home runs in only 53 games.AdvertisementWith McCann gone, the Yankees have more possibilities for the designated hitter spot, including pursuing free agents.“We’re going to continue to pursue pitching as well as offense now,” said Cashman Thursday night at a charity event at the Covenant House in Manhattan.The Yankees’ reloading of young talent continued with the addition of Abreu, 21, who had a 3.72 E.R.A. at Class A last season and was ranked the Astros’ No. 7 prospect by MLB.com. Guzman, 20, reached rookie level in 2016 and had a 4.05 E.R.A. over all. Both have been profiled as right-handed starters with strikeout capabilities thanks to fastballs that reach speeds in the high 90s.McCann was owed $34 million over the next two seasons, but the Yankees will pay only $5.5 million of his $17 million yearly salary. The Astros will pay the rest.The Astros emerged as an obvious landing spot for McCann this winter when their primary catcher, Jason Castro, who hit .210 with 11 home runs last season, became a free agent after the season.McCann hit .242 with 20 home runs, 58 R.B.I. and .748 O.P.S. over 130 games this season, his strikeout rate rising and contact rate declining with age. With the emergence of Sanchez, McCann was relegated to designated hitter and backup catcher over the final two months of the season.McCann called Sanchez the best player in baseball during those final two months of the season, and ceded his job to him gracefully.“It ended up being a perfect fit,” McCann said of the Astros.In Houston, McCann has the possibility of a financial bonus. His $15 million team option for 2019 becomes a player option if he logs at least 1,000 plate appearances from 2017 to 2018, starts at least 90 games at catcher in 2018, and does not end that season on the disabled list.A version of this article appears in print on November 18, 2016, on Page B10 of the New York edition with the headline: Yankees Trade McCann to the Astros.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.