By THE ASSOCIATED PRESSNOV. 17, 2016
DALLAS — The Heisman Trophy-winning quarterback Johnny Manziel has reached a deal with prosecutors for the conditional dismissal of a domestic assault case involving his former girlfriend.Jim Darnell, Manziel’s defense lawyer, said the deal had not been completed. But Darnell said he was encouraged after a Thursday morning hearing. A judge set a hearing for Dec. 1, at which the case could be settled.“That’s all in progress,” Darnell said regarding the conditions of any agreement. “Until we get something done, if we do, then we’ll announce it.”Manziel, the troubled former Cleveland quarterback, left the courtroom without responding to questions, talking on his phone as he walked ahead of reporters and cameramen and quickly getting in a car driven by Darnell.Advertisement“He’s doing O.K.,” Darnell said. “Tough kid.”Manziel, 23, is accused of hitting and threatening his former girlfriend Colleen Crowley during a night out in January. He faces a misdemeanor assault charge that carries a penalty of up to a year in jail and a $4,000 fine.Judge Roberto Canas met in chambers for about 15 minutes with the defense and prosecutors. Manziel left the meeting after about five minutes and sat alone at the defense table, mostly looking down. The hearing after the meeting was brief, with Canas setting the next court date.“Everybody will be required to be here,” Canas said. “Then we will get this case down the road.”Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.A spokeswoman for the Dallas County district attorney’s office did not immediately respond to a request for comment.Cleveland took Manziel 22nd over all in the 2014 draft, and the Browns cut him in March after two tumultuous seasons marked by inconsistent play and off-the-field headlines about his partying and drinking, including one stint in rehabilitation. Even though he is an unsigned free agent, Manziel served a four-game suspension to start the 2016 season over a substance-abuse violation. Brian McCarthy, an N.F.L. spokesman, said the assault case remained under review by the league.Since the 2015 season ended, Manziel has been dumped by two agents after both demanded that he make a second trip to rehab.The allegations in the assault case stem from a night out on Jan. 30. Crowley said Manziel had accosted her at a Dallas hotel, a confrontation that continued downstairs to the valet station. She said that he had forced her into a car and that a valet had disregarded her pleas for help.AdvertisementThe two eventually drove to a Dallas bar where her car was parked, she said in an affidavit. She said Manziel had begun to drive away and had stopped when she tried to jump out of the car, but then he dragged her back inside and hit her.A version of this article appears in print on November 18, 2016, on Page B14 of the New York edition with the headline: Manziel’s Domestic Assault Charge May Be Dropped, His Lawyer Says.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.