AdvertisementSupported byBy The Associated PressTALLAHASSEE, Fla. — The last time No. 17 Florida State visited Syracuse, running back Dalvin Cook was third on the Seminoles’ depth chart and looking for an opportunity to prove himself.Two years later, Cook is on the precipice of becoming the Seminoles’ career rushing leader.The junior, who has 3,941 career yards, needs 19 yards on Saturday to break Warrick Dunn’s 20-year-old mark. He is also 59 yards away from becoming just the sixth player in Atlantic Coast Conference history to reach 4,000 yards and would be the first to do it in three years.Ted Brown, the former North Carolina State standout, is the A.C.C.’s career rushing leader, with 4,602 yards from 1975 to 1978. He is also the quickest to have reached 4,000 yards, having done so in his 38th game. Saturday will be Cook’s 36th.Cook said that he had talked to Dunn before the Oct. 29 game against Clemson but that there had not been any discussion about the record. Cook reiterated this week how much he admired Dunn for what he had done on and off the field.“When you have a guy like Warrick at the top of the list and see what he did with the program and as a human being, you have to humble yourself,” Cook said. “This is kind of like the first game of the season where I have to keep my emotions in check.”Last Friday against Boston College, Cook appeared as if he was going to break Dunn’s record at home as he rushed 108 yards through three quarters. But with Florida State (7-3, 4-3 A.C.C., No. 17 C.F.P.) up 35-0, Coach Jimbo Fisher rested his starters in the fourth.The Carrier Dome turf carries special significance for Cook.In 2014, he had his first 100-yard game there, with 122 yards on 23 carries in a 38-20 win. That was the first of five 100-yard games for Cook that season as he became the first freshman in program history to rush for over 1,000 yards (1,008).“It was kind of like a situation I got thrown into due to injuries,” Cook said. “They had confidence in me, and I took advantage of the opportunities, ran from there and kept building my momentum. I had to grow up quick and make the plays.”Last season, he broke Dunn’s program single-season mark and finished with 1,691 yards. Cook did not have a 100-yard rushing game this season until Sept. 24, when he had a career-best 267 yards at South Florida. He has had six 100-yard games in his last seven.With Florida State out of contention for a spot in the College Football Playoff, Cook has quietly put together what could be his best season. He is second among Power 5 running backs in rushing yards (1,242) and yards from scrimmage (1,642) while scoring 14 touchdowns.Syracuse Coach Dino Babers said Cook was among the fastest running backs in the conference, if not the fastest.“I thought he was really good,” Babers said, “but I didn’t know how fast he was until I saw the Clemson game, and I saw him run away from the Clemson secondary. We couldn’t run away from their secondary people.”Cook’s biggest improvement has been catching the ball. He has had two 100-yard receiving games this season, one of them in an Oct. 1 loss to North Carolina in which he became the first Florida State running back to have 100 yards rushing and receiving in the same game.“I mean, he’s always caught the ball well,” Fisher said. “But understanding how to run routes where leverages are and how to set holds — now he’s got certain things down, and he keeps adding to his repertoire.”Cook’s college career is most likely down to its final three games, including a bowl game. Syracuse (4-6, 1-5) is Florida State’s final A.C.C. game this season, followed by a Nov. 26 game at home against Florida.Cook said he would not discuss his future until after the season. However, he has been keeping a close eye on Ezekiel Elliott’s rookie season in Dallas and on how that could improve his draft stock.The status of running backs in the N.F.L. had been declining, Cook said, “but guys like Zeke, Melvin Gordon and Todd Gurley are doing a good job of showing how you have to have a running back to be successful.”“Zeke is really showing how the position is valued,” he added. “He can go 80 yards with it running or catching out of the backfield, and he can block well. Those are the types of guys you want to have.”Advertisement