
On Baseball By                     
 TYLER KEPNER
 
NOV. 16, 2016
If you thought the Electoral College was confusing, consider the 2016 American League Cy Young Award vote. After five routine elections, for the rookies of the year, the managers of the year and the National League Cy Young Award, things got really, really weird Wednesday night.Justin Verlander of the Detroit Tigers received 14 of 30 first-place votes from the baseball writers. Rick Porcello of the Boston Red Sox received eight first-place votes. And your winner is … Porcello?Yes, for real.“That’s the weird thing about these things — the voting,” the Washington Nationals’ Max Scherzer, the National League winner, said from a boat in the British Virgin Islands while on a conference call with reporters. “You never know how it’s going to actually shake out and how the writers actually view everybody’s season.”National League voters overwhelmingly chose Scherzer, who had a 2.96 E.R.A. and led his league in wins (20), innings (228 ⅓), strikeouts (284), walks plus hits per inning pitched (0.968) and strikeouts per walk (5.07). Scherzer, who became the sixth pitcher to have won a Cy Young in both leagues, collected 25 of 30 first-place votes, with the Chicago Cubs’ Jon Lester the runner-up.AdvertisementThe A.L. voters were divided in choosing among Porcello, Verlander, Cleveland’s Corey Kluber and others.The Baseball Writers’ Association of America, which established the Cy Young Award in 1956, assigns two writers from each league city to vote. Some news outlets, including The New York Times, do not allow writers to participate.I voted twice on the A.L. Cy Young Award before joining The Times, and both elections were easy — one unanimous decision for Roger Clemens, another for Pedro Martinez. A vote this season would have demanded much more consideration. The contenders were painfully close.“You get into those top three guys,” Porcello said, “everybody’s deserving of the award at that point.”That was true enough in this case. Porcello, Verlander and Kluber were separated by 0.11 in E.R.A., and each led the A.L. in multiple categories.AdvertisementFor Porcello, it was wins (22) and strikeouts per walk (5.91). For Verlander, it was strikeouts (254) and walks plus hits per inning (1.001). Kluber led in two advanced metrics: ERA+, which measures a pitcher’s E.R.A. relative to the league and adjusted for ballparks, and fielding independent pitching, which measures a pitcher’s ability to generate strikeouts while preventing home runs, walks and hit batters.Then there was Zach Britton, the sublime Baltimore closer, who was 47 for 47 in save opportunities. His 0.54 E.R.A. was the lowest in history for pitchers with at least 60 innings. But his 67 innings would have been the lowest total ever for a Cy Young Award winner, and no reliever has won the award since Eric Gagne of the Los Angeles Dodgers in 2003.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.Kluber collected three first-place votes and finished third. Britton collected five first-place votes and finished fourth. But first-place votes, of course, did not make the difference.The problem for Verlander was the rest of the ballot, which has five spots. The system awards seven points for first place, four for second, three for third, two for fourth and one for fifth. Porcello had 137 points to Verlander’s 132, making it the second-closest election since the only tie, between Baltimore’s Mike Cuellar and Detroit’s Denny McLain in the A.L. in 1969. Verlander lost by four points to David Price, then of Tampa Bay, in 2012.This was just the third time the Cy Young winner did not have the most first-place votes. The other races were much tighter in that regard: In the N.L. in 1998, Trevor Hoffman (13 first-place votes) lost to Tom Glavine (11), and in the N.L. in 2009, Adam Wainwright (12) lost to Tim Lincecum (11).Two writers — Bill Chastain and Fred Goodall, both of the Tampa Bay chapter — left Verlander off their ballots. Chastain, a well-respected beat writer for MLB.com, said he talked to lots of players, studied the candidates and took the vote seriously. He chose Porcello first, followed by Britton, Kluber, Chris Sale of the Chicago White Sox and Masahiro Tanaka of the Yankees.“I spent a lot of time on it, and I did the best I could,” Chastain said.Goodall, of The Associated Press, had a ballot of Porcello, Kluber, J. A. Happ of Toronto, Britton and then Aaron Sanchez, also of Toronto.Seven voters placed Verlander fourth or fifth. He got just two votes for second place while Porcello got 18. Porcello and Kluber were the only pitchers named on every ballot.Verlander’s inner circle was incensed. His brother, Ben, a Class A outfielder for the Tigers, posted three times on Twitter to Chastain, asking for an explanation. Verlander’s fiancée, the model and actress Kate Upton, said the Tampa Bay writers should be fired and suggested they were “paid off.” She also had a much more colorful post on Twitter that cannot be reprinted.AdvertisementAsked about those reactions on his conference call, Porcello sounded unfazed. He was once Verlander’s teammate with Detroit, and a bizarre, contentious vote was not about to spoil his celebration.“I honestly don’t care,” Porcello said from his parents’ home in New Jersey. “I’m not the one who made that decision, as far as who wins the Cy Young. All I know is that I’ve got a lot of people around me that I love very much and were instrumental in my success in getting to this point.”He added: “On top of that, we’ve got some really good bottles of wine that still need to be drank. So there’s really not a concern in my mind.”A version of this article appears in print on November 17, 2016, on Page B14 of the New York edition with the headline: Porcello Wins Cy Young, if Not Popular Vote.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.See More »