By THE ASSOCIATED PRESSAPRIL 28, 2017
STUTTGART, Germany — Maria Sharapova won again to move into the Porsche Grand Prix semifinals after beating Anett Kontaveit, 6-3, 6-4, on Friday.In her third match after a 15-month doping suspension, Sharapova converted five of her six break points.“I’m really enjoying myself,” she said.Sharapova will next face Kristina Mladenovic, who overcame Carla Suárez Navarro, 6-3, 6-2.Last year’s runner-up and home favorite, Laura Siegemund, upset second-seeded Karolina Pliskova, 7-6 (3), 5-7, 6-3, in a match that lasted more than three hours. She next faces the fourth-seeded Simona Halep, who defeated Anastasija Sevastova, 6-3, 6-1.AdvertisementOn Thursday, Mladenovic ousted second-ranked Angelique Kerber, the two-time defending champion, and she is one of several players who has criticized Sharapova for her doping violation. But Sharapova said she would not use it as added motivation in their semifinal on Saturday.Advertisement“I’m not someone that uses that as part of my comeback,” Sharapova said of comments against her from her peers, adding she prefers her tennis do her talking.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.“My results have spoken for everything that I should speak for. And that’s all that matters. The biggest part of my comeback is what’s out on the court and I will leave it at that.”Kontaveit had only five unforced errors in the first set, but Sharapova broke for 4-3 and won the next two games. She broke early in the second set, too, and then again for 4-2.Sharapova finished the match with four aces to raise her total for the tournament to 24.“I didn’t back off, I didn’t back down and those are kind of the moments that I like putting myself into,” said Sharapova, who won this indoor clay event three times from 2012 to 2014.A five-time Grand Slam champion and former No. 1, Sharapova entered the event on a wild card after losing her ranking because of the suspension.A version of this article appears in print on April 29, 2017, on Page D6 of the New York edition with the headline: Sharapova Reaches Semifinals in Germany.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.