AdvertisementSupported bySenators 2, Rangers 1 | Ottawa leads series, 1-0By Allan KredaOTTAWA — Turning the emotional page heading into a fresh playoff series would not take the Rangers long, Coach Alain Vigneault insisted before the puck dropped against the Ottawa Senators to start Round 2 on Thursday night.He said the new wave of verve had been detected “probably two practices ago.”“We are focusing on what we needed to do against a really good team,” Vigneault added. “We’re ready for the challenge.”If anyone would be ready for the Senators, it was goalie Henrik Lundqvist, who returned to sterling postseason form in the Rangers’ gutsy six-game conquest of the Montreal Canadiens in the first round.Lundqvist had to be ready in the first 20 minutes, making 21 saves to keep the game scoreless. But his 41 stops over all — many of them gymnastic and acrobatic — were not enough. Ottawa’s Erik Karlsson scored a seeing-eye goal with 4 minutes 11 seconds remaining in the third period to lift Ottawa to a 2-1 victory in Game 1.It was the first goal of the playoffs for Karlsson, who led the Senators in points this season. He shot the puck at an impossible angle along the goal line, and it banked off Lundqvist into the net.“He’s a skill player who became a star, and now he’s a winner,” Senators Coach Guy Boucher said. “I’d like to tell you I’m surprised, but it’s every day. That’s what great players do. He’s been showing that all year long.”Ottawa goaltender Craig Anderson made 34 saves. Game 2 is Saturday afternoon.Karlsson’s goal sent the Canadian Tire Centre crowd into a frenzy. The fans feverishly waved white towels with the words “All In” emblazoned in red.“That’s the life of a goalie,” Lundqvist said. “I make 100 decisions, maybe 150 or 200, but it comes down to one play. It’s a tough one.”Throughout the night, there was not much more he could do short of trying to rush the puck up ice himself.Lundqvist’s dynamic play helped the Rangers cling to a 1-0 lead until late in the second period. He carried over his scintillating performance from the Canadiens series, in which the Rangers forged three straight wins to advance.“We need him to be our best player, and he was phenomenal tonight,” Rangers center Derek Stepan said.Boucher said the Senators’ game plan had involved leveling as many shots against Lundqvist as they could muster.“Anything below 40 shots, we’re not going to score anything; we know that,” Boucher said. “He’s at the top of his game. We got a lucky one at the end. It served us well.”The speedy yet deliberate Senators, who finished with 4 fewer points than the Rangers but have home-ice advantage because the Rangers are a wild-card team, could not convert three early power-play chances.The Rangers scored first, at 7:10 of the second period, when Ryan McDonagh’s shot from the point on the power play eluded Anderson. Mats Zuccarello and Pavel Buchnevich had assists.Then it was back to work for Lundqvist, who kept recording save after save before Ottawa’s Ryan Dzingel knocked in a rebound on the power play at 18:39 of the second to tie the score.“You’ve got to make the other team pay for their mistakes, and we didn’t,” Vigneault said.The atmosphere in Ottawa was a departure from what the Rangers had experienced in the rabid and raucous Bell Centre against the Canadiens. Thursday’s game was not a sellout.The crowd grew more enthusiastic as the home team kept its composure against the favored and fast Rangers.As the game weaved its way through the third period, it was no surprise it was tight, considering the history between the clubs in recent years.All three previous games this season were decided by two or fewer goals, with Ottawa winning twice.“It’s about winning the tight ones,” Boucher said. “We heard from everybody how good they are, how they are going to crush us. Maybe there was a lot of fear that helped us. We expect them to bounce back even better next game.”SLAP SHOTSThe Rangers are facing two Canadian teams in the same playoff year for the first time since 1937, when they played the Toronto Maple Leafs and the Montreal Maroons before losing to Detroit in the finals.Advertisement