AdvertisementSupported byBy The Associated PressARLINGTON, Tex. — Joey Gallo has hit the hardest homer in the majors this season — and several of the longest.Gallo went to spring training not even knowing if he would make the Texas Rangers’ roster to start this season, but in a few short weeks he has played in all 22 games in place of the injured third baseman Adrian Beltre.There have been majestic home runs, the kind that have come to be expected in his short career. But the 6-foot-5, 235-pound Gallo is showing that he is more than just a slugger. He can field the ball, too, and is not too bad running the bases when not trotting around them.“For me, the home runs are going to be there,” Gallo said. “One of the things that always kind of frustrated me was people didn’t realize that I could actually play defense. People didn’t realize that I could run the bases. They just thought I was just a big donkey.”Gallo went into the Rangers’ day off on Thursday tied for the American League lead with seven home runs, all but one of them at least 422 feet. That included a 462-foot blast with an exit velocity of 116.1 miles per hour, according to Major League Baseball stats — the one that hit Rick’s Popcorn Wagon on the concourse well beyond the right-field seats.“He’s the guy that needs to be complimented on everything, just the complete game really, and he’s been playing that way,” Manager Jeff Banister said. “We talked about his defense, we’ve talked about the base running, the presence of mind on defense, and then engaged at the plate and putting really good swings.”Gallo, 23, who as a boy played on a Little League team in Las Vegas with Bryce Harper and Kris Bryant, also has four doubles, 16 R.B.I., 16 runs scored and three stolen bases. And in the field, Gallo has only one error in 58 total chances while playing every defensive out at third base for Texas.“I’m just starting to learn to trust my abilities and trust myself more in what I can do,” Gallo said. “I think I used to listen to other people’s opinions too much. I wouldn’t think I was good enough to be here because everyone else thought I wasn’t.”Beltre, 38, has been on the disabled list all season dealing with calf problems in both legs, and Banister indicated Wednesday before the Rangers’ 14-3 over Minnesota that there had been no significant progress in his recovery.Texas was trailing the Twins, 2-0, in the fifth when Gallo made a lunging backhand stab of a sinking liner by Jorge Polanco that appeared to be headed to the left-field corner, then threw to second to complete an inning-ending double play.Texas tied the score in the bottom of the inning and took the lead for good after Gallo was hit by a pitch to start the sixth and was then struck on the back of one shoulder by a catcher’s throw while scoring on a wild pitch. He had walked twice before that plate appearance.The Rangers picked Gallo 39th over all in the 2012 amateur draft, and he made an impressive major league debut on June 2, 2015, after Beltre went on the disabled list with a thumb injury. Gallo made the jump from Class AA with an upper-deck homer, a double off the top of the wall and a club record for a big-league debut, with four R.B.I.Gallo was initially with the Rangers about a month, staying to play some outfield after Beltre returned. He also ended that season on the roster.After striking out 19 times with just one hit in 25 big-league at-bats last year, Gallo looked as if he might be headed back to minors this year, as the Rangers had re-signed Mike Napoli at first base and had a crowded outfield. But then Beltre reported to training camp with calf problems that have not gone away.“When spring training started, I didn’t know if I would really have an actual chance to be on the team and make the team and be here,” Gallo said “So just to be here, be contributing to wins for this team, helping this team out, it’s pretty awesome.”Advertisement