By THE ASSOCIATED PRESSAPRIL 27, 2017
VANCOUVER, British Columbia — A chat toward the end of his playing career planted a seed in Travis Green’s mind.A veteran center at the time, Green had already thought about staying in hockey after retirement when a conversation with Paul Maurice, then his coach with the Toronto Maple Leafs, got him thinking.“We were just talking one day, and he gave me the advice: ‘You should be a coach,’” Green said. “It stuck with me.”Some 10 years later, Green was introduced Wednesday as the 19th head coach of the Vancouver Canucks, tasked with injecting youth and offense into a franchise that has fallen on hard times.AdvertisementGreen, a native of Castlegar, British Columbia, inherits a team that finished 29th in the N.H.L. and was near the bottom in several offensive categories, including setting a club record for futility with just 178 goals. That led to the dismissal of Willie Desjardins after three seasons in charge.Advertisement“We have to create more offense,” Green said. “Our special teams have to get better. I think there’s a way you can create offense nowadays with the way the game is played, but that’s definitely an area where we’ll have to improve.”Green, 46, spent the last four seasons coaching Vancouver’s top farm team, the Utica Comets of the American Hockey League. After retiring as a player, he joined the Portland Winterhawks as an assistant in 2009 before leading the club to the 2012-13 Western Hockey League title and an appearance in the Memorial Cup final as interim head coach.In his first news conference at Rogers Arena, Green, flanked by the Canucks president Trevor Linden and General Manager Jim Benning, fielded several questions about his style and approach, especially with young players, for a team that seems a long way from respectability.“I’m not sitting up here saying, ‘Hey, we’re going to win the Stanley Cup next year,’” Green said. “But I will tell you we’re going to get better. We’re going to start the process of building the right culture.”Part of that means getting young assets involved in the rebuilding program.The Canucks are still led by the identical twins Henrik and Daniel Sedin, who will turn 37 in September, but Vancouver has a promising group of younger players, including Bo Horvat, Sven Baertschi, Markus Granlund, Ben Hutton and Troy Stecher.Brock Boeser also impressed late in the season, while Jake Virtanen, another former first-round pick, spent most of 2016-17 with Green in the A.H.L. working on his game. Add in the Canucks’ acquisition of Jonathan Dahlen and Nikolay Goldobin before the trade deadline, and Vancouver’s having the second-best odds of winning Saturday’s draft lottery, and Green should have plenty to work with next season.Get the big sports news, highlights and analysis from Times journalists, with distinctive takes on games and some behind-the-scenes surprises, delivered to your inbox every week.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.“We need to get younger, it’s no secret,” he said. “We need to infuse more young players into the lineup.”AdvertisementGreen has no experience as an N.H.L. head coach, just as Desjardins had none he took over the Canucks June 2014. But Green, Vancouver’s fourth head coach since May 2013, has never been an N.H.L. assistant, either.That lack of N.H.L. experience apparently did not concern the Canucks’ brass, as Linden said Green had been the only candidate interviewed for the job, a process that took just two days.“We have a lot of faith in Travis,” Linden said, adding that other clubs expressed interest in Green’s services both last year and this spring.“We wanted to be really decisive,” Linden said.Green led the Comets to the Calder Cup final in 2015, but they were eliminated in the first round last season before missing the playoffs entirely in 2016-17, when a number of players who were expected to stay on their roster instead wound up in Vancouver.As an N.H.L. player, Green scored 193 goals and added 262 assists in 970 games over 14 seasons with the Islanders, the Anaheim Ducks, the Phoenix Coyotes, the Maple Leafs and the Boston Bruins. He played for the coaching greats Al Arbour and Pat Quinn, among others.“I’ve taken something from every coach that I’ve been under,” Green said. “I’ve not necessarily applied it, but learned from it to become the coach that I am today.”He comes to Vancouver with expectations that could not be lower for a team that missed the postseason three of the last four years.Desjardins made the playoffs in 2014-15 with 101 points but followed that up with a 75-point effort in 2015-16 and a 69-point campaign this year, as the Canucks pivoted into a full rebuild over the season’s final six weeks.AdvertisementWhile Desjardins was initially expected to guide an aging roster back into contention in the aftermath of Vancouver’s run to within a game of winning the 2011 Stanley Cup, Green will probably have more of a leash to develop the Canucks’ younger players, with less emphasis on the short-term results.“There’s pressure whenever you coach,” Green said. “I like challenges. I like when our team has a tough game, has a big game. You learn a lot about your team when you have a challenge.“I’m not nervous about it, I am excited about it.”A version of this article appears in print on April 28, 2017, on Page B13 of the New York edition with the headline: New Canucks Coach Seeks a Culture Change.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.