By CHARLY WILDERAPRIL 26, 2017
STUTTGART, Germany — The shock of blond hair was back. The menacing groundstrokes were back, likewise the breathy, rising shriek accompanying each monster return.In one of the most anticipated and contentious comebacks in women’s tennis, Maria Sharapova returned to the court Wednesday, the day her 15-month doping suspension expired, and defeated Roberta Vinci, 7-5 6-3, in the first round of the Porsche Tennis Grand Prix.Palpably excited spectators and journalists converged on the Porsche Arena to watch Sharapova, a five-time Grand Slam champion, come back from an early deficit to claim a decisive victory over the 36th-ranked Vinci.“It’s the best feeling in the world,” Sharapova said in her on-court interview after the win. “Those first few seconds before you enter the arena — it’s been a stage of mine since I was a young girl and to know that I’d be walking back on it was really special. I’ve been waiting for this moment for a long time.”AdvertisementShe had not played a match since losing to Serena Williams in the quarterfinals of the Australian Open in January 2016. About six weeks later, Sharapova, who was in the top 10 at the time, announced that she had failed a drug test after that match, testing positive for meldonium, a cardiac supplement that had recently been added to the World Anti-Doping Agency’s prohibited list. It is sold over the counter in her native Russia, and Sharapova said she had been taking it for 10 years for heart irregularities. She said she had not been aware that meldonium had been banned as of Jan. 1, 2016.AdvertisementSharapova, who turned 30 last week, was initially suspended for two years by the International Tennis Federation, but the penalty was later reduced to 15 months by the Court of Arbitration for Sport, which ruled it was too harsh given that her infraction was deemed unintentional.Barred from setting foot on site until Wednesday morning, Sharapova practiced at a small local tennis club until her suspension officially expired Tuesday at midnight. In the second round Thursday, Sharapova will play her fellow Russian Ekaterina Makarova, against whom she is undefeated.The decision to let the unranked Sharapova, whose ranking points expired during her suspension, enter the tournament as a wild card rankled many in the tennis community, who felt anyone convicted of a doping violation should have to work their way up from the bottom. A particular sticking point was the fact that Sharapova’s ban expired two days after the tournament’s main draw began, meaning she had to be granted a late entry to the event.Sharapova, who before her suspension was the top-earning female athlete for more than a decade, shares a sponsor, Porsche, with the tournament and has won the title here three times.Opprobrium swirled in the lead-up to Wednesday’s match, with Caroline Wozniacki calling Sharapova’s wild-card entry “disrespectful” to other players, and Agnieszka Radwanska, who lost to Makarova in the first round, saying Sharapova should not receive special treatment from Grand Slam events. Vinci, Sharapova’s opponent Wednesday, and Angelique Kerber, the top seed and world No. 2, voiced opposition to Sharapova’s wild-card entry ahead of the match.“I can’t control what people say, and I never have,” Sharapova said after the match. “The only thing I can control is what I do out there. I’ve always preferred to walk the walk, and I’ve done that by winning five Grand Slams and being No. 1 in the world.”Asked whether she agreed with the suggestion by her longtime agent, Max Eisenbud, that some of her critics want to prevent her from playing at next month’s French Open because “it’s their last chance to win a Slam,” Sharapova said: “I don’t control my manager’s words. He’s been watching everyone’s comments in the last 15 months, and he’s entitled to his opinion.”AdvertisementVinci tried to be gracious after her defeat, calling Sharapova “a great player” and saying it’s “good for the sport that she’s back.” But she reminded reporters that Sharapova is “back not after an injury — so she’s been practicing.”Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.Sharapova has secured two other wild-card entries for clay-court events in May, in Madrid and Rome. The next two Grand Slams, the French Open and Wimbledon, have yet to decide on wild cards for Sharapova, a past winner of both tournaments.“I’m being offered wild cards by the tournament directors and I’m accepting them to be able to compete in the draw,” Sharapova said. “I’m not receiving a wild card to receive a trophy and a golden platter.”Her supporters have argued that a 15-month suspension is ample punishment for an unintentional doping infraction, particularly given her achievements and the visibility she has brought to the sport.Her reception by fans Wednesday, initially lukewarm, seemed to heat up over the course of the match. She lost seven of the first eight points, but rallied to break Vinci’s serve twice to take the first set. She then jumped out to a quick lead in the second set and held on, finishing with 39 winners and 11 aces. By the time she celebrated her victory with a photogenic fist clench, it seemed she had won over the crowd.Despite the hovering cloud of controversy, Sharapova’s return no doubt comes as a relief to a women’s tour reeling from the news last week that the current No. 1, Serena Williams, perhaps the only player capable of drawing bigger crowds than Sharapova, is expecting her first child and will sit out the rest of the season.But a 15-month break presents no small challenge for Sharapova, whose career has been plagued by injuries.“I’m not an individual that’s angry or bitter, and over the past many months I was very much present in my life,” Sharapova said Wednesday. “There are a lot of things that I probably would have never done in my 20s. I was studying, I was working, I was learning, growing my business.“And as a woman, as a 29-year-old, it was very liberating,” she added. “So, was it the way I wanted to experience those things? Absolutely not, but I had the opportunity and I did.”AdvertisementSharapova bristled when asked whether she had made changes to her pre-match regimen or her medications.“That information is between myself, the WTA and my orthopedic doctor,” she said.The French Open said it would announce its wild-card decision May 16. Many expect Sharapova to be granted entry into the qualifying tournament rather than the main draw. But if she makes the final here Sunday, she would be guaranteed a spot in qualifying at Roland Garros.Based on her performance Wednesday, she has more than a fighting chance at earning her spot in France on the court, but she said she would take any opportunity to play.“I think I’d be prepared to play in the juniors if I had to,” Sharapova said.“Words and quotes and articles is not what matters in life, and I’ve learned that very well in the past year,” she added. “At the end of the day, what matters is what happens on the court, and that’s why I’m here.”A version of this article appears in print on April 27, 2017, on Page B8 of the New York edition with the headline: Unbowed, a Star Retakes the Stage.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.