By FRANK LITSKYJULY 15, 2017
Babe Parilli, a two-time all-American under Coach Bear Bryant at the University of Kentucky and then a quarterback for 15 seasons for five National Football League and American Football League teams, died on Saturday in Parker, Colo. He was 87.The cause was complications of multiple myeloma, Fran Black, a longtime family friend, said.Parilli came from the western Pennsylvania area that has produced such outstanding quarterbacks as Joe Namath, Johnny Unitas, Johnny Lujack, Joe Montana, Dan Marino and Jim Kelly.From 1949 to 1951, Parilli mastered Bryant’s new T-formation offense so well that he led his Kentucky teams to a 28-8 record.When he graduated with a degree in physical education, he was the N.C.A.A. career passing leader in completions (331), yards gained (4,351) and touchdowns (50). Those records have all been broken.AdvertisementIn 1982, he was elected to the College Football Hall of Fame. His biography there reads, in part:“Parilli brought national recognition as he introduced Bear Bryant’s T formation that baffled opponents and spectators alike. On the field or in the stands, you simply lost sight of the football once Parilli had it in his magical Houdini hands. Defenders tackled backs not carrying the ball as Parilli miraculously seemed to repossess it and toss it into hands that suddenly appeared from obscurity.”AdvertisementParilli put great trust in Bryant, one of the sport’s legendary coaches, most notably at the University of Alabama. In 1980, Time magazine recalled a hospital visit from Bryant the day after Parilli underwent shoulder surgery in 1950. Bryant threw a stack of new plays on the bed, the article said. It continued:“The plays were designed to let Parilli stand back in the shotgun offense and throw the ball after getting a long snap from center. ‘Learn them,’ the coach told his quarterback. Said Parilli: ‘I thought he was crazy. I could barely move. But I studied the plays. We were playing Louisiana State the next week, and on the day of the game he said, Get into that shotgun and start throwing until I tell you to stop. I did what I was told, and on the first 16 plays we threw 15 times. I never got touched. We won, 14 to 0.’ ”The Green Bay Packers chose Parilli (6 feet, 190 pounds) in the first round of the N.F.L.’s 1952 draft. Then came a career with the Packers (1952-53); the Ottawa Rough Riders of the Canadian Football League (1954-55); the Cleveland Browns (1956); the Packers again (1957-58); a second stint with the Rough Riders (1959); the Oakland Raiders (1960); the Boston Patriots (1961-67); and the Jets (1968-69).Parilli’s best seasons came with the Patriots, as five of his seven teams had winning seasons. With the Jets, he was Namath’s backup, playing on the 1968 team that stunned the Baltimore Colts, 16-7, in Super Bowl III.In 189 regular-season games in the N.F.L. and A.F.L., Parilli passed for 22,681 yards, 178 touchdowns and 220 interceptions. He was also an excellent holder for field-goal attempts and an occasional punter. He was chosen for the A.F.L. All-Star Game three times.When Parilli joined the Jets, Namath told The New York Times, “When I was in grade school, there were helmets with his name on them in the Army-Navy store.” Bart Starr, the winning quarterback in the first two Super Bowls, said: “He was my hero. I had pictures of him on the wall of my bedroom.”Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.Vito Parilli was born on May 7, 1930, in Rochester, Pa., outside Pittsburgh.After his playing career, he was an assistant coach for the Pittsburgh Steelers, the Denver Broncos and the Jets; head coach of the New York Stars and the Chicago Winds in the short-lived World Football League; and head coach of several teams in the Arena Football League.He is survived by his son, Vance; his brother, August; and his sister, Martha Edge.In 2007, Parilli told Patriots.com: “I don’t go to the games. I usually just watch it on the tube. It’s time to let other people do it and enjoy my life. I enjoyed all of it. I never felt I had a job. I looked forward to all of it, playing and getting knocked around.”Matt Stevens contributed reporting.A version of this article appears in print on July 18, 2017, on Page A21 of the New York edition with the headline: Babe Parilli Dies at 87; Standout Quarterback With ‘Houdini Hands’.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.