By BILLY WITZJULY 15, 2017
BOSTON — The way the Yankees have unraveled recently, as Saturday night’s game dragged on and each opportunity went unfulfilled, it might have seemed as if it were one more torturous chapter in a season going awry.But the Yankees were at long last rewarded for their perseverance, pushing three runs home in the 16th inning to outlast the Boston Red Sox for a 4-1 victory that took 5 hours 50 minutes to complete.It was an exhilarating victory for the Yankees, who drew to within three and a half games of the first-place Red Sox, and it gives them a boost of energy they could soon need. After a day-night doubleheader on Sunday, they will fly to Minneapolis for a three-game series against the Minnesota Twins and then travel to Seattle for a four-game series.“We wanted to win this one bad, and we needed to for a lot of reasons,” reliever Tyler Clippard said. “For us to come out on top was huge.”AdvertisementMatt Holliday belted a home run off Red Sox closer Craig Kimbrel to begin the ninth, sending the game into extra innings and giving Kimbrel his first blown save of the season at Fenway Park.AdvertisementShortstop Didi Gregorius also helped the Yankees. In a slump at the plate, he began the game on the bench, but he delivered the go-ahead hit, a looping liner to center.“I’ve been struggling lately with guys in scoring position and finally came through today,” said Gregorius, who had just two hits in his previous 32 at-bats and had hit a soft liner with two runners aboard for the first out of the 14th inning.But the most redemptive performances came from the Yankees’ bullpen, which has a major-league-worst 18 blown save opportunities, including one by closer Aroldis Chapman in Friday night’s loss. Seven Yankees relievers bolstered a fine performance from starter Luis Severino, shutting out the Red Sox over nine innings.Get the big sports news, highlights and analysis from Times journalists, with distinctive takes on games and some behind-the-scenes surprises, delivered to your inbox every week.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.Doing the heavy lifting were Jonathan Holder, who pitched a scoreless 11th, 12th and 13th, and Ben Heller, who threw the two final innings, yielding no hits and earning a win.Heller had appeared in only one other game this season, giving up a game-ending infield hit in an 11-inning loss to the Los Angeles Angels last month. That was the start of a skid that had sent the Yankees to 19 losses in 26 games before Saturday. Heller, who had not pitched in nine days, said he spent nearly four hours stretching.“In the minor leagues, I pitch in a lot of close games, but it’s kind of tough to simulate the adrenaline that you get in a game like this,” Heller said. “I think I was trying to be very conscious of that and really stay under control as much as possible.”Nevertheless, Heller and Holder were most likely headed back to Class AAA Scranton/Wilkes-Barre to allow the Yankees to import some fresh arms for the doubleheader. Late Saturday, the Yankees bumped Bryan Mitchell — the scheduled starter for the opener — in favor of C. C. Sabathia, who had been set to start Monday against the Twins.AdvertisementThe Red Sox played Saturday’s game under protest, arguing that Holliday should have been called out for interference in the 11th inning. With Holliday on first, Jacoby Ellsbury hit a grounder to first baseman Mitch Moreland, who threw to second to force out Holliday. But Holliday, thinking that Moreland had stepped on first, pivoted and ran back to first, which prevented Moreland from getting back to the bag to receive the return throw.The home-plate umpire, Gary Cederstrom, went to the replay to see if the play was reviewable, according to a pool reporter. But Cederstrom said interference calls were not reviewable. Major League Baseball will rule on the protest.“I don’t know the rule exactly,” Holliday said of the play. “It’s crazy.”Until Holliday’s home run, a rousing victory and a long night did not seem to be in order for the Yankees. Chris Sale, the Red Sox’ ace, turned in a masterly performance, striking out 13 and allowing only three hits and walking two in seven and two-thirds shutout innings. Sale has been dominant against the Yankees in his career, lowering his E.R.A. against them to 1.17 over 12 appearances, nine of which have been starts.But Severino was nearly as good as Sale, allowing only a sacrifice fly by Moreland in the third inning — even if his performance was largely forgotten by the end of the night. When Gregorius’s single in the 16th was followed by another run-scoring hit by Austin Romine and a sacrifice fly by Gary Sanchez, the Yankees had something to celebrate.“It’s a huge win for this team with the way some of the things have gone,” Manager Joe Girardi said.A version of this article appears in print on July 16, 2017, on Page SP3 of the New York edition with the headline: Desperately Seeking a Win, the Yankees Find One in the 16th Inning.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.