By SARAH LYALLJULY 14, 2017
You don’t want to be half an hour late for an appointment with someone as chronically irascible as John McEnroe. But instead of verbally abusing me when I confuse the time for a recent lunch in Manhattan, McEnroe does something more unsettling: He fails to respond to my apology or even acknowledge that anything has happened. Low-grade irritation wafts off him.The situation is not alleviated when the glass of water I nervously grab from the table turns out to be his.“Help yourself,” he says.He still has the joltingly familiar in-your-face voice and brash manner of a New Yorker perpetually protesting a parking ticket. But McEnroe, now 58, is at a fragile juncture in the career that hit its peak in the early 1980s, when he spent four years as the world’s No. 1-ranked men’s tennis player.McEnroe has his rich second-act life, as perhaps the sharpest and most interesting tennis commentator on television, but he will soon be too old, he says, to compete even on the senior tennis circuit that has helped sustain him for many years.Advertisement“I’m near the end of my rope,” he says.Transitions are a subject of his latest memoir, “But Seriously,” a sequel of sorts to “You Cannot Be Serious,” his 2002 account of his earlier life and times. (That earlier title is an allusion to his famous meltdown at Wimbledon in 1981, the one in which he also referred to the umpire as “the pits of the world.” With the passage of time, the once-horrifying incident is now a source of delighted nostalgia for the British.)AdvertisementThe new book discusses, among other things, what it is like to be on “the dark side of the dividing line,” as McEnroe puts it, to have to figure out what to do next when you’re nearing 60 and so many things that drove your early life are no longer possible.“In essence, my story for the last 15 years has been the continual process of trying to figure it out for myself,” he says.Nearly as wiry as the rock stars he sometimes hangs around with, McEnroe works out three days a week and plays tennis three days, often with the young people at his tennis academy on Randalls Island (on the seventh day, he rests). Cursed by reflexive self-flagellation, he is blessed by high metabolism.By now he is midway through his radicchio salad, and by some mysterious process has managed to procure a fresh water glass for himself. “Could I order, like, a pasta with Bolognese?” he says to a passing waiter. There seems to be no menu on the table. “Do you want anything?” McEnroe says, after the waiter leaves.“But Seriously” is a baggy hodgepodge of a book, the work of a talker rather than a writer, roaming over topics as restlessly as McEnroe once roamed the court. It addresses questions people who have followed him since his headband-wearing Superbrat days might have, such as: Is he less angry now? (Yes, because of the court-mandated therapy he attended during the collapse of his first marriage, to Tatum O’Neal, and because of the tempering influence of his second wife, the singer-songwriter Patty Smyth.)Also: Does McEnroe still keep in touch with his 1980s rival Bjorn Borg, whose inscrutable Swedish cool was the perfect foil for his pugnacious Queens agita?“Ninety-nine percent of the time I’m wearing Bjorn Borg underwear,” McEnroe declares (this apparently includes right now). He visits Borg, whom he describes as “the only guy I didn’t have a problem with at some point or another” on the circuit, whenever he goes to Sweden.Advertisement“There’s a seniors event in Stockholm, so I try to make sure that No. 1, I go and see him because he’s not really playing much anymore, and b., he’ll say, ‘Come to the store and I’ll give you some underwear,’” McEnroe says. He keeps close track of where they both are in life. “He’s doing really well. He’s two and a half years older than me, and he just had a birthday. He’s 61.”A new film exploring their rivalry, “Borg/McEnroe,” which stars an obnoxious Shia LaBeouf as McEnroe and the hunky Swedish actor Sverrir Gudnason as Borg, is scheduled for release in September.At one point, McEnroe says, he approached Nike, which has sponsored him since the late 1970s (one of the buildings on its campus in Beaverton, Ore., is named after him), with the idea of putting out his own line of underpants.“That to me is like a no-brainer — it would be huge,” he said.He explained: “A lot of the rap guys started wearing those clothes that seem to be four sizes too big for them. And they wear the hats without taking the tags off. They were laughing all the way to the bank. And I’m like: ‘They’re wearing these shorts that go down to their ankles. This is crazy that people think this makes sense. Let’s get some regular underwear, three pairs for 15 bucks — we’ll all go home happy.’”Like many of McEnroe’s ideas, including his short-lived career as a TV game show host, this one did not work out. But he has multiple projects going on, some connected to tennis, some connected to the art gallery he owns in Downtown Manhattan, and some connected to other things.We get on the topic of annoyance, a two-step process for McEnroe. First he becomes irritated at someone or something else, then he becomes irritated at himself.Take what happens when fans accost him in public. “People come up in the middle of lunch and say, ‘I don’t want to bother you,’” he says. “If you didn’t want to bother me, why exactly are you bothering me?”Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.He goes on: “But then I think, ‘what an’” — here he calls himself a rude name — “you are. This person’s asking you for your autograph and you’re like, ‘How dare you?’ You don’t want to make them feel like a peon just because you’re having lunch.”The McEnroe who appears in the Wimbledon broadcast center a few weeks later seems like a different person. Relaxed and funny, his pugnaciousness now coming across as playfulness and combative self-mockery, he is in his element here.AdvertisementHe has gone from being an enfant terrible to an éminence grise, beloved of even the staid BBC, which encourages him to be as colorful as possible. (He divides his time between commentating for the British broadcaster and for ESPN.)In between our previous encounter and this one, he has managed to wade into a typical McEnroean controversy by saying that Serena Williams would be ranked “like 700 in the world” if she played on the men’s circuit.It’s annoying, he says, because a., he has tremendous admiration for Williams and b., he didn’t really mean to say what he did.“I was just sort of taken aback by the lady’s comment,” he says of the interviewer who prompted his remark. “When she said, ‘Why don’t you just call her the greatest player that ever lived?,’ I should have said that she’s a great player but trying to compare was like apples and oranges.”Now he’s in the ESPN booth with Chris Fowler, calling Andy Murray’s match against the Frenchman Benoît Paire. (Murray wins the match but loses in the quarterfinals.) The narrative for the day is Paire’s tendency to psych himself out and fail to capitalize on critical moments.“I put myself inside their head,” McEnroe says of the way he approaches commentating. “But it’s not me playing — my style’s different and I don’t want it to be like, ‘Well, if I played, I’d do this.’ It’s not about me, it’s about them.”Paire is a perfect subject for the McEnroe mind-meld because he so obviously lets himself down just when he needs to dig in. He’s diving wildly for balls but missing and ending up flattened in various configurations on the grass.“I always love players diving,” McEnroe says on the air. “It’s one of my favorite moves.”In one disastrous sequence, Paire goes down, skins his knee, then goes down again, possibly hurting his other knee; it’s hard to tell from the broadcast booth. Paire calls for the trainer to examine him during the changeover, then waves him away.Advertisement“What’s Paire complaining about now?” McEnroe asks.“He’s losing some skin,” Fowler says. “He’s about to lose his serve.”“The truth is he didn’t need the trainer in the first place,” McEnroe says, “so that sort of got into his head and threw him a little bit, and by the end of the game he realized that’s not what he should have done, and he’d given away his chance. Welcome to Benoît Paire’s world.”Back in New York a few weeks earlier, we’re very much in McEnroe’s world. We’re talking fast because of the missed half-hour. He’s telling me about his recent experience at the French Open, in which he played senior doubles with a new partner, Cédric Pioline of France. “I’ll never play with him again,” McEnroe says.He explains, “He was a really nice guy, but we weren’t clicking and I was just like not feeling it.” Also, they did not practice enough before the match. “I don’t like going out and not being ready,” he says. “I didn’t hit enough serves. I didn’t hit enough returns. I wasn’t on the court enough.”But surely that wasn’t Pioline’s fault?“Well, it was, a little bit,” McEnroe says. “We had to play at 11 and I said, ‘Let’s get there at 9:30.’”Lunch is winding down. I don’t realize it, but McEnroe is about to take the ball I lobbed into the air an hour ago and smash it into the far end of the court for a down-the-line winner.“He showed up at 10:35,” he says of Pioline. He looks at me, a little glint in his eye. “It was sort of like you showing up late to lunch.”A version of this article appears in print on July 15, 2017, on Page D1 of the New York edition with the headline: 58 and Still Fussing.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.