By KATE WALKERJULY 15, 2017
SAKHIR, Bahrain — It is a few minutes before the pit lane opens for the beginning of qualifying for the 2017 Bahrain Grand Prix, held in April. In a small room on the ground floor of the Race Control tower, their faces lit blue by the glow of a bank of computer screens, sit the race stewards, the referees of Formula One.For the next hour, the four stewards will be watching for simple rule violations like cutting a corner to gain an advantage and speeding in the pit lane, or the more dangerous weaving and impeding a competitor.In a sport that involves competition at hundreds of miles an hour, safety is paramount. Accidents can always happen, so the job of the stewards is to ensure that drivers do not pose unnecessary risks to other drivers and the trackside volunteers — a group that includes medical teams and fire crews, as well as the marshals, whose duties include waving the colored flags that give drivers instructions and removing disabled cars from the track.Adjudicating the action on the track involves using the wealth of data generated by each car to determine whether anyone should be penalized for offenses such as light contact and collisions, or whether the matter is simply what is considered “a racing incident” (accidents that are a result of multiple cars fighting for the same corner, scenarios in which no one is to blame).AdvertisementFormula One is a particularly data-rich sport. Each car logs terabytes of data during a grand prix weekend: positioning information on the track; onboard video of laps; driver inputs to pedals and steering; and information on the health and efficacy of the thousands of components that make up the car, including tires and the engine control unit.AdvertisementIt is this data — and radio traffic, TV broadcast footage and closed-circuit TV — that Formula One stewards use to determine whether an incident requires “no further action” or a penalty following an investigation.“We’ve got real-time telemetry coming in to an F.I.A. database system,” said Chris Bentley, head of information technology strategy for the International Automobile Federation, referring to it by the French abbreviation. “That software links to our marshaling system, so in Race Control, the stewards’ room and our software engineers can compare real-time telemetry with video, audio and the track map.“The incident system actually tracks the cars and will detect an incident. If a car has stopped, it will flag it automatically. It will send out an audible alert, which comes on in Race Control and the stewards’ room to signify a yellow sector. All of our systems are interlinked. The weather service talks to the team client to send weather data, for example.“We bring together a number of systems, using data from the timing loops, on-car GPS systems, plus two forms of radio communication,” Bentley said. “We have data coming back in lots of different ways. We can see real-time diagnostics of the steering wheels and dashboards of the cars. We give the teams raw data which they can then put in their systems to display on their screens.”At every Formula One Grand Prix, four stewards will monitor the action on the track, investigating and assessing possible infractions that are viewable onscreen and those reported by the competing teams or by trackside marshals. The stewards report violations to the clerk of the course, who passes them to Race Control, which determines whether the incident demands investigation.In addition to relying on technology and data, one of the stewards at every grand prix is a former driver. His role is to provide an element of “cockpit context,” explaining scenarios from a driver’s point of view.Danny Sullivan, an Indianapolis 500 winner and former Formula One driver, is a regular steward. “That’s part of the reason we’re driver stewards,” he said. “We’re supposed to understand from their position, more to benefit them than to catch them in something.”AdvertisementSullivan brought up an incident at the Singapore event, in which data on a car’s throttle position came into play. “The first corner is always a bit tricky,” he said. “You’ve got the open runoff area, then a left, and then a right and a left. In this particular situation, the driver came down and cut straight across the middle [of the off-limits runoff area]. He said: ‘I was forced to go across there. There was someone there,’ but his steering wheel was pointing straight and his foot was on the gas. We’re not stupid: What about the throttle trace?”Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.Because the stewards rotate among the races, the F.I.A. has turned to technology to ensure consistent decisions. The 2017 season has seen the introduction of the Incident Database, a searchable system that allows stewards to access recent incidents tagged and categorized by type — such as collisions, track-limit violations and potential blocking — and stores videos of each incident and the paperwork relating to each decision.Where possible, decisions will be made during the race, ideally within a few laps. Stewards request telemetry data from the relevant cars and use that information in conjunction with multiple onboard feeds and varying video angles to determine whether a driver is at fault.Incidents that are unclear are investigated after the race, and drivers and other team personnel are often called in to plead their cases and provide supporting data.Penalties include fines, often $5,000 to $16,000, for speeding in the pit lane; time penalties; and drops in a driver’s starting position. When possible, penalties are applied during the race, with drivers forced to wait five or 10 seconds before their mechanics can touch the car during a pit stop, but more-complicated incidents can take time to unravel.Where penalties are issued after the race, stewards can add a time penalty to the driver’s result, which often drops him down the finishing order, or they can apply starting-position penalties at the next race. In extreme circumstances, dangerous driving can result in a one-race ban.More typically, drivers will accrue reprimands for minor infractions, similar to points on a normal driver’s license. Any driver receiving three reprimands in a season — at least two of them for driving offenses — will receive a 10-place drop on the starting grid at the next race.Olivier Hulot, an F.I.A. software analyst, said, “What the stewards access generally is car speed, throttle, pedal trace, braking, brake pressure, steering and roll acceleration, lateral acceleration; the sort of thing that will tell them what a driver has done in that corner.”Hulot said: “If you have two drivers, and one is saying, ‘He didn’t leave me any room,’ you can see if the driver turned into the other one or not. The stewards have access to the information, and that information is the same as the team has. We do compare.”On that Saturday night qualifying event in Bahrain, however, there was nothing for the stewards to look into beyond some minor pit lane speeding. As the paddock outside celebrated the maiden pole position of Valtteri Bottas of Mercedes, the stewards sorted through paperwork, the bank of screens behind them showing nothing but empty racetrack.A version of this article appears in print on July 15, 2017, in The International New York Times.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.See More »