By FILIP BONDYJAN. 16, 2017
Gary Sanchez, the young catcher and face of the rebuilding Yankees, stood behind a counter Monday afternoon and prepared two sandwiches for starry-eyed customers at the Bullpen Deli Twin Donut on 161st Street in the Bronx. The current team’s greatest slugger somehow cobbled together a turkey, lettuce and tomato concoction on a roll, with mayo. Then he created a simpler ham and cheese.“No knives!” urged Jason Zillo, the Yankees’ director of publicity and media relations, concerned that Sanchez might accidentally wound himself.Sanchez’s wardrobe at the deli — his pinstriped No. 24 uniform and accessorized chef’s hat — clearly demonstrated that rules are changing on the fly for the Bombers. After four seasons without a playoff victory, the haughty, dynastic Yankees have come to the realization that they must mix with the common folk if they are to persuade more fans to buy into this painful renewal program.This week, during a four-day campaign titled “Winter Warm-Up 2017,” several young Yankees and a few veterans will serve up sandwiches, visit senior centers and make phone calls to season-ticket holders to thank them for their support.AdvertisementThis is the kind of stuff the Mets used to do during their so-called winter caravans, when they were dealing with the frequent reality of being overshadowed by the Yankees in New York. But the Mets abandoned that tradition more than a decade ago in order to assemble players earlier in Port St. Lucie, Fla., to prepare for the coming season. And these days they seemingly don’t need a caravan to sell tickets — they’re a good team with a bunch of marquee players who made it all the way to the World Series in 2015.AdvertisementSo, startling as it might seem, it’s the Yankees’ turn to hit the pavement and make themselves better known. While it is hard to imagine Derek Jeter or Alex Rodriguez ever agreeing to work at a bodega in January, the current campaign is more feasible because the Yankees’ roster has turned over and is generally fresher and less grizzled. Players are more willing to do publicity stunts in the middle of the winter.Whether it helps to sell more tickets is, of course, another question. Baseball attendance has a way of reflecting performance, and last season, the Yankees lacked both big names and big victories. What resulted was a continuing slide in attendance — to be exact, a drop of 130,390 fans, according to the Baseball-Reference website — that must be worrisome to Yankee ownership and, combined with the revival of the Mets, raises the possibility that the city’s baseball pecking order is on the cusp of a major reversal.Get the big sports news, highlights and analysis from Times journalists, with distinctive takes on games and some behind-the-scenes surprises, delivered to your inbox every week.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.Consider: In 2014, the Yankees drew 3,401,624 fans and had an average attendance of 42,520 fans per game, trailing only the Los Angeles Dodgers and the St. Louis Cardinals. That same season, the Mets ranked 21st in attendance, drawing 2,148,808 fans and an average crowd of 26,860.By 2016, the Yankees had fallen to sixth in attendance, attracting 3,063,405 fans and an average of 37,819. The Mets drew 2,789,602 fans that year — an increase of 219,849 from the previous season — for an average of 34,870, the ninth best in baseball.Over the course of just three seasons, the attendance gap between the two clubs had narrowed from more than 1.2 million fans to fewer than 300,000.That brings us to the deli and to Sanchez, a 24-year-old native of the Dominican Republic who tore up the American League last season with 20 homers and 42 R.B.I. in 53 games after he was recalled from Class AAA Scranton/Wilkes-Barre on Aug. 3. More than any of the Yankees’ other young players, Sanchez has already proved his potential merit.“It was a good season for me, but that’s past,” he told a pack of reporters Monday, through an interpreter, after his sandwich duty was done. “I have to focus on this season, hopefully make the playoffs. I don’t feel any pressure at all. Just got to keep doing the same things. What kind of results, we’ll have to see.”AdvertisementAfter the interviews, Sanchez posed for selfies with fans and signed autographs in the back of the deli. Again, it was hard to imagine Roger Clemens or Jorge Posada performing such tasks in the same kind of setting.“It’s exciting to go into the neighborhood and spend some time with people around us,” Sanchez said.He sounded and looked very young. Now, he just has to win a few championships, keep the Mets at bay. Call that a hero sandwich.A version of this article appears in print on January 17, 2017, on Page B7 of the New York edition with the headline: From Yankees, Ham and Cheese and Humble Pie.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.See More »