By SCOTT CACCIOLAMARCH 29, 2016
OAKLAND, Calif. —  Once upon a time, Sadiki Fuller made his living by dressing up in a skintight bodysuit. Foam-enhanced muscles formed mountain peaks on his arms, and he wore a blue mask framed by a lightning bolt that swept toward the heavens.Fuller played the role of Thunder, the onetime mascot of the Golden State Warriors — a fading and sometimes forgotten piece of franchise lore.A trampoline-bouncing, basketball-dunking, uniform-wearing superhero, Thunder was banished to the mascot junkyard in 2008 when the Oklahoma City Thunder were set to debut. It was a sad bit of nickname confluence that meant the mascot had to go. The Warriors never replaced him.Fuller, who was inside the costume when Thunder made his grand entrance in 1997, entertained fans for five seasons before he left to pursue a career in comedy. Playing the role of Thunder was fun, Fuller said, but not without its challenges. The Warriors back then were not the record-breaking deities that they are now. Their overall record during his tenure was 97-281.Advertisement“Steph Curry would have made my job so easy,” Fuller said in a recent telephone interview from his home in the Los Angeles area. “You know how hard it is to get 18,000 people to scream when they feel like the team is just going to lose again?”Fuller got his start in the business under the tutelage of Jerry Burrell, a former mascot for the Houston Rockets. Burrell assembled a squad of costumed trampoline dunkers that roamed the country performing shows, and Fuller, who had trained as a gymnast, joined the team.Advertisement“Incredibly gifted,” Burrell said. “He really understands what makes people tick, which is one of the things that makes him great as an entertainer.”As a part of its travels, the squad made regular appearances at Warriors games. During the 1996-97 season, the Warriors relocated to San Jose Arena while their facility in Oakland, now known as Oracle Arena, underwent renovations. The team tried to draw new fans — or at least distract the old ones from the on-court mess — by unveiling a mascot named Berserker, who did not exactly dazzle crowds. It was a brief experiment.“Berserker died after one season,” said Brett Yamaguchi, the Warriors’ director of game operations.Fuller, who got to know members of the team’s production crew through his work with Burrell’s dunk squad, felt that the Bay Area market had untapped mascot potential. The Warriors were planning to rebrand upon moving back to Oakland for the 1997-98 season, with a new logo that featured a lightning bolt. Soon, Thunder was born. Fuller got the gig.“I was living the dream,” Fuller said. “I still can’t believe I got that opportunity.”Fuller felt obliged to help sell people on the team, he said, because the Warriors were not — how to put this mildly? — setting the region ablaze. He recalled running into the lobby of a bank near the team’s offices — in full costume, no less. That alone was a startling sight, and then Fuller opened his mouth and said, “This is a stickup!”In hindsight, Fuller said, it was not the most judicious way to build a connection with the community.Advertisement“I was overzealous when I first got the job,” he said.Nobody making a deposit that day recognized Thunder as an N.B.A. mascot. Most were under the impression that a less-than-sane person in a superhero outfit was attempting to rob the bank until Fuller backflipped out of the lobby while shouting, “Go Warriors!”When Fuller returned to the team’s headquarters, he was met by several members of the team’s front office. They had received word of his marketing ploy.“They were like, ‘Listen, it’s great that you’re doing everything with so much enthusiasm, but you can’t run into banks,’ ” Fuller said. “I was young. I didn’t get it.”Fuller was only a few months into the job when Latrell Sprewell choked P.J. Carlesimo, who was then the team’s coach. It was an infamous episode that was, in so many ways, a sign of things to come. Those were lean years for the Warriors, who never won more than 21 games in each of Fuller’s five seasons with the team.“But he took his bag of tricks and became a star there,” Burrell said. “There are still people who are like, ‘My God, Thunder was the best.’ Because there wasn’t anything else going on. The team was that bad. But Sadiki came in there and started doing things that they had never seen before.”Courtside, Fuller said, he met luminaries like Johnnie Cochran, the famed lawyer, and Roger Craig, the former 49ers running back. Fuller recalled playing a full-court game of one-on-one against Chris Mullin. Shaquille O’Neal once spent 15 minutes trying to remove Thunder’s mask.“Like, man, can’t I have a secret identity?” Fuller said.Thunder was often responsible for the game’s few highlights. He was like an action figure come to life. While the Warriors occupied themselves by bricking jump shots, Thunder spent timeouts soaring for dunks. The aesthetics of the costume itself were a stark departure from industry standards, and fans were receptive.“He was sleek and muscular,” Yamaguchi said. “Up to that point, most teams had these mascots that were fluffy and huggable and kind of clumsy.”AdvertisementThere were on-the-job hazards, however. As Fuller put it, “With any superhero, you’re going to have some limitations.”Velcro, for example, was dangerous. Any contact with the material was harmful to the structural integrity of the costume.Also, Fuller wore wraparound sunglasses under his mask, which gave Thunder a sleek, buglike look. The problem was that the lights occasionally dimmed in the arena, making it tough for Fuller to see. Darkness only increased the degree of difficulty on many of his stunts: leaping from the top of backboards, riding motorcycles, jumping off trampolines.Get the big sports news, highlights and analysis from Times journalists, with distinctive takes on games and some behind-the-scenes surprises, delivered to your inbox every week.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.“We always did an extravagant entrance,” Fuller said. “We worked our hardest to do something amazing before the start of each game.”One such installment of amazingness involved Fuller descending from the rafters by rope and harness, except that he got distracted and slammed his head against the court.“I got up and went to the team huddle,” Fuller said, “and all the players were like, ‘You O.K., man?’ ”There were other close calls. Thunder was not waterproof. Fuller made an appearance at a birthday party, he said, where a group of children pushed him into a swimming pool.“I don’t know if you’ve ever had a thin layer of spandex over your face,” Fuller said, “but when that gets wet, you can’t breathe.”AdvertisementFuller made dozens of public appearances each season, showing up at school functions and store openings in addition to performing for fans at the team’s 41 home games. Thunder was unique in that he was allowed to speak. (Most mascots are not.) But things tended to get uncomfortably warm in that suit. Once in a while, Fuller caught a break.“Maybe it’s a 10-minute thing and you’re just running through somebody’s office, like, ‘Hiiiiii! It’s a happy birthday telegram from the Warriors!’ ” he said.But the work was usually more strenuous. Fuller laundered his Thunder outerwear regularly.“I mean, Spider-Man did his own laundry, too,” he said.Several others played the role of Thunder for the Warriors after Fuller left for his new career in Los Angeles, but the mascot’s days were numbered.Not so long ago, Thunder was actually spotted working in China — a production crew from the Warriors reported that he had fallen in love with a young woman there — so perhaps he was able to sidestep mascot purgatory and land a second act overseas.As for the Warriors, the team appears determined to go mascot-free for now. During all those losing seasons, Thunder filled a vital role. But these days?“The show,” Yamaguchi said, “is on the court.”A version of this article appears in print on March 30, 2016, on Page B10 of the New York edition with the headline: A Warriors Superhero in Downtrodden Days.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.