
Global Sports By                     
 CHRISTOPHER CLAREY
 
MARCH 26, 2016
Richard W. Pound never won an Olympic medal, and he finished a distant third in his only campaign for president of the International Olympic Committee.But when the histories of this tumultuous sports era are written, Pound will most likely play a significant role.He has had quite a journey for a Canadian tax lawyer, one that has included views of both sides of the fence. He once defended the about-to-be-disgraced Ben Johnson and later served as the first president of the World Anti-Doping Agency, which he helped found.Love him or loathe him, but please always quote him. Pound became a pivotal figure at a time when the running and the jumping, the shooting and the scoring, have so often been overshadowed by the scheming and the cheating.AdvertisementThis latest period has provided little relief, and Pound, 73, is still in the fray. His sound bites still bite, and as chairman of the WADA independent commission that delivered a damning two-part report on Russia’s widespread doping problems, he is still charging hard at big issues, be they international track and field’s allegedly corrupt former leadership or Maria Sharapova’s credibility.AdvertisementA self-described “cynical optimist,” Pound surveys the landscape — or is it a wasteland? — and sees material to suit the duality within.“It is good in the sense that a lot of things are being exposed, and people are being forced to deal with them,” he said in a recent interview.So is this positive momentum at last?“I think it could be,” he said. “I’ve been kind of naïve. I thought Ben Johnson could have been a tipping point, but it wasn’t.“I thought Festina could have been a tipping point, but it wasn’t,” he added, referring to the 1998 Tour de France doping scandal. “But I think this is more broadly serious, and even some of the idiots that run international federations are starting, starting to get the point that this could all dry up if they don’t deal with the issue. The public is getting pretty inured to the fact that competitions are fixed, and they will stop watching and then sponsors will stop sponsoring and then it could all go down the tubes.”Pound, president of WADA from 1999 to 2007, concluded long ago that bons mots were a necessary complement to back-room diplomacy. His double-barreled approach has sometimes misfired, but it did generate the requisite sense of urgency at a critical moment for antidoping.“It became apparent pretty quickly that I needed to be provocative,” Pound once said. “I’ve always said I’m happy to be known by the enemies I make in this.”He has made plenty. Hein Verbruggen, the former president of the International Cycling Union, was once one of Pound’s prime targets. He wrote last week on the website Around the Rings that Pound was interfering with due process with his public statements, needed to be checked and had “used/abused his position in WADA — and therefore WADA itself — for his own political position and for settling personal accounts.”AdvertisementPound’s legacy looks a great deal more secure than Verbruggen’s at this stage, but Verbruggen raised another important point. With WADA’s influence and role expanding, there needs to be a watchdog keeping WADA in check, too.Get the big sports news, highlights and analysis from Times journalists, with distinctive takes on games and some behind-the-scenes surprises, delivered to your inbox every week.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.“I think it would be CAS,” Pound said of the Court of Arbitration for Sport.That may not be enough, given everything else on CAS’s plate. But Pound insists that it is time for WADA to sharpen its teeth and wield its power to declare sports organizations noncompliant with its antidoping code more convincingly.He said more investigations like the one his committee recently concluded should be part of the plan. That two-pronged investigation — begun in response to news media reports — cast further light on doping in Russian track and field and on duplicity in the sport’s international governing body, the I.A.A.F., whose former president Lamine Diack faces charges of corruption and money laundering in France.“I think WADA has to change from being a cheerleader to a regulator, and I think we did that with this investigation,” Pound said. “Taking on athletics as the No. 1 Olympic sport and taking on Russia, arguably the No. 1 country, you’ve got everybody’s attention. So if you’re cheating at handball or biathlon or something like that, you’ve got to be saying, ‘Holy moly, if they are taking on athletics and taking on Russia, what are they going to do to me?’ ”Pound expressed doubt that Russia’s track and field athletes, suspended from international competition, would be reinstated in time for the Rio Olympics in August. He flashed back to a September conversation with Vitaly Mutko, Russia’s now-embattled sports minister.“In the famous Baur au Lac,” Pound said of the Zurich hotel where FIFA officials were arrested, “we said: ‘We’ll point the way, but the onus is going to be on you to show that there’s genuine change. You probably can’t demonstrate culture change in a matter of months, but you can certainly demonstrate conduct change, and if you can satisfy everyone that the team you send will be clean and will not have any residual benefits from any doping programs they’ve been on, maybe, maybe you can do it by the time of Rio.’“But there’s been a lot of lost time, and the I.A.A.F. working group, they’ve got some good people on it, and they are not going to want to look like lackeys themselves.”Pound has been praised for his role in leading the independent committee but also accused of turning soft on the day he delivered the second part of the report in January by backing Sebastian Coe, the new president of the I.A.A.F. Coe was a longtime vice president under Diack and was — if Coe is to be believed — phenomenally out of the loop when it came to Diack’s behavior.AdvertisementTwo months later, Pound said that his thinking had not changed and that he believed federation presidents like Diack had traditionally had so much latitude that Coe’s claim to have been in the dark was plausible. Pound does not agree that he bailed Coe out.“There were a couple of questions: Do you think he’s lying? And I said: No. I don’t think he’s lying. He said he didn’t know, he didn’t know,” Pound said. “And then I said, with all the skill sets that he possesses and having been elected where you had a pretty obvious and stark choice between two candidates of different caliber, in my view, give him a chance to do it. It’s still his game to lose if he doesn’t do it properly. But he’s probably the best one to do it now.”Coe trudges on while Pound, still making admirers and enemies, continues his journey with a spring in his step.It has been nearly 30 years since he defended Johnson, the star Canadian sprinter who had tested positive for the steroid stanozolol after beating Carl Lewis for gold in the 100 meters at the 1988 Olympics in Seoul. Pound, an I.O.C. vice president at the time, said he thought he got that dirty job because he was “the only Canadian lawyer in Seoul.”“They brought him down to my hotel,” Pound said. “And I took him down the hall to the bathroom and closed the door and I said, Ben, are you on anything? And he looked me right in the eye and said, ‘Nope.’ ”Johnson was soon stripped of his gold medal, and Pound, a former Olympic swimmer, of his illusions.“In the end, I think the right result was reached, but it was an eye opener for me,” Pound said. “The disappointing thing was that it did not seem to have any impact on the sport community. Ten years and it’s Festina.”That scandal at the 1998 Tour de France, which revealed systemic doping among many cycling teams, led to the creation of WADA, conceived by Pound and others as a counterweight to federations poorly policing themselves.They are still at it, as the latest round of hand-wringing makes clear. And for all the duality within Pound and the rest of us, cynicism seems a more rational approach at this stage than optimism.A version of this article appears in print on March 27, 2016, on Page SP9 of the New York edition with the headline: Loved and Loathed, a ‘Cynical Optimist’ Keeps Up the Fight.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.See More »