By ANDREW KEHMARCH 28, 2016
COLUMBUS, Ohio — For the United States men’s national soccer team, this seems like a good time to be back in Columbus. The team has performed well in the hospitable confines of Mapfre Stadium over the years, and it will be desperate for a victory on Tuesday against Guatemala.A shaky run in its World Cup qualifying campaign produced another stumble Friday, when the United States lost, 2-0, to Guatemala in Guatemala City. The result dropped it to third place in its group in the semifinal round of World Cup qualifying, with a 1-1-1 record. The top two teams in the four-team group advance to the next round.“We need to win this game,” Coach Jurgen Klinsmann told reporters Monday.With all their urgency, the players will have the comfort of knowing they have historically done well in Columbus. The American men have played 10 matches in the city, going 7-0-3 — including a 6-0-2 record in World Cup qualifying — while conceding only one goal.The Americans have played in seven straight World Cups. They conceded two quick goals last Friday in Guatemala, handing their opponents the shutout. The United States had not lost to Guatemala since 1988, a run of 21 games.AdvertisementA victory on Tuesday — in a game being characterized in all quarters as a must-win — would help to put the team back on track and quell some of the anxious chatter that has once again emerged around the squad.AdvertisementFor instance, criticism of Klinsmann’s coaching abilities and decision-making skills, which has simmered over the years but never quite boiled over, bubbled back after the loss last week. On Monday, he was questioned about his lineup choices for that game, with some suggesting that he had not deployed his players at their best possible positions.Michael Orozco started that game at center back, even as he has struggled to earn regular playing time at that position at Club Tijuana. Klinsmann then deployed Geoff Cameron, who seems more comfortable in the middle, at right back and pushed DeAndre Yedlin, who has been playing as a right back for Sunderland, up to the wing.Get the big sports news, highlights and analysis from Times journalists, with distinctive takes on games and some behind-the-scenes surprises, delivered to your inbox every week.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.Klinsmann said he appreciated the discussion, but he remained defiant.“I’m not playing anyone out of position,” he said. “I know that Geoff Cameron can play right back and center back. I know Yedlin can play right wing or right back. This is a good thing for us to have, because we try to put the pieces together the best way possible in order for them to fit.”The team will have other uncertainties in its roster. Klinsmann said on Monday that midfielder Alejandro Bedoya had sustained an ankle injury on Friday and might not be available to play on Tuesday night.Guatemala may not be at full strength, either. As of Monday afternoon, there was some uncertainty over whether the team’s top striker, Carlos Ruiz, who is involved in a legal dispute over a property in his home country, would be allowed to travel to Columbus. The team announced early in the day that he had been cleared to travel, but conflicting reports emerged from Guatemala over the course of the day.A version of this article appears in print on March 29, 2016, on Page B13 of the New York edition with the headline: Home Field Offers U.S. Crucial Jolt of Optimism.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.