By ANDY KENTMARCH 28, 2016
KEY BISCAYNE, Fla. — Not even the hometown favorite and three-time defending champion, Serena Williams, or the men’s No. 2 player, Andy Murray, is immune to the spate of bad luck that has befallen players at this year’s Miami Open.Williams, the top-ranked woman, was upset by No. 19 Svetlana Kuznetsova, 6-7 (3), 6-1, 6-2, in her fourth-round match Monday, immediately after No. 2 Agnieszka Radwanska lost to No. 20 Timea Bacsinszky in three sets, 2-6, 6-4, 6-2. Soon after Williams’s match, Murray, who is from Scotland but owns a home in Miami and trains at Crandon Park, fell to No. 26 Grigor Dimitrov of Bulgaria in the fourth round, 7-6 (1), 6-4, 6-3.It is only the second time Williams has failed to reach the quarterfinals here and the first time since she lost in the same round to Jennifer Capriati in 2000.“It’s obviously disappointing, but I’ve won here a lot, so it’s O.K.,” Williams said in a brief news conference after the match.Tournament organizers would do well to channel Williams’s positivity after virtually all the fan favorites have exited in the first week, either by losing or because of an illness. Ticket sales for the remaining days are certain to reflect that trend.AdvertisementOnly three of the top eight seeds and four of the top 10 advanced to the round of 16 (No. 1 Novak Djokovic, No. 6 Kei Nishikori, No. 7 Tomas Berdych and No. 10 Richard Gasquet). Those match the lowest numbers in tournament history going back to 2005.AdvertisementIt started Friday when Switzerland’s Roger Federer, ranked and seeded third, withdrew shortly before his scheduled match with Argentina’s Juan Martín del Potro because of a stomach virus. He had hoped to make his return from arthroscopic knee surgery after missing seven weeks but felt too weak after warming up.A day later, in humid conditions, No. 5 Rafael Nadal retired in the third set of his opening match against Damir Dzumhur of Bosnia, citing dizziness. He was trailing, 3-0, at the time after winning the first set, 6-2, and losing the second set, 6-4. Dzumhur also complained of dizziness during the match and called a medical timeout at one point, but Nadal hinted that he might have been experiencing something similar to Federer.“Hopefully, it’s the beginning of a virus, and in combination with the conditions, I had these strange feelings,” Nadal said Saturday. “Even with very bad conditions, I finished a lot of the matches in my career because I didn’t want to retire. But today I was suffering for my health, so I didn’t know what’s going on. I decided to stop because I was not sure that I can finish the match that way.”Get the big sports news, highlights and analysis from Times journalists, with distinctive takes on games and some behind-the-scenes surprises, delivered to your inbox every week.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.Williams said she was not bothered by Monday’s temperature of 91 degrees, a record high for the date in Miami, pointing out that she was used to this weather and practiced in it regularly. During her match, she did not request a towel to dry off her grip and hands nearly as often as Kuznetsova, but she committed 55 unforced errors compared with just 18 by her opponent.Meanwhile, Radwanska did appear to be affected by the heat and humidity, especially because of the stark contrast with the dry conditions she had played in during the BNP Paribas Open in Indian Wells, Calif. “We all know that here it’s always very tough and always very humid, especially coming from Indian Wells, where it was really dry,” she said. “But the conditions are the same for everyone, so you just try to prepare for that as good as you can.”Venus Williams, Serena’s older sister, was upset in the second round Friday by the Russian qualifier Elena Vesnina, and on Saturday, No. 4 Stan Wawrinka lost to Andre Kuznetsov, 6-4, 6-3. No. 8 David Ferrer lost his third-round match Sunday to France’s Lucas Pouille, 6-7 (1), 7-6 (4), 7-5.Serena Williams, 34, who fell two matches short of a calendar-year Grand Slam in 2015, losing in the semifinals of the United States Open in September, has not won a tournament since before the United States Open. It is the longest title drought for Williams since 2011-12. She emphasized that nobody put more expectations on her than herself, but she bristled at observations about her movement on the court.“I don’t think it’s appropriate to criticize my movement right now,” Williams said. “I did the best that I could, so to the fans, I did the best that I could today, and I can’t win every match. These players come out, and they play me like they’ve never played before in their lives. So, you know, it’s the best that I could do today, and I have to be 300 percent every day.”A version of this article appears in print on March 29, 2016, on Page B14 of the New York edition with the headline: Williams and Murray Are Swept Up in Miami Open’s Wave of Surprises.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.