By TYLER KEPNERJUNE 13, 2016
Teams needing an impact hitter this summer — and, perhaps, for the next few years — have a new opportunity.Yulieski Gourriel, a third baseman who defected in February from Cuba, was declared a free agent on Monday. Gourriel, 32, was widely considered the island’s best player.He is also known to be a Yankees fan, and the Yankees badly need an impact hitter in the middle of their order. The Mets are also missing several important hitters in their lineup.One scout who has seen Gourriel but who requested anonymity to candidly share his evaluation called him “advanced” — a very good hitter who profiles as an everyday player.Get the big sports news, highlights and analysis from Times journalists, with distinctive takes on games and some behind-the-scenes surprises, delivered to your inbox every week.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.But teams have had mixed results with Cuban players in recent years. Some have been bargains, like Jose Abreu of the Chicago White Sox (six years, $68 million) and the Mets’ Yoenis Cespedes, whose first contract with Oakland was for four years and $36 million.AdvertisementBut others have been busts so far, like Boston’s Rusney Castillo (seven years, $72.5 million) and Atlanta’s Hector Olivera, who signed for six years and $62.5 million with the Los Angeles Dodgers before being traded to the Braves and is now serving a suspension for violating baseball’s domestic abuse policy.AdvertisementThe Yankees bid aggressively last spring on Yoan Moncada, a second baseman who signed with the Red Sox for $31.5 million. Moncada, 21, was hitting .299 with 36 steals in Class A through Sunday.Gourriel defected with his younger brother, Lourdes Gourriel Jr., an infielder and outfielder. Their father was a star player who once managed the Cuban national team, and other relatives have been prominent players.“Yulieski is one of the most beloved we have here, from the people to the government,” Ismael Sene, a baseball historian who hosts a weekly television program in Havana, said after the brothers defected in February. “It’s a sad day because it means our baseball is falling apart.”Cuba’s loss could soon be a major league team’s gain, for this pennant race and beyond.A version of this article appears in print on June 14, 2016, on Page B13 of the New York edition with the headline: Cuban Star Is Declared a Free Agent.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.