By PAT BORZIJUNE 12, 2016
MILWAUKEE — Mets Manager Terry Collins appeared perfectly fine about two and a half hours before Sunday’s game at Miller Park. Speaking to reporters in his office, Collins reviewed his limited options off the bench: Second baseman Neil Walker (stiff back) and outfielder Michael Conforto (sore wrist) were not starting, and Collins hoped to give shortstop Asdrubal Cabrera his first complete day off this season.“Managing in the minor leagues, you’re used to it because it happens all the time,” Collins said. “In ’84, I had to activate myself to give us enough players to play. If you’ve done it as long as I’ve been doing it, it’s just part of the game.”But less than an hour before the start, Collins, 67, felt ill and headed to nearby Froedtert Hospital for tests, accompanied by the trainer Ray Ramirez. The bench coach, Dick Scott, who last managed with Class A South Bend in 1997, took over for Collins, the oldest manager in the majors. The Mets’ assistant general manager, John Ricco, said Collins walked out of the clubhouse and would remain overnight for observation and more tests.Collins and Ramirez watched on television, Ricco said, as the Mets lost, 5-3, to Milwaukee, a mess of a game featuring five errors — three by the Mets — and several head-scratching plays.Advertisement“He was probably a bit agitated, knowing Terry,” Ricco said. “But other than that, he was feeling fine.”AdvertisementRicco said Ramirez and a Brewers team doctor examined Collins in the Mets’ clubhouse.“He just said he wasn’t feeling well,” Ricco said. Most players knew nothing about what had happened to Collins until Scott informed them 30 minutes before the game, just before starter Steven Matz headed to the bullpen to warm up.“I saw him walking and talking, asking for his stuff when he was escorted out,” right fielder Curtis Granderson said.Then the Mets went out and lost for the second consecutive day to a club they had beaten five consecutive times, bringing an unsatisfying end to a 5-5 road trip.Brewers starter Zach Davies limited the Mets to one hit through six scoreless innings before allowing a double to Kelly Johnson and a single to James Loney to start the seventh. Davies departed and was ultimately charged with a run when Johnson scored. Matz allowed five runs, four earned, on nine hits in six innings. The Mets trailed by 5-0 when Matz left, then chipped back with Johnson’s run in the seventh and two more in the eighth.Neither club took batting practice on the field, and major league teams abandoned regular pregame infield practice years ago. Whether that contributed to the ragged play, including four throwing errors in the first five innings, was up to the beholder. Granderson attributed the Mets’ misplays to fatigue after a 10-day trip, not concern about Collins.“None of that had anything to do with whatever ended up happening to Terry,” he said.On a cool, sunny afternoon, the mistakes commenced almost immediately. Milwaukee’s Aaron Hill bounced a throw to first in the first inning. Mets left fielder Alejandro De Aza threw wildly past second in the bottom of the inning.In the second, when Milwaukee scored three, Matz’s misfire on a sacrifice bunt by Davies allowed two runs to score. With Davies on first base in the fifth, third baseman Wilmer Flores threw away Jonathan Villar’s bunt, leading to two more runs.Advertisement“It wasn’t great for sure, turning routine plays into little bit of a disaster there,” Scott said. “It’s the first game we’ve had like that all year long. After early in the game, we could have phoned the rest of the game in, but they continued to play.”In the eighth, Villar, the Brewers’ shortstop, mishandled a leadoff grounder by pinch-hitter Juan Lagares, which was generously scored a double. Granderson, whose bat has come alive the last few days, singled sharply to right for one run. A long double by Yoenis Cespedes brought in another.A one-out infield single by Kevin Plawecki in the ninth brought the tying run to the plate, but Brewers closer Jeremy Jeffress struck out pinch-hitter Conforto and retired Granderson on a grounder to first.Afterward, the Mets quietly packed their gear and headed for the airport, minus their manager.“It was tough,” Matz said. “We’re all concerned about him, definitely.”Get the big sports news, highlights and analysis from Times journalists, with distinctive takes on games and some behind-the-scenes surprises, delivered to your inbox every week.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.INSIDE PITCHBefore he left, TERRY COLLINS said TRAVIS d’ARNAUD, on a rehab assignment with Class A St. Lucie, was about “seven or eight days away” from rejoining the Mets. D’Arnaud caught Saturday for the first time. “One of the things you would like to see when he’s been out as long as he is are back-to-back games,” Collins said. JOHN RICCO, the ranking Mets executive on the trip, concurred, adding the Mets might move him up to Class AA Binghamton or Class AAA Las Vegas later in the week. … The Mets added a bullpen arm Sunday, calling up ERIK GOEDDEL and optioning Logan Verrett, Saturday’s starter, to Las Vegas.A version of this article appears in print on June 13, 2016, on Page D3 of the New York edition with the headline: Mets Lose Again After Collins Takes Ill.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.