By RYAN GOLDBERGJUNE 13, 2016
It took Norman Casse almost three months to tell his father, Mark, that he wanted to become a racehorse trainer just like him. He had secretly fallen in love with horse racing while attending college in Louisville, the home of the Kentucky Derby, and now he was afraid of what his father might say.“I had heard before,” Norman recalled. “‘You don’t have it in you. You don’t have what it takes.’ And he was right, I was a lazy kid.”Their conversation started obliquely. “I picked a fight over something else because I didn’t want to tell him straight up,” Norman said. “And then when I told him, it was a big relief, because he said, ‘Why didn’t you say so?”’Norman then drove straight from Florida, where his father owns a farm in Ocala, to Woodbine Racetrack in Toronto, where his father was a leading trainer.AdvertisementThat was almost 10 years ago. Norman didn’t take a day off for two years.“I feel like I helped change the culture of the barn,” said Norman, now 32. “I bring in a lot of enthusiasm.”AdvertisementIt was contagious. Of his  father, who is 55, Norman said, “I think I jump-started his excitement for horse racing again.”Together they have become one of the most successful stables in North America, with more than 160 horses based in Kentucky, New York, Florida and Canada. On Tuesday, their ascent reaches England, at the five-day Royal Ascot meeting. They will saddle their superstar 5-year-old mare Tepin in the Group 1 Queen Anne Stakes.Leading up to the race, British bookmakers offered her as the favorite, ranging from odds of 3 to 1 to 4 to 1.Tepin already beat some of the best from Europe in last year’s $2 million Breeders’ Cup Mile in Kentucky. That was her first time facing the boys, and this will be her second. She is well-traveled domestically but has never been abroad. Unlike American races, Ascot’s Queen Anne is held over a straight, undulating mile. Mark Casse admits he is anxious.“We have a champion filly that is at the top of her game, and we’re going to take her out of her element,” he said. “We have a lot to lose by going.”It’s a sporting gesture. Tepin could have run as a shorter-priced favorite in New York a few days ago for similar prize money to the Queen Anne. But her owner, Robert Masterson, who purchased Tepin as a yearling for $140,000, has long dreamed of a chance like this.Norman originally had his reservations. But after each of Tepin’s four victories this year, all of them easy, he has thrilled to the trip. “I never thought I’d be this excited about it,” he said.AdvertisementTepin always showed talent. As a 2-year-old, she won a half-million-dollar race on dirt. But it was as a 4-year-old, with an unbroken campaign in turf races, when she began to mature and kick clear of fitness issues. She had always been fast, but a new jockey, Julien Leparoux, helped her relax. Since then, only a head and a nose separate her from 11 consecutive victories. Norman has rarely left Tepin’s side. At first this was because of their location — Tepin began her career in Kentucky, where Norman is the stable’s main assistant.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.“I wouldn’t dare pull her away from him now,” Mark said with a laugh. “He’s done so well with her.”Norman readily admits that his family gave him a head start in the business. But he was green when he went to work for his dad. In fact, he was afraid of horses. “I had to get over my fear and that took a long time,” he said.Throughout his childhood, he resented horse racing. It kept his father on the road and away from him. Norman grew up in Louisville and saw his father in Toronto only during the summer or on the occasional winter break in Florida. Those trips became almost nonexistent after he joined his high-school baseball team.Mark, however, has known little else. When he was 5, his father — also named Norman — moved his family from Indiana to Ocala. The elder Norman had started buying and breeding racehorses, but now wanted to open his own farm. Florida was easier to crack than traditional Kentucky.The elder Norman, who died in March, also helped found the Ocala Breeders’ Sale Company in 1974. He remained its chairman for 28 years. Along the way he trained and bred and sold horses.While his peers read textbooks, Mark devoured bloodstock guides, sales catalogs, and racing newspapers. He began training at 17. “It’s the only thing I’ve ever wanted to do my whole life,” he said.But he may have lost some of his desire by the time Norman, his oldest son, joined him. In 2010, Norman’s enthusiasm put them at a turning point. They had become the top stable at Woodbine, but Norman wanted more. New owners were sending them expensive horses. He told his father that they should send horses to Churchill Downs, where Mark had been leading trainer in 1988.“I told him, ‘Kentucky frustrates me,”’ Mark said. “But he was right. As we grew, we needed to expand and have more places to run.”AdvertisementBy last year, they rose to fourth in North America, with earnings of $13.7 million from 896 starts. But Mark was well aware of his record in important races outside Canada, including the Breeders’ Cup, where he was 0-for-23. And then in October, Catch a Glimpse won the Juvenile Turf Fillies, Airoforce lost the male counterpart by a neck, and Tepin conquered the Mile.In a televised interview after her stunning victory, Mark grew emotional. His ailing father watched from home, but he was surrounded by his family, among them his key assistant.“It was a lot for me to take, and it all came out then,” Mark said.  “We showed we could beat the best in the world, and I felt like without Norman we couldn’t have done that.”A version of this special report appears in print on June 14, 2016, in The International New York Times.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.See More »