
Sports of The Times By                     
 WILLIAM C. RHODEN
 
JAN. 16, 2016
I first heard the name Altee Tenpenny about 10 years ago.His aunt, a longtime friend and a sports aficionado, predicted that I would be hearing about her nephew in years to come. I’ve heard that many times about many people over the years, but in this case, she was right.Altee Tenpenny began to get a name. After a sensational sophomore season at North Little Rock High School in Arkansas, he exploded onto the college football recruiting landscape as a big-time prospect.He verbally committed to Alabama in January 2012 and signed his letter of intent with the Crimson Tide the following February.I thought about Tenpenny after Alabama defeated Clemson to win the national title. Amid the confetti and the blaring bands, I thought, “He should have been here.”AdvertisementIn many ways, he was. The Alabama team dedicated the championship run in his honor.Tenpenny was killed in October when his car veered off the road on Mississippi Highway 1 as he returned from Louisiana. He was driving to Little Rock from Nicholls State in Louisiana, where he had been dismissed from the football team after his arrest on charges of possessing of a firearm and discharging a weapon.It was the low point for a former high school star who never regained his equilibrium after an initial disappointment. He wanted to hit the reset button on his career and on his life.The short life of Altee Tenpenny is instructive on many levels.It is the story of a high school star going to college, where he is dwarfed by brighter stars and struggles to flourish.Get the big sports news, highlights and analysis from Times journalists, with distinctive takes on games and some behind-the-scenes surprises, delivered to your inbox every week.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.“Being top dog, then going to the back of the line,” said Bobby Williams, the Alabama special teams coordinator. Tenpenny was part of a freshman running back class that included Derrick Henry, this season’s Heisman Trophy winner.As Henry and Kenyan Drake, one year their senior, surged, most of the action Tenpenny saw was on special teams.Advertisement“I loved Altee,” Williams said. “He did a great job for us on special teams. He was popular, well-liked and respected.“But the process starts over. Some kids have a harder time with that. It’s a big transition for them.”Tenpenny’s mother, Shenitta, said the familiar narrative — a high school star who feels diminished — was only partly accurate. Altee wanted more playing time, but he did not begrudge other players’ getting it. In fact, Henry credited Tenpenny with helping him improve.“He was always a team player,” Tenpenny’s mother said. “He believed that if one was winning, we’re all winning.”He put himself in the doghouse with well-publicized blunders, like being caught with marijuana in his car and being late for a meeting and getting sent home. Had he not been on the football team at Alabama, no one outside his immediate family might have known or cared. The double-edged sword of attending a high-profile sports factory is that people do watch and do care. There were signs even in high school that national notoriety was having an effect. How could it not?“There were a couple times when I had to reel him back,” said his high school coach, Brad Bolding. “ESPN is talking about you and Nike is inviting you out to Oregon to participate in contests. The attention gets to be like a drug.”What makes the college sports industry unique is that it runs on the flesh and blood of supple young bodies. In a competitive arena for these vital human resources, recruiters are almost obliged to become confidence men and women who work extraordinarily hard to win a family’s trust.Mike Groh began recruiting Altee for Alabama during Altee’s sophomore season. He visited the family’s home and went to church with them. Even after Altee broke his ankle and missed his junior season, Groh stayed connected.Advertisement“I wholeheartedly believed in Altee,” Groh said during a telephone interview. “Not only athletically, but the kind of person that he was and the character that he showed.”I could tell that Groh was holding back tears.“I just believed that this is the kind of kid that does well at Alabama,” he said.But Groh never got to be at Alabama with Tenpenny. After Tenpenny signed with the Crimson Tide, Groh left the program to take a job with the Chicago Bears as the wide receivers coach. Tenpenny could have left like the new employee who sees the boss who hired him suddenly leave the company.“I feel like things could have been different if I hadn’t left,” Groh said. “I think I could have been somebody there for him, who understood the kid, and the things that were important to him.”Tenpenny wanted more playing time and thought he could get it elsewhere. He transferred from Alabama after two seasons as a reserve running back. He landed at U.N.L.V., where he was suspended by a new coach for missing team obligations. He then went to Nicholls State and was dismissed after the firearm episode.“It just breaks my heart that he didn’t get to fulfill his dreams,” Groh said Saturday. “In my heart, I believe that he was meant for better than the way it finished.”College athletics is more of a business than most of the families involved ever imagine. They read the stories and watch the games, but they have no idea what it’s like until they get caught up in the machinery.The head coach is the chief executive whose livelihood depends on the willingness of 18- to 21-year-olds to give their minds and bodies to the corporation.AdvertisementThursday was the first day recruiters could make contact with recruits. The highways are filled with coaches hounding 17- and 18-year-old football stars, and near-stars, convincing them that their program is the right fit. This process will go on until Feb. 3.Tenpenny’s mother was overwhelmed by the recruiting process and, once her son enrolled, by the business of a big-time college sports program.After her son’s death, she established a foundation in his name to educate unsuspecting parents — and parents who think they know — about the pitfalls and blind spots of recruiting.“I didn’t know about all of this,” she said. “People need to be prepared for the game — on the field and off the field.”There is a tragedy here, but no villain.Young college players come and go every season. Players make mistakes. So do coaching staffs. Altee Tenpenny’s death was illuminated because he was a popular player on a national championship team.Last Monday, I stood in the midst of the Alabama team’s celebration. Nights like those remind fans, coaches and players what makes the business of college sports worthwhile.But the life and death of a young star remind us of the cost of doing business.Email: wcr@nytimes.com A version of this article appears in print on January 17, 2016, on Page SP2 of the New York edition with the headline: Alabama Player’s Misfortunes Typify the Pitfalls of College Sports .  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.See More »