
On Soccer By                     
 SAM BORDEN
 
JUNE 13, 2016
ST.-DENIS, France — There was the time Zlatan Ibrahimovic suggested that his own dominance sent an entire country (Denmark) into retirement. There was the time he denied rumors he had purchased a Porsche by saying he actually bought a plane because it was “much faster.” There was the time he described an opposing team (Chelsea) as “11 babies.”And, of course, there was the time Ibrahimovic was asked what sort of gift he had given his longtime partner, Helena, for her birthday.“Nothing,” he said with a straight face. “She already has Zlatan.”Ibrahimovic has always had the gift of chatter. He is among the most quotable players in the world, a giant of a man with a never-ending braggadocio that comes off (most of the time) as amusing instead of arrogant. He is, as he will tell you, a legend.He is also old, at least in soccer terms. He will turn 35 this fall, a number that is not insignificant for a player who turned professional in 1999 and who, on Monday night here at the Stade de France, made his 114th appearance for Sweden in a 1-1 tie with Ireland in the European Championships.AdvertisementThis was an important game for Ibrahimovic in an important tournament: This is his home, after all, at least for a little bit longer. Yes, he said goodbye to Paris St.-Germain last month; typically, he told the news media he would consider staying if Paris gave him the Eiffel Tower. But Paris has been his city and France his country for the past four seasons.It feels, too, as if this could be Ibrahimovic’s send-off from the biggest stages of international soccer. Sweden did not qualify for the World Cup in Brazil two years ago, an absence that grated on Ibrahimovic. In an interview that spring, Ibrahimovic did his best to make light of how he would feel not being in Brazil — he said he was planning to go hunting and might not even watch the tournament — but in a quieter moment he allowed that he was aware there might not be many more chances.AdvertisementHere, at the Euros, he has one more chance to shine with the world watching. There could be opportunities at his next club — though Manchester United, thought to be the leading contender, is not playing in the Champions League next season — but that will be different. With Sweden, Ibrahimovic is the singular focus, the captain, the sun around which the rest of the team revolves and the light that envelops everything around it. At Manchester United, even if he helps claim a Premier League title, Ibrahimovic will never be bigger than the club.So he has these few weeks, these few chances. On Monday, he looked focused as he waited in the tunnel before the game, a fierce gaze on his face as he led his teammates onto the field. Then, as he often does, he slumbered into the early phases of the game, jogging and walking and shouting at his teammates as the pace of the game rarely went faster than a canter.Earlier in his career, Ibrahimovic was a firecracker, liable to explode at any moment. There were free kicks and bicycle kicks, charging headers and whistling shots that needed little more than an inch of space to be unleashed. Ibrahimovic would stalk and plunder a defense’s back line. He would pounce.Now, it is a bit different. Ibrahimovic can still shred a truly inferior defense — as was evidenced on more than one occasion in the French league — but he frequently needs time to build into a match, to get his legs and his body rolling downhill.Get the big sports news, highlights and analysis from Times journalists, with distinctive takes on games and some behind-the-scenes surprises, delivered to your inbox every week.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.In Monday’s match, the signs began to show close to halftime. Ireland essentially man-marked Ibrahimovic, hounding him away from the ball and near it. Yet before the halftime break, there was a moment, near midfield, when Ibrahimovic came on to a bouncing ball and controlled it deftly at his feet, spinning all the way around and going away from an Irish midfielder while the crowd gasped at the fluidity of his whirl. Nothing much came of it — a long pass followed and rolled out of play — but the magic was there.Then, on the hour, there was more. A cutting run into the penalty area by Ibrahimovic left him just in front of an Ireland defender as Martin Olsson crossed the ball toward the goal. Ibrahimovic lashed at the ball with his left foot, slashing it out of the air with power, but the ball skipped just wide of the post. Another gasp, another moment.AdvertisementFinally, 10 minutes later, and with Ireland leading through a Wes Hoolahan volley, Ibrahimovic delivered. A precise passing sequence around the Ireland penalty area led to Ibrahimovic’s sprinting on to a pass near the end line and astutely curling the ball back across goal. It was one of those crosses that are disasters for a defense: too close to let go and too tight to the goal to try to spin away while retreating. Ciaran Clark, the closest defender, did his best, but his momentum was too much, and the ball caromed off his head and into his own net.Ibrahimovic’s speed carried him into the advertising boards behind the goal, where his teammates surrounded him as if he had scored. Sweden had its goal and, a bit later, its first point of the tournament. With games against Italy and Belgium still to come, advancement is hardly guaranteed. But then, with Ibrahimovic, defeat is never a certainty, either.For his part, Ibrahimovic does not want to say whether this will be his final international tournament. He has hinted he would like to play at the Rio Olympics in August, and qualifying for the 2018 World Cup begins in the fall. His age, and the difficulty of World Cup qualifying, may conspire against him. But Ibrahimovic, ever quotable, refuses to concede.In his mind, there is plenty still yet to come.“I have been dominating wherever I go,” he said. “The legend can still deliver.”A version of this article appears in print on June 14, 2016, on Page B12 of the New York edition with the headline: Before Curtain Closes, Ibrahimovic Seeks an Encore.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.See More »