AdvertisementSupported bySpecial Report: Royal AscotBy Ryan GoldbergAfter his chestnut colt Galileo Gold won the 2000 Guineas Stakes in late April, Hugo Palmer’s thoughts naturally turned to the Epsom Derby, the next — and greatest — leg of the English Triple Crown. Palmer, who is only in his sixth year as a trainer, had dreamed of saddling a Derby winner since he had watched Lammtarra win the race two decades earlier.But what Palmer, 35, had seen in the robust Galileo Gold suggested he would not stay the additional half-mile from the Guineas to the Derby. Seeking scientific evidence, he sent a blood sample from Galileo Gold to an Irish equine genetics company, Equinome.“Was there a chink of light, genetically, that might suggest that I was wrong?” Palmer wondered. “Unfortunately, there wasn’t.”Equinome informed him that Galileo Gold fell into a group of horses that usually prefers distances up to a mile. Statistically, he was unlikely to appreciate the Derby distance. Palmer decided to bypass Epsom. Instead, Galileo Gold figures to be one of the main contenders in the one-mile St. James’s Palace Stakes at Royal Ascot on Tuesday.DNA testing in horse racing is relatively new but already one of its most contentious topics. In 2009, the horse genome was fully sequenced, and since then scientists and a handful of private companies have searched for the genes that contribute to outstanding racing performance. Given the stakes, secrecy runs through their work. Galileo Gold’s case is the most high-profile one so far.Palmer said he had never before felt the need to test one of his horses. “If you’ve got any ability to train a horse, most of the time you can understand what the horses are telling you about their likes and dislikes,” he said. “The test told us exactly what we could see.”One of the co-founders of Equinome is Emmeline Hill, a geneticist who participated in the international effort to map the horse genome. She had been studying genetics at University College Dublin as far back as 2004. In 2010, she published research showing a strong correlation between differences in one specific gene to a horse’s distance preferences. Called myostatin, this gene encodes for a protein that influences muscle development, which made sense because sprinters and stayers are often muscled differently.She called it the “speed gene” and started Equinome with the famed Irish horseman Jim Bolger to patent and sell this test to horsemen. It now costs $780. Hill said Equinome had tested more than 13,000 racehorses, but only about 1,000 have been group or listed winners like Galileo Gold.DNA is written in four chemical letters: A, C, T and G. Every horse inherits two copies of myostatin, and at one marker on the gene, Hill found three combinations: CC, CT and TT. Using a sample of 148 racehorses, she learned that CCs tend to be sprinters, CTs are usually middle-distance runners, and TTs prefer longer distances. Galileo Gold is a CC.The findings seemed particularly pertinent for owners and breeders. In their simplest form, genetic inheritance principles can help them better predict the outcome of a mating. Some breeders in Australia and South Africa now advertise the genetic type of their stallions. Some of the largest stables around the world test their horses, but rarely publicize it.Equinome also offers what it calls an Elite Performance Test, where horses are assessed based on 670,000 markers on tens of thousands of genes, and not only the so-called speed gene. The forecasts are inherently retrospective: Equinome, like its competitors, compares an individual horse to the past results of horses with similar DNA makeups. Larger samples produce more reliable models.Genetics typically account for 40 to 50 percent of a horse’s performance, but is still an emerging tool. “It’s best used hand-in-hand with traditional horsemanship and it’s not intended to replace the knowledge of the horse,” Hill said.For his research, David Lambert, a veterinarian who founded Equine Analysis Systems in Kentucky, is able to call on a database of some 40,000 horses that he has analyzed since the 1980s. But he argues that genetics is the cart and not the horse, and its use should be included after seeing the whole physical picture.“I think equine genetics is greatly overstated and oversold at the moment,” Lambert said. “I don’t think it’s appropriate to make a distance prediction for a horse based on one simple marker of whether or not this horse is going to have myostatin.”Lambert offered examples of a pair of two-year-old champions who were stamina-loving, or TT, and a Belmont Stakes winner who was a CC. He has seen other sprinter-types win the Kentucky Derby. Since they were clients, he declined to disclose their names.Lambert always starts by taking several measurements from a horse’s skeleton and combining that with a cardiovascular assessment, and then introduces three different genetic markers, of which one is myostatin. Together, he said, this can explain about 75 percent of speed.It is enormously complex research. The more factors he can employ to divide his 40,000 horses and their hundreds of thousands of genetic markers into smaller groups, the easier it becomes to find prognostic variables. In the case of Galileo Gold, Lambert reeled off a number of features he would inspect before his DNA — his body shape, the size of his heart and heart-wall and spleen, his breathing efficiency, his ability to relax. He said he would then work out the pace of the race in question, in collaboration with the trainer, jockey, exercise rider, and even the groom.“If the scientist can sit there with the trainer and discuss the nuance, that’s when you really get it right,” Lambert said. “The trainer will get there, but we can get there sooner.”Advertisement