By VICTOR MATHERJUNE 13, 2016
It is the first thing you learn in peewee soccer: Don’t touch the ball with your hand.Peru broke the cardinal rule on Sunday night but got away with it, and mighty Brazil was eliminated from the Copa América in the group stage.Brazil needed only a draw in their game in Foxborough, Mass., to advance, and that looked extraordinarily likely: It had not lost a competitive game to Peru since 1985.But with the game scoreless in the 75th minute, Andy Polo of Peru crossed the ball to Raúl Ruidíaz in front of the net, and Ruidíaz batted it in with his arm.The replays were unambiguous, but after a four-minute discussion involving the referee, his assistants and a headset, the goal stood. Despite several good chances, Brazil could not tie the score and was eliminated.AdvertisementBrazil had 66 percent possession, outshot Peru by 14-4, had 10 corner kicks to Peru’s two and outpassed Peru by 593-320.AdvertisementDunga, the embattled Brazil manager, said after the game, “The fans saw how Brazil was eliminated; the goal was scored with his hand,” The Associated Press reported. But asked if he feared dismissal, he replied, “I only fear death.”It was an impressive accomplishment for Peru. Polo and Ruidíaz are among the 17 players on the 23-man team who play in the unheralded Peruvian league while Brazil is packed with players from the best teams in Europe.Peru stands just eighth among 10 South American teams in World Cup qualifying and has not played in the World Cup since 1982. Yet it has punched above its weight recently in the Copa, finishing third in each of the last two events. Still, those performances did not involve a marquee victory over a team like Brazil.The surprise result, combined with Ecuador’s 4-0 win over Haiti, means that the United States, which before the tournament might have expected a quarterfinal game against Brazil, will instead face Ecuador, potentially a much easier opponent, on Thursday in Seattle.Brazil was last eliminated in the group stage of the Copa in 1987, when only four teams made the knockout round and Brazil was second in a three-team group. In the 11 Copas since, Brazil has made 11 knockout-round appearances and won the event five times.It is not a golden age for Brazilian soccer. Playing at home, the team was favored to win the World Cup in 2014, only to be embarrassed in the semifinals by Germany, 7-1. In World Cup qualifying, Brazil unusually stands in sixth place in South America with six of 18 games played.The history of the hand ball is as old as the history of soccer itself. Probably the most famous one came in the quarterfinals of the 1986 World Cup, when Diego Maradona flagrantly fisted the ball into the net in a 2-1 Argentina victory over England. He later credited the goal to “the hand of God.”Get the big sports news, highlights and analysis from Times journalists, with distinctive takes on games and some behind-the-scenes surprises, delivered to your inbox every week.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.In a World Cup playoff game in 2009, Thierry Henry handled the ball in the box before kicking it to William Gallas for a goal that sent France on to the tournament and eliminated Ireland. The referee missed that one, too.AdvertisementIn a 2010 World Cup quarterfinal, Luis Suárez used his hand to save what would have been a winning goal by Ghana. This time the infraction was caught, Suárez was ejected, and Ghana was awarded a penalty kick. But Asamoah Gyan missed it, and Uruguay won the game in a penalty shootout, keeping Ghana from becoming the first African team to reach the semifinals.Suárez was unrepentant to say the least. “The hand of God now belongs to me,” he crowed after the game.Whether human or divine, hand balls continue to play a controversial part in big games.An earlier version of this article misstated the scorer after Thierry Henry handled the ball in a World Cup playoff in 2009. William Gallas scored, not Henry.A version of this article appears in print on June 14, 2016, on Page B11 of the New York edition with the headline: Peru Has a Hand in Brazil’s Surprise Elimination From the Copa.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.