By VICTOR MATHERAUG. 8, 2016
RIO DE JANEIRO — They love basketball and volleyball in Brazil. Formula One racing and martial arts have produced many of the country’s sports heroes.But every sport is overshadowed by the towering popularity of soccer, which has become almost synonymous with the nation.So fans here are eager for a victory at Brazil’s Olympics, especially after an embarrassing 7-1 clobbering by Germany in the semifinals of the 2014 World Cup in Brazil.Despite its glorious soccer history, Brazil, a five-time World Cup champion, has never won a gold medal in the sport at the Olympics.AdvertisementTo improve its chances this year, one of the country’s best players, Neymar, was added to a team mostly composed of players under 23.AdvertisementThe draw seemed favorable. Brazil opened against South Africa. But Neymar’s gifts did not seem to mesh well with those of his younger teammates, and the game ended in a 0-0 draw. Next up was Iraq, one of the weakest teams in the tournament. The result of that game, played late Sunday night in Brasília, was another scoreless draw.Sam Manchester will guide you through the 2016 summer Olympics in Rio de Janeiro.Hey. It’s Sam from the NYT Sports desk. I’m at the Olympics in Rio (so you don’t have to be :)). Grab a limited spot and I’ll text you updates, answer your questions and share the behind-the-scenes stuff nobody else gets.Thanks! Talk to you soon.Afterward, Coach Rogério Micale apologized to the fans. That might have been a good idea. The reaction here has been apoplectic.Fans in the stadium booed the team lustily and chanted for Iraq at the end of the game.“Fiasco em Brasília: de novo, vaias e nada de gol,”  the magazine Veja screamed — “Fiasco in Brasília: Boos and No Goals, Again.”Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.The newspaper Valor Econômico called it Brazil’s worst performance at the Games since 1972 and noted that in 1972, the team at least scored four goals in its first two games.Online memes took the team to task, showing Pelé holding his head in his hands in despair and comparing the team, unfavorably and sometimes profanely, with the undefeated Brazilian women’s team. Fans in the stadium Sunday night yelled, “Marta, Marta,” a reference to the star player of the women’s team.The atmosphere is a turnaround for the women, who ordinarily receive far less recognition at home. They have looked sharp in defeating China and Sweden by a combined score of 8-1.Brazil’s men are not yet out of the competition, but on Wednesday in Salvador, they must beat Denmark, the toughest of their three preliminary-round opponents, to be sure of advancing to the quarterfinals.“We deserve the criticism and will not run away from it,” Micale, the coach, said. “Everyone expected better results, and we look forward to the response in Salvador. We expect to be strong to advance.”Anna Jean Kaiser contributed reportingWe’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.See More »