By SAMANTHA SCHMIDTAUG. 7, 2016
In the moments after Alex Rodriguez announced that Friday would be the end of his turbulent yet stellar playing career, fans outside Yankee Stadium on Sunday cheered for different reasons — some in relief, and others in solidarity with a player they will always consider one of the greats.Among the fans, reactions to Rodriguez’s departure were as conflicted as their thoughts about the player himself.One group of fans outside the stadium yelled “A-Rod! A-Rod!” while holding a sign for a website they had created called “Da Yankee Bombers Site.”“I never gave up on A-Rod,” Ricardo Paniagua said of Rodriguez. Paniagua, 57, a Brooklyn resident and member of the group, said he had been a fan of Rodriguez since he had played in Seattle and would have liked to have seen him play more during his last season. “I’m here for him,” he added.Advertisement“We all are,” said Janet Jusino, 52, another member of the group. “He did what he was supposed to do when it was his time. No matter what, for me, he’s a legend.”Other fans waiting to enter the stadium were dissatisfied with the anticlimactic end to Rodriguez’s career.Advertisement“You have a contract, finish it off,” said Greg Santo, a law enforcement officer from Long Island. Rodriguez had been signed through the 2017 season, though the Yankees announced that he would be paid the rest of the $27 million he was owed and would remain with the team in an advisory role for next season.Santo said he felt that Rodriguez had redeemed himself in recent years, and he wished Rodriguez could have joined the 700-home-run club. Entering the week, Rodriguez had 696.Regulo Rodriguez, 51, a Queens resident, wore a Yankee hat while sitting on a metal post outside the stadium. He has been a Yankee fan since he moved to New York 19 years ago, but for the last several years, he has been disillusioned with the player who shares his last name.“I don’t see him as a great figure,” Rodriguez, a native of Venezuela, said in Spanish. “He has not only cheated the public, he has cheated himself.”Sam Manchester will guide you through the 2016 summer Olympics in Rio de Janeiro.Hey. It’s Sam from the NYT Sports desk. I’m at the Olympics in Rio (so you don’t have to be :)). Grab a limited spot and I’ll text you updates, answer your questions and share the behind-the-scenes stuff nobody else gets.Thanks! Talk to you soon.He said he was pleased to hear about Rodriguez’s departure.“They should have done this earlier — five or six years ago,” Rodriguez said. “It’s way too late.”Sitting on a bench nearby, Maury Weisel, 69, said Rodriguez’s exit marked a shift for the team toward younger players, much like what had happened with the 1996 team.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.“I’m looking forward to a rejuvenated Yankee team,” he said. “Maybe not this year, but next year.”AdvertisementIn the Yankee Tavern Sports Bar and Restaurant on 161st Street, a few blocks from Yankee Stadium, Ron Babbitt, 50, donned a red and Yankees blue Hawaiian shirt as he watched the game on television. Babbitt, along with several of his friends, came to the Bronx on a bus from Latham, N.Y., near Albany, to watch Sunday’s game.“I’d love to see him get his 700 home runs, but it’s not going to happen,” Babbitt said. “Everybody knows, he knows. It’s time.”“Hopefully, the Yankees get a clean slate again,” said Tony Berrios, a hairstylist from Albany and one of Babbitt’s friends.In front of the group, sitting at the bar, Nancy Matacchiero and her friend Bob Mitchell, also from Latham, debated the legacy that will be left behind by Rodriguez as they watched the game on television.“I was never happy with him,” Matacchiero, 58, said, adding that Rodriguez would never compare with her favorite player, Derek Jeter, whom she called a “class act.”“I wanted him to be great, but he disappointed me too many times,” she said of Rodriguez.“I’ve always liked A-Rod,” Mitchell, 57, said. “I really wanted him to break Barry Bonds’s record.”Matacchiero rolled her eyes in response. “It’s going to open up the whole team,” she said, adding that it was the second inning, and it was time for them to head into the Stadium to watch the game, which the Yankees won, 3-2, over the Cleveland Indians.Down the street at Billy’s Sports Bar, Rob Doyle, 29, a Queens resident and manager of the Jolly Monk bar, said he was disappointed when his friends cheered after they had seen the news on television Sunday morning.“It’s sad that he can’t finish on his own terms,” Doyle said. “He will go down as a great Yankee at the end of the day.”We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.