AdvertisementSupported byBy Christopher ClareyHAMILTON, Bermuda — Buoyancy does not matter like it used to in the America’s Cup.One hundred and sixty-five years after yachting’s most prestigious competition began off the Isle of Wight in England, the boats still float, but not for long. And when the latest edition of the Cup begins next year in Bermuda, the goal — strange as it might seem to the great sailors of the past — will be to float as little as possible.“The boat that can make it around the racecourse without touching the water will win this America’s Cup,” said Tom Slingsby, the tactician for Oracle Team USA.For those who have missed the radical changes of the 2010s, the reason is simple even if the technology is not.The Cup, long raced in monohull yachts with heavy keels providing underwater stability, is now contested in foiling catamarans that can hit speeds well above 40 knots. Those catamarans go fastest when they lift off the water and ride only on their foils — two rudders and two daggerboards.In the last Cup in San Francisco in 2013, the 72-foot catamarans in use were able to do that consistently only when sailing downwind — although one of the keys to Oracle’s epic comeback victory over Emirates Team New Zealand was Oracle’s final-hour ability to begin foiling upwind, too.But a foiling tack is no longer a novelty, and the new class of America’s Cup catamarans that will be used in 2017 — just short of 50 feet in length — should be able to foil in most conditions.“The goal would be to get around the racecourse without dropping onto the hull,” Scott Ferguson, Oracle’s design coordinator, said in an interview at the team’s base last week. “That would be the holy grail this time. It depends on the wind strength. As it gets windier, it gets harder to sail the boats in general, and trying to do a foiling tack would be pretty hard when it’s really windy. And obviously when it’s light you’re going to be hull in the water at times. But in 12 knots of breeze in the beautiful flat-water conditions we might get in Bermuda that time of year, it is possible.”The 45-foot catamarans racing for the final time in competition at this week’s Louis Vuitton America’s Cup World Series event in Fukuoka, Japan, remain more limited in their foiling range.But in the push to get ready for the final World Series racing of the season, there has been another push behind the scenes and in front of computer screens as the design teams have completed their first sets of daggerboards for the Cup boats that will debut next year.“It was a long week,” Ferguson said as he sat at his desk with drawings on the wall in front of him. “We’ve still got more time for our second set, but we just finished the first set.”The boards will be critical to success, and each team is allowed to use only four boards in its Cup boat during this cycle — a cost-cutting measure that allows little room for breakage, which is a genuine concern with submerged objects, and also puts a premium on getting the design right.“We’ve learned that the size of the foils makes a big difference, and we have larger, longer foils” for lighter winds, Ferguson said. “We have smaller foils for when it’s breezier. So we can adapt the foils to suit the conditions.”Still, Ferguson said his team would have preferred to produce more than four boards for the boat to cover a wider range of conditions. But the lead time required to manufacture the boards, which in Oracle’s case are produced in New Zealand, means that big decisions have to be made now for a regatta that won’t start until May.“It’s one of the hardest things,” said Chris Draper, the tactician for SoftBank Team Japan, which as part of an unusual agreement is using many of Oracle’s design resources. “The decisions you make now, you are stuck with them whether they are good or bad.”In another cost-cutting move, the America’s Cup organizers have mandated that many of the boat design elements in 2017 must be the same for all teams. But there is no “one-design” rule for daggerboards and rudders. Teams are also allowed to innovate and create their own onboard control systems for the foils as well as the solid wing sails, which have flaps and an internal skeleton that can be adjusted from below.“The foils are the one thing you can see in all these boats, but the one thing you can’t see in all these boats is the control systems, and that’s equally or even more so where a lot of the magic happens,” said Dean Barker, who was on the losing end of Oracle’s comeback as skipper of Emirates Team New Zealand in 2013 and is now skipper and chief executive of SoftBank Team Japan. “While people tend to focus on the bits you can see, it’s quite often the bits you can’t that are going to be the key to winning or losing. And it’s really only in the aftermath of the event that you’ll know how different teams tackle their control systems.”In the true cloak-and-dagger days of the Cup, the monohull’s keels were shrouded when teams were not racing to keep competitors from getting a look. But shrouding is no longer allowed.“If we could shroud the daggerboards and the rudders we would,” Ferguson said. “That’s pretty much all there is.”But with the boards in plain view, what is striking when you see them up close is how much is riding on so little surface area.“It comes down to the strength of the materials,” said Bryan Baker, an engineer with Oracle. “It’s pretty wild when you consider the size and shape of the object we have. Traditionally, a catamaran weighs like 3,000 kilograms straight up for all the people and all the bits and everything that is on there, and you used to distribute that weight over a long hull, and basically it was buoyancy was what was keeping it up mostly. And now we’ve gotten it down to something that is smaller than a surfboard that is holding all that weight up.”Baker said a carbon-fiber daggerboard typically weighed about 70 kilograms, about 154 pounds. The board leaning against the wall near the entrance to Team Japan’s boat shed last week was sleek to the touch and shaped like an L, but looked remarkably thin for all the forces it must withstand.“When you walk around and go through the boat shed and look at the technology, it’s still mind blowing to think where sailing has got to from where it was,” Barker said.Advertisement