AdvertisementSupported byBy Harvey AratonSTORRS, Conn. — The good news for the rest of women’s college basketball is that Connecticut is no longer blowing out every opponent. The bad news is that the Huskies are still not losing.The really bad news is that two games into a rare season without a linchpin star, Coach Geno Auriemma has apparently found his next impact player.Confronted with the challenge of Baylor, ranked No. 2 in the Associated Press preseason poll, No. 3 Connecticut toppled the Lady Bears, 72-61, on Thursday night, riding an electrifying performance by Crystal Dangerfield, a 5-foot-5 freshman point guard.Dangerfield scored 19 points and had 5 assists as the Huskies won their second straight game this young season and their 77th over all. She was more than a leading scorer and facilitator. It was Dangerfield’s ball handling (one turnover in 30 minutes), leadership and — small stature notwithstanding — defense that stood out in her regular-season debut at Gampel Pavilion.“I came into the game, and it was attack, attack, attack,” she said after the game, which she entered midway through the first quarter to relieve the senior starter Saniya Chong. “The coaches know I have an extra gear, and that showed.”With Connecticut clinging to a 58-54 fourth-quarter lead, a Dangerfield steal led to a run-out basket by Gabby Williams. On the Huskies’ next possession, Dangerfield drove the left lane, crossed over on the dribble, hung in the air and spun in a layup.Two free throws by Katie Lou Samuelson, who had 16 points, made the score 64-56, and the Huskies didn’t look back.Alexis Jones led the Lady Bears with 23 points, but their tall and physical front-line players — the 6-7 Kalani Brown and the 6-4 Beatrice Mompremier — were held to a combined 15 points by the smaller but swarming Connecticut defenders.“We’ll have to look at the film and see why we got so few post touches,” said Baylor’s 17th-year coach, Kim Mulkey. She offered several possibilities but hit on the correct one when she wondered, “Was it Connecticut’s defense?”Before the Huskies held on for a 78-76 victory in their opener Monday night at Florida State, Auriemma had said his players probably did not even know the length of the latest Connecticut winning streak.“They’re just in a panic about having to win another national championship,” he said.They are a long way from having to confront the boulder-size burden of extending a historic run of four consecutive national titles. So the latest winning streak is destined to become the heart of the early-season narrative, even as keen observers of the women’s game — none more than Auriemma — have given a Huskies team hammered by graduation little chance of challenging the program’s 90-game string that was ended by Stanford in November 2010.A daunting nonconference schedule remains — continuing at Louisiana State on Sunday — but Baylor’s being handled the way Connecticut did should sound an alarm around the country.The Lady Bears were considered a threat to the smallish Huskies on the glass. In Baylor’s 84-70 win over a solid U.C.L.A. team on Monday, Brown, a towering sophomore, scored 25 points on 12-of-15 shooting, grabbed 19 rebounds and blocked five shots in 29 minutes. And she’s not a starter.In any reasonable pregame assessment, the Huskies were the underdogs. But Kia Nurse, a veteran of the last two title teams, said the role reversal represented an opportunity seldom seen in a program that has not lost consecutive games since the 1992-93 season.“I personally like playing with a chip on our shoulder,” she said. “Going out and proving someone wrong with the way you play is one of the most fun things you can ever do.”With the Connecticut men’s team having already lost its buzz after season-opening losses to Wagner and Northeastern, the women had an amped-up crowd to play for and led for much of the first half, playing an aggressive man-to-man defense that applied full-court pressure.It helped that Brown, inserted early by Mulkey to join Mompremier, was tagged for two quick fouls and was back on the bench about midway through the first quarter.Williams, one of Connecticut’s four returning rotation players, also sat early with two fouls, replaced by Auriemma’s biggest player, the 6-5 Natalie Butler. Butler, who seldom played last season, gave Auriemma a steady and physical 15 first-half minutes, grabbing five rebounds.But the night’s revelation was the all-around play of Dangerfield, Auriemma’s first-ever recruit from Tennessee.Asked if he was surprised by how quickly she had developed a swagger, Auriemma said: “That’s hard to say. If I said yes, it’d be wishful thinking. If I said no, it would be disrespecting her talent. From Day 1, it was show me what you have and why you came to Connecticut.”Dangerfield was rated by many to be the nation’s top point guard in the 2016 high school class. She is a lightweight but lightning quick, with a soft rainbow touch from outside and excellent peripheral vision.After seldom looking to shoot at Florida State, Dangerfield nailed her first two 3-pointers, added a basket by following her own missed 3-point attempt for a pull-up bank shot and finished off a team-leading 10-point first half with a sweet hesitation move.Her unanticipated outburst was enough to allow the Huskies to take a 32-29 lead into the break. She wasn’t done. And she’s just getting started.Advertisement