By MIKE VORKUNOVNOV. 16, 2016
After LeBron James criticized Knicks President Phil Jackson for using the word “posse” to describe James, his friends and his business partners, Stan Van Gundy took a moment to consider his own use of the term.Van Gundy, the Detroit Pistons head coach, has been coaching in the N.B.A. for two decades and has lately become a liberal vanguard in the league. But he said that he had used the word too — and in a way that might cause the same consternation that Jackson’s use did for James.Van Gundy said he had asked himself if he had ever used “posse” when talking about a white player. The answer was discomforting.“The answer is no,” he said Wednesday before the Pistons played the Knicks at Madison Square Garden. “I think, look, you have to be aware of the language and you have to be aware a little bit of your own biases if you’re going to overcome them. I took that seriously.Advertisement“I understand why it’s offensive. I’ve never used that word publicly with anybody but I have used it in just talking to people I know and things like that. It has never been in conjunction with a white player. So I think at a time where you’re going to call out other people on attitudes you need to be willing to look in the mirror and call yourself out.”Jackson has remained silent since Monday, when ESPN published an interview with him that drew James’s ire. In the interview, Jackson told an anecdote about James, then with the Heat, trying to keep the team in Cleveland for an extra night after a road game.“You can’t hold up the whole team,” Jackson said, “because you and your mom and your posse want to spend an extra night in Cleveland.”Get the big sports news, highlights and analysis from Times journalists, with distinctive takes on games and some behind-the-scenes surprises, delivered to your inbox every week.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.James responded angrily, saying that he had lost respect for Jackson and that Jackson was using the word in a way that was racially coded.Though he has not spoken publicly, Jackson on Tuesday reposted a Twitter message by Clarence Gaines Jr., a Knicks executive, that mentioned the Posse Foundation — a nonprofit that supports multicultural groups of students — as a “worthy and positive organization.”AdvertisementVan Gundy, who said he had no problem with Jackson (but mentioned that there had been hard feelings between Jackson and Van Gundy’s brother, Jeff, an ESPN broadcaster) also continued to speak out against President-elect Donald J. Trump.Last week, he called Trump “brazenly racist and misogynistic.” On Wednesday, he added that all N.B.A. teams should examine whether to stay at Trump’s hotels after an ESPN report came out saying three teams had already decided not to do so this season. Van Gundy said the Pistons were not among those teams because they had no plans to stay at those hotels in the first place, but not for political reasons.“I think every team’s got to take a look at that,” Van Gundy said.“I think teams are getting tuned in politically and everything else,” he continued. “Give the players a great deal of credit. I’ve been really proud of our own players but players throughout the league and that they’re attuned to what’s going on and they’re going to stand up for their values. I think that’s impressive, particularly the fact that we have a really young team and guys in their 20s. Normally that kind of — no matter where you stand on the spectrum — normally that kind of social awareness and activism is something you come to later in life.”We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.