By VICTOR MATHERNOV. 17, 2016
Thursday night’s N.F.L. game has some intriguing elements. The Carolina Panthers are desperately fighting to save a bad season after their Super Bowl run last year. The New Orleans Saints have the prolific passer Drew Brees and the game-breaking receiver Brandin Cooks.On the other hand, it is also a battle between a 3-6 team and a 4-5 team. In that respect, it is very much a typical “Thursday Night Football” game this year.There is always a sense of anticipation for Thursday night games. After 72 long hours without the N.F.L., fans are hungry for some football. But this season they have been served a slice of mediocrity.The opening game of the season, a Super Bowl rematch between the Denver Broncos and the Panthers, was played on a Thursday night on NBC. But the official Thursday night schedule, which airs on NFL Network and is sometimes simulcast on a broadcast network, began in Week 2. Things went sour fast.Get the big sports news, highlights and analysis from Times journalists, with distinctive takes on games and some behind-the-scenes surprises, delivered to your inbox every week.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.Here is the whole ugly lineup:SEPT. 15, JETS AT BILLS Thursday football comes right out of the gate with two teams that lost their openers, dashing some preseason optimism. Buffalo’s defense, newly led by Rob Ryan, is so bad that it makes Jets quarterback Ryan Fitzpatrick look good. The Jets win, 37-31, and Fitzpatrick passes for 374 yards. He has not gotten within 100 of that total since.AdvertisementSEPT. 22, TEXANS AT PATRIOTS A seemingly strong matchup of seemingly strong teams is spoiled when New England runs Houston off the field, 27-0. Fans also do not get to see Tom Brady (suspended) or even his backup, Jimmy Garoppolo (hurt). Instead, Jacoby Brissett leads the Patriots.It is the last time two teams with winning records meet on a Thursday.SEPT. 29, DOLPHINS AT BENGALS Two 1-2 teams. Cincinnati wins, 22-7, before eventually falling to 3-5-1. The Dolphins go on to play better, but this early-season version of the team manages only eight first downs on the night.AdvertisementOCT. 6, CARDINALS AT 49ERS Enjoyed seeing two 1-2 teams? How about two 1-3 teams? At least Arizona has Carson Palmer. … Oh, he’s out injured, and Drew Stanton is starting. The Cardinals get 17 points off turnovers in a 33-21 win. San Francisco later drops to 1-8.OCT. 13, BRONCOS AT CHARGERS A chance to see the reigning Super Bowl champion proves a disappointment when the Broncos play terribly, losing to San Diego, which was previously 1-4, by 21-13. Still, for upset lovers, this is one of the better Thursday games of the year.OCT. 20, BEARS AT PACKERS A miserable 1-5 Chicago team is drilled by Green Bay, 26-10. Having lost Jay Cutler, the Bears start Brian Hoyer, who breaks his arm in the second quarter. That puts Matt Barkley in charge. He completes 6 of 15 passes, with two interceptions. The game is a false dawn for the Packers, who go on to slip to 4-5.OCT. 27, JAGUARS AT TITANS Two more losing teams meet. Tennessee wins, 36-22, and Jacksonville loses its next two games, too.NOV. 3, FALCONS AT BUCCANEERS A decent 5-3 Atlanta team faces a not-especially-decent 3-4 Tampa Bay team and spanks the Buccaneers as expected, 43-28. Both teams pass a lot, so that’s something.NOV. 10, BROWNS AT RAVENS How much worse could it get? Oh, no, it’s the Browns. Cleveland enters the game 0-9 and leaves it 0-10 after a 28-7 pasting by a .500 Baltimore team. The Browns try Josh McCown at quarterback after Cody Kessler is ineffective. To the surprise of nobody, McCown is also ineffective.AdvertisementSo far this year, the teams lining up for “Thursday Night Football” have had a combined record of 34-52 at the time of their games. Add in this Thursday’s matchup, and it is 41-63.With 14 Thursday slots to fill, 28 of the league’s 32 teams take part. (The other four are all in action in the Thanksgiving games, which are not part of the official Thursday night roster.) So good teams do play on Thursdays. But this season it seems as if many of the elite teams fans most want to see have been slotted into bad matchups: The Patriots-Texans game turned into a blowout, and the Broncos played a poor Chargers team.There are also just a lot of teams around .500 this season, and fewer teams at the top of the pile. All these factors have contributed to the dip in the Thursday night ratings, as in the ratings for N.F.L. games on other days.This week, NBC replaces CBS as the NFL Network partner for Thursdays. NBC seems to have been luckier with the schedule. The Raiders-Chiefs game on Dec. 8 is the marquee game that Thursdays have been lacking. The Giants-Eagles game on Dec. 22 could have big playoff implications. The Cowboys play Dec. 1 against the Vikings, although Minnesota looked a lot more attractive at 5-0 than at 5-4.Because of the short week for game prep and recovery, coaches and players hate Thursday games. If the matchups continue to be ordinary at best, fans may decide the same.We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.