By VICTOR MATHERNOV. 15, 2016
Brook Lopez is not the stereotypical 3-point shooter. A 7-foot Nets center, he is thought of as a classic inside player, looking to create easy buckets.In his first six N.B.A. seasons, all with the Nets, he took seven 3-pointers total, and did not make one. In the 2014-15 season, he seemed to get a little more serious about the shot and fired up 10 of them, making one. Last season he was 2 for 14.And this season? After eight games, Lopez has taken 38 shots from beyond the arc, and made 12. In a single game, against the Detroit Pistons on Nov. 2, he made four 3s, surpassing the total of his first eight seasons.Lopez sometimes looks a little awkward shooting from distance, but Coach Kenny Atkinson said before the season that he wanted him to shoot more 3s. It seems to be paying off. Lopez’s effective shooting percentage, which factors in whether shots are 2s or 3s, is up to .549, after two seasons in the .510s.AdvertisementIt’s not a secret that the N.B.A. has gone 3-crazy in recent years. Not so long ago, the shot was seen as a gimmick, to be used sparingly. Last season, teams took an average of 24 a game. Ten years ago, that figure was 16. Thirty years ago, it was three.But the biggest indication of the rise of the 3 may be the unlikely players who are suddenly firing them up. Another 7-footer, Marc Gasol of the Grizzlies, never tried more than 17 in his career until this season. He has now taken 35 through nine games, and made 12.Last season, several players became unexpected 3-point marksmen. The Pelicans star Anthony Davis, whose previous high in 3-point attempts was 12, shot 108 last season and is on a pace for a similar number this season. Al Horford topped his previous high of 36 attempts by shooting 256 last season, his last with the Hawks. Kris Humphries had been in the league since 2004 and had never tried more than seven 3s. Playing with three different teams last season, he took 108. Luis Scola increased his highest total to 161, from 20.Get the big sports news, highlights and analysis from Times journalists, with distinctive takes on games and some behind-the-scenes surprises, delivered to your inbox every week.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.Not every player keeps up his sudden 3-point barrage. After years of taking 10 or 20 3s per season, LaMarcus Aldridge fired up 105 in 2014-15, his last season with the Blazers. He returned to a more typical number with the Spurs last season.Coaches and statisticians have increasingly valued 3s as they realized that taking them stretches the defense and opens up the offense. As simple as it sounds, there has also been an increased appreciation for the fact that a 3 is worth 1 more point than a 2. Even shot at a lower percentage, that can make the 3 a more potent weapon than the 2. Ask Stephen Curry, for one.Of course, that doesn’t mean every center is letting fly from distance. Rudy Gobert of the Jazz, Steven Adams of the Thunder, DeAndre Jordan of the Clippers and Hassan Whiteside of the Heat are among the regulars who still have not taken a 3 this season.AdvertisementThe record for fewest career 3-point attempts by an active player with at least 500 games played is four. Two players are tied at that mark. One is Kosta Koufos of the Kings. The other is Brook Lopez’s brother Robin Lopez of the Bulls. If there is something genetic about hitting the 3, Chicago might just want to unleash him.A version of this article appears in print on November 16, 2016, on Page B11 of the New York edition with the headline: Even Centers Pull Up at the 3-Point Line Now.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.