By MIKE VORKUNOVNOV. 16, 2016
Kristaps Porzingis habitually looks up to the scoreboard screen hanging above the court at Madison Square Garden when he hears the crowd’s applause build. The clapping serves as his cue. Wednesday night, in the fourth quarter, he was conditioned again, though this time he had an inkling about the reason.After nailing a jump shot following a spin into the lane, Porzingis had set a new career high in points scored. With nearly 10 minutes remaining, he still had time to build on it, too. It was that kind of night for Porzingis, 21, whose extensive skill set allowed him to drain shots with ease and made him the ultimate chess piece.Porzingis scored 35 points in the Knicks’ 105-102 victory over the Pistons, 25 of them in the first half. For much of the night, he could barely stop smiling, flashing a grin after every important bucket or in appreciation of his own exploits. After he scored 10 consecutive points in the second quarter, the last 3 on a shot from behind the arc, he backpedaled to the defensive end, smirking. On the bench, Carmelo Anthony smiled, too.“It’s kind of crazy,” Derrick Rose said. “A unique player.”It was a thrilling display in which Porzingis showed off the kind of talent that has Knicks fans calling him the Unicorn. The performance was another indication of the progress he has made this season after working in the off-season to expand his game.AdvertisementBy the fourth quarter, as the Knicks milked their lead, Porzingis drew chants of “M.V.P.” from the Garden crowd — an honor usually reserved for Anthony.Advertisement“I wanted to go for 40,” Porzingis said.Still, the Knicks had to squeeze out the victory after nearly giving away an 8-point lead in the final two minutes. They had to watch as Kentavious Caldwell-Pope missed a potential game-tying 3-point attempt before the final buzzer.Get the big sports news, highlights and analysis from Times journalists, with distinctive takes on games and some behind-the-scenes surprises, delivered to your inbox every week.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.Porzingis did not take down the Pistons alone. Anthony scored 22 points, and Joakim Noah put together his best game of the still-young season as the Knicks improved to 5-6.Noah grabbed 15 rebounds and scored 7 points, nearly posting a double-double by halftime. It was a dynamic rebuttal to a meek showing on Monday against the Mavericks, when he sat out the entire second half and played just 15 minutes. That raised the question of whether the Knicks’ best lineup includes the center they signed this summer to a four-year, $72 million contract.But Noah was at his energetic best Wednesday. He helped the Knicks contain Pistons center Andre Drummond, holding him to 15 points and 9 rebounds. And Noah rebounded with fury and played with a verve that had been missing at times in his first season with the Knicks.“He’s a guy that he’s going to play hard every play,” Knicks Coach Jeff Hornacek said. “That’s why we love him. He can do that for us. There’s a lot of talk of the offensive side, but really, we don’t care about that.”Noah had been an odd fit with the Knicks so far, his presence negating Porzingis’s strengths. With Noah on the floor, Porzingis was left to defend forwards on the perimeter when teams like the Pistons played four shooters at once. The Knicks’ defense has often struggled, especially when Noah and Porzingis played together.On Wednesday, all those worries were papered over for a night, in particular because of Porzingis’s outburst. He scored insistently and in many ways.In the first half, he played like a one-man wrecking crew. In one moment, Porzingis went nearly the full length of the court, dribbling and finishing with a layup that reflected a grace that seemed at odds with his 7-foot-3 frame. In the next, he was flying to the rim, catching an alley-oop pass from Brandon Jennings and finishing with a dunk over Pistons forward Jon Leuer even as he was fouled, before falling to the court awkwardly.AdvertisementOn the following possession, he nailed a 3.“He’s obviously just probably scratching the surface of what he’s going to become,” Hornacek said. “So it’s going to be fun to watch.”A version of this article appears in print on November 17, 2016, on Page B13 of the New York edition with the headline: Porzingis Proves More Than Equal to a Challenge From the Pistons.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.