AdvertisementSupported byOn Pro BasketballBy Scott CacciolaLOS ANGELES — Jordan Clarkson, a third-year guard with the Los Angeles Lakers, was explaining the virtues of good ball movement this week when he was asked about last season, when the Lakers were not known for their good ball movement. The Lakers were known for many things, like their horrible record, but ball movement was not one of them.“Uh,” Clarkson said, “we’ve just got a new system put in place.”Clarkson was trying to stifle a laugh, but he just could not hold it any longer. He had to walk away to collect himself, and everyone knew what he had left unsaid — that those challenges had almost everything to do with Kobe Bryant and his chief enabler, Byron Scott, who was then the team’s coach, and that this season bears no resemblance to last season.“We’re all having fun, and we all want to see each other do well,” Clarkson said. “There’s a lot of balance on this team.”Behind their core of young players and their new coach, Luke Walton, who has emphasized the importance of such refreshing topics as teamwork and passing, the Lakers ran their record to 7-5 by pulling away from the Nets on Tuesday night at Staples Center. With Bryant (who retired) and Scott (whom the team fired) absent, the Lakers appear quite content these days.“Everybody wants to make the right play, and that becomes contagious,” said Julius Randle, a forward who finished with 17 points, 14 rebounds and 10 assists in the Lakers’ 125-118 victory over the Nets. “Everybody trusts each other, and the ball is moving.”Walton was hired in April after serving as an assistant coach with the Golden State Warriors. Randle recalled his first phone conversation with him.“It was just a different vibe, a different kind of energy,” Randle said. “You could tell it was going to be fun.”“Fun,” “balance” and “trust” — these are the types of coded words that the players use to explain their success this season and to condemn much of went wrong last season, when the Lakers went 17-65 amid the circus of Bryant’s monthslong farewell tour. Metta World Peace, one of the team’s resident sages at age 37, cited the growth of his young teammates.“I’d rather give those guys credit,” World Peace said. “They put in the work. Nobody’s making shots for them. Nobody’s playing defense for them. It’s all on those guys.”At the same time, World Peace, ever the contrarian, argued that his younger teammates had benefited from having been around Bryant, to having borne witness to his intergalactic stardom.“They had a chance to see what it takes to be great,” World Peace said.That may be true for some of the team’s more experienced players. But for others, like Clarkson, Randle and D’Angelo Russell, what did they really see of Bryant? Once he announced his impending retirement, he never practiced. He was a ghost at shootarounds.In fairness, his body had been so ravaged by injuries that he struggled to get up and down the court. But that did not prevent Bryant from assembling one of the most gluttonous seasons in N.B.A. history. He averaged 17.6 points a game while shooting 35.8 percent from the field and 28.5 percent from 3-point range. At visiting arenas, the team’s postgame departures were often delayed by endless processions of well-wishers and local dignitaries.For the bulk of his career, Bryant had been known for his work ethic. But by last season, those days were long gone. He conserved what he could of himself for games. As he described it at the time, he felt that he owed it to his many fans across the country to show up at their arenas and play one last time, somehow making the ultimate show of ego sound selfless.If last season was all about Bryant, his younger teammates suffered because of it. Their growth stagnated, with their roles reduced to bit parts in the Kobe Show.Russell told The Los Angeles Times in September that “there was no guidance from the people that were supposed to give me the guidance.”Under Walton — and without Bryant around to consume so much oxygen — the atmosphere has changed for the better. Walton wants his players to pass the ball at least 300 times each game. He has his coaching staff chart the totals, and he tells his players when they fall short.Against the Minnesota Timberwolves on Sunday, the Lakers finished with a season-low 259 passes, Walton said. It was no surprise to him that they also lost, 125-99. The game came at the end of a three-game trip, and Walton chalked up the poor effort to fatigue. But passing, passing, passing — he continues to hammer away at the message.“It’s a new way we’re trying to play this year,” Walton said. “It’s easier in basketball to stand around. You’re tired and hope someone else can score. Or if you have the ball, you just try to go one-on-one. That’s an easier way to play. But that’s what we’re trying to get away from, and we’ve done a good job of it for the most part.”When World Peace screamed, “I love basketball!” after sinking a free throw against the Indiana Pacers this month, it became an early-season mantra for the entire team. Without their longtime star, the new-look Lakers are finally seizing the stage.Advertisement