
TV Sports By                     
 RICHARD SANDOMIR
 
MARCH 19, 2016
Seven weeks remain in an improbable Premier League season. Leicester City is in first place. Manchester United is in crisis. Chelsea, the defending champion, is adrift after an early-season collapse.If you are Rebecca Lowe, who very ably hosts NBCSN’s Premier League coverage, there is no better place to be these days than the network’s studio in Stamford, Conn.“If there was no other story but Leicester City, it would be one of the most memorable ever, but it’s not just that,” she said last week by telephone. “You’ve got Tottenham that hasn’t won since 1961. You’ve got Manchester United, which has had a dismal season and really struggled. And for Chelsea to have fallen in the fashion that they fell — I’ve never seen anything like it. It’s been marvelous.”But Lowe will have to watch the season’s final weeks from home. She is eight and a half months pregnant, and after Sunday’s eagerly awaited Manchester Derby between United and City, she will begin her maternity leave.Advertisement“The season is so long, and if you’re female and you want to have a baby, there’s never a good time,” she said. “The season is 10 months long. Of all the seasons in the Premier League, it’s typical that this is arguably been the best one and I won’t be there for the end.”AdvertisementShe added: “This will be a long weekend, my last one. Adrenaline will get me through it.”The baby, her first, is a boy. Lowe’s husband, Paul Buckle, who has two children from a previous marriage, coaches Sacramento Republic F.C. in the United Soccer League and will return to their home in Connecticut as often as possible.“My mom is coming over next week,” Lowe said.Since being hired in 2013 from ESPN UK, Lowe has become the defining face of the Premier League at the NBC Sports Group, part of the extensive British influence imported by the network. The coverage has been a critical and viewing success — an average of 530,000 viewers for each match window this season on NBCSN, NBC and USA, up 9 percent from last year at this time.Last August, as NBC was about to start the final season of its current three-year deal, it retained the Premier League rights for another six years for $1 billion. Lowe signed a similarly long contract.“My husband and I had a Plan A, if we kept the rights, and a Plan B if we didn’t,” she said. “We brought our lives to the U.S. and to NBC. We want to make this our life, and it would have been harder if we didn’t get the rights.”Thirty-eight weeks of exposure on television have raised Lowe’s profile in the United States, but as a homebody who works outside Manhattan, she said she did not feel widely recognized. Yet, she said, “I went to a bar for a Champions League game and someone said, ‘Isn’t that the one who does the Premier League?’ ”Get the big sports news, highlights and analysis from Times journalists, with distinctive takes on games and some behind-the-scenes surprises, delivered to your inbox every week.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.In her absence this spring, Arlo White, the network’s lead play-by-play voice, will fill in for Lowe in the studio for two weeks. Steve Bower will fill in for five.“It’s impossible to replace her,” said Pierre Moossa, coordinating producer of NBC Sports Group’s Premier League coverage. “She’s really the glue on the set with the announcers. She gets the best out of them. She has a great sense of story, and no one knows the material as well.”AdvertisementThat was evident Thursday on NBC’s weekly internal conference call, as she, White, Moossa and the analysts Graeme Le Saux, Kyle Martino and Robbie Mustoe discussed this weekend’s games (including not only Manchester United-Manchester City but also Crystal Palace-Leicester City and Newcastle-Sunderland).During a lively conversation, Lowe discussed the lack of effective strikers at Crystal Palace, the club she has supported since she was 9, and said Manchester City’s brand was not as strong as it could be in its hometown even as it had brought jobs to the area and built an enviable youth academy.“If you don’t fill the grounds, that’s unforgivable,” she said. “What aren’t they doing? Not enough is being done at the club.”She also posed one question to her colleagues: Which club, Sunderland or Newcastle, deserves to stay in the Premier League? The neighboring clubs from England’s Northeast are both at risk of being relegated.Lowe did not give an opinion but subsequently said by email that she wanted both to stay in the league “because there’s really something special about Northeast football.”Later, she argued that Ryan Giggs, the assistant manager at Manchester United, should not be promoted to run the club if, as expected, Louis van Gaal is forced out this year.“None of us know — he could be the next Pep Guardiola, but it’s too big a risk to give him the job to see if he is,” Lowe said of Giggs, drawing a comparison to the incoming Manchester City manager. “From his personal standpoint, I don’t think he should want the job now. If he fails, it would be dreadful for him.”Van Gaal may depart this summer, but Lowe’s role will only increase for NBC. After her maternity leave, she will be a host at the Summer Olympics in Brazil, as she was during the Sochi Winter Games in 2014, when she anchored daytime coverage. Working in Rio de Janeiro will extend her absence from the Premier League through the first two weeks of the next season.“I love soccer, and it will always be my No. 1,” she said. “But I also really enjoy putting that to one side and trying my hand at other things.”AdvertisementAnd, she added, the access to Olympic athletes will be refreshing for someone so immersed in soccer.“You really get to tell stories,” she said. “With soccer, so much is kept from you it’s so hard to get close.”Email: sandor@nytimes.comA version of this article appears in print on March 20, 2016, on Page SP9 of the New York edition with the headline: Premier League Host Faces a Hiatus .  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.See More »