By ALLAN KREDAAPRIL 26, 2017
KANATA, Ontario — Erik Karlsson, the top defenseman of the Ottawa Senators, does not have much in common with Ryan McDonagh, his Rangers counterpart, when it comes to on-ice style.Karlsson, a two-time winner of the Norris Trophy and a nominee this season, is an offensive machine whose scoring and playmaking ability draw comparisons to Bobby Orr and Paul Coffey. He cruises around the ice like a shark eying injured prey, and when the puck finds his stick, he frequently makes otherworldly passes that send viewers reaching for the replay button on their remotes.The gritty McDonagh is known more for his driving and physical style, although he did have 36 assists this season.They share an intangible leadership quality. Both have commanded the respect of teammates and coaches, a major reason they were named captains within four days of each other in October 2014. And both appear to deftly navigate the fine line between leading by example and verbally prodding their teammates when needed.AdvertisementThe collective skills of both captains will be on display in the second-round showdown between the teams starting Thursday night at Canadian Tire Centre in Ottawa.AdvertisementDerrick Brassard, traded from the Rangers to the Senators for Mika Zibanejad in July, knows both players well.“Erik is the most dynamic defenseman there is,” Brassard said. “He has really good vision, really offensive minded, and he also blocks a lot of shots. If you paired him and Ryan together, they would do well because Mac defends really well and skates really well. And he’s also hard to play against.”Senators defenseman Dion Phaneuf, a former captain with Toronto, said Karlsson’s maturity was a crucial factor in the Senators’ 98-point regular season, during which Karlsson, 26, had 17 goals and 54 assists. Last season, Karlsson led the N.H.L. with 66 assists.“He’s so consistent, that’s the word I’d use,” said Phaneuf, 32, who relishes his supporting role for Ottawa’s younger star. “He continues to be dangerous game after game. He logs the biggest minutes and plays the toughest matchups.”McDonagh, 27, often does the same, and he has been effective in the playoffs alongside his longtime partner, Dan Girardi, both veterans of many Rangers spring runs.“He brought an edge to that whole series, let everyone around him know he was there, and I really loved that he wanted the puck,” Rangers Coach Alain Vigneault said of McDonagh’s performance in the six-game win over Montreal in the first round. “You want guys who are difference makers.”McDonagh, the 12th overall pick in 2007, has played seven N.H.L. seasons; Karlsson has played eight. Karlsson broke in as a 19-year-old, one year after the Senators drafted him 15th over all in 2008.AdvertisementMcDonagh chose to compliment Karlsson instead of trying to dissect any contrasts between himself and the flashier Swede.Get the big sports news, highlights and analysis from Times journalists, with distinctive takes on games and some behind-the-scenes surprises, delivered to your inbox every week.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.“I don’t know if you can compare us,” McDonagh said. “He’s a special player who plays a ton of minutes. He’s a challenge every time you play him and he has the ability to put the puck into the net if he has the chance.”Karlsson, who revealed this week that he battled a heel injury during the first-round series against Boston, which Ottawa won in six games, said his exploits took a back seat to the team’s success.“This time of year, there’s no hiding anymore,” he said. “You’ve got to push forward, and it’s not going to be easy. I’m taking care of my part and doing what I can to the best that possibly I can. I expect everybody to do the same. I feel we are on our way there.”Forward Bobby Ryan, who has been with Ottawa for four seasons after playing six years with Anaheim, said he had seen Karlsson’s leadership develop since he took the captain’s mantle from Jason Spezza, who was traded to Dallas.“He almost tried too hard at first, felt he had to do everything himself,” said Ryan, 30, who had four goals for the Senators in the first round after scoring 13 in the regular season. “Now he’s more vocal and demands the best out of everyone. He’s going to demand that you are as passionate as he is.”Rangers goalie Henrik Lundqvist, a fellow Swede, has been Karlsson’s teammate in numerous international tournaments. Perhaps not wanting to add any fuel to the offensive firepower Karlsson brings each game, Lundqvist was succinct in his description.“Funny guy and a great player,” Lundqvist said.Karlsson’s coach, Guy Boucher, made clear how much the captain means to his squad, which reached the second round for just the second time since reaching the finals in 2007. Ottawa lost to the Rangers in seven games in the first round in 2012, Karlsson’s third season.“I like that he’s a guy with emotion; he’s got torque,” said Boucher, who became the Senators’ coach last May. “He was all about the team from Day 1. That’s where the maturity comes into play. Whenever you talk to him about an award or points, it’s always deflected. I thought his leadership this year was a very clairvoyant one; he knew what to do and when.”Filip Bondy contributed reporting from Greenburgh, N.Y.A version of this article appears in print on April 27, 2017, on Page B11 of the New York edition with the headline: Two Defensemen Lead By Different Examples.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.