By VICTOR MATHERAPRIL 26, 2017
It’s time for the return of Beast Mode.The dominating power running back Marshawn Lynch, beloved by Seattle Seahawks fans and highlight film editors, has come out of retirement and will play for the Oakland Raiders. Lynch grew up in Oakland, where the Raiders are expected to play for two more seasons, before making a planned move to Las Vegas.Lynch passed a physical on Wednesday and agreed to a restructured two-year contract. The Seahawks traded his rights along with a 2018 sixth-round pick to the Raiders for a 2018 fifth-round pick.“I think every indication I got is he was excited to play for the Oakland Raiders,” Coach Jack Del Rio told reporters last week.Oakland’s top rusher last season, Latavius Murray, moved on to the Minnesota Vikings, so the Raiders are definitely in need. Oddly enough, Seattle’s running back situation is also in flux: Its first option last season, Thomas Rawls, ran for only 349 yards in half a season. The Seahawks have also signed the veteran Eddie Lacy as a free agent.AdvertisementAfter three outstanding years at California, Lynch began his N.F.L. career with the Buffalo Bills in 2007. He surpassed 1,000 rushing yards in each of his first two seasons, but after a suspension for having a gun in the trunk of his car, he lost his starting job. He was traded to the Seahawks in 2010 for draft picks. There, he began a dazzling career of breaking tackles that helped take the team to new heights.AdvertisementAt times seemingly unstoppable, he was a five-time Pro Bowler, led the league in rushing touchdowns twice and had six 100-yard games in the playoffs.His time coincided with a purple patch for Seattle, including its first Super Bowl title, after the 2013 season, and a return trip the next year.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.His most famous play might be one he did not make. With 26 seconds left in that second Super Bowl, trailing by 4 and at the New England Patriots’ 1-yard line, Seattle elected to pass rather than hand the ball to Lynch. Russell Wilson threw an interception, and the Seahawks lost.Lynch missed half of the 2015 season because of hernia surgery and returned for a playoff cameo. He then elected to retire, making the announcement via a photograph on his Twitter account of football shoes hanging from a telephone wire posted during the Super Bowl.A retired player must send a written request to the league to be reinstated. The N.F.L. has not yet announced that it received such a letter from Lynch.The often news media-phobic Lynch has not spoken openly of his plans. He amused fans on the media day for his second Super Bowl by answering every question with “I’m just here so I don’t get fined.”Seattle has also made news of late for its possible interest in trading away the superstar cornerback Richard Sherman.Ken Belson and The Associated Press contributed reporting.A version of this article appears in print on April 27, 2017, on Page B13 of the New York edition with the headline: Lynch Ending Retirement to Play for Raiders.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.