

 Scott Cacciola
 

ON PRO BASKETBALL
APRIL 25, 2017
TORONTO — The Milwaukee Bucks are one loss away from elimination. The N.B.A. playoffs do not slow down for any team, not even for one as precocious as the Bucks. It could all come to an end for them against the Toronto Raptors on Thursday in Game 6 of their first-round playoff series. But even if the Bucks lose, it will still feel as if they are just getting started.Led by Giannis Antetokounmpo, the Bucks are young, long and talented. They emerged as a threat in the Eastern Conference despite the absence of Jabari Parker, who had another season derailed by a knee operation. Thon Maker, months removed from high school, is starting at center. And Malcolm Brogdon, a second-round pick in last year’s draft, is one of the best young point guards in the league.On Monday, Brogdon, 24, made plenty of plays for the Bucks. He shot 5 of 7 from 3-point range and scored 19 points. He defended the Raptors’ Kyle Lowry. But he also felt the full weight of the playoffs. Moments after he appeared to twist an ankle on a drive in the third quarter, Brogdon picked up his fourth foul and went to the bench. The Bucks lost by 25.“The regular season is long,” said Brogdon, whose team trails the Raptors, 3-2, in their best-of-seven series. “But the playoffs are harder. They’re more intense. Every game counts for more. And you’re playing the same team over and over, so teams figure you out.”AdvertisementBrogdon, in his first season out of Virginia, is getting an education — one that should benefit the Bucks in the long term. The Raptors, with their All-Star backcourt of Lowry and DeMar DeRozan, have been through this before. They took the Cleveland Cavaliers to six games in the conference finals last season. They know how to win playoff games, and they have coped with hard losses.Advertisement“We’re lacking the experience of what’s coming,” Jason Kidd, the coach of the Bucks, said after Monday’s loss. “You can talk about it, but you’ve got to go out there and you’ve got to play.”Incidentally, the series has highlighted the value of second-round picks. Norman Powell, a second-year shooting guard and the 46th pick of the 2015 draft, scored a team-high 25 points for the Raptors on Monday. Like Brogdon, Powell had the full college experience: four seasons at U.C.L.A., where he was an all-Pacific-12 Conference selection as a senior. But he is perhaps another example of a bias against players who stay in school. In this extended era of one-and-doners, with teams eager to bank on potential, seasoned players like Powell and Brogdon are throwbacks.“He went to college,” Raptors Coach Dwane Casey said of Powell. “He’s got his life together, on and off the floor. He’s mature.”Get the big sports news, highlights and analysis from Times journalists, with distinctive takes on games and some behind-the-scenes surprises, delivered to your inbox every week.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.Powell and Brogdon, who was the 36th overall pick in last year’s draft, are making a case for polish over promise — or at least reinforcing the idea that there is room in the league for players like them. Tony Bennett, who coached Brogdon at Virginia, said that Brogdon developed in every way as a college player: his shooting, his defense, his decisions. As a fifth-year senior, he led Virginia to the regional finals of the N.C.A.A tournament and was the Atlantic Coast Conference’s player of the year.“We demanded a lot of him,” Bennett said in a telephone interview. “He had to stretch himself to guard the best players on the other teams, and then we also relied on him to score.”Brogdon, who left Virginia with a master’s degree in public policy, has ambitions beyond basketball. The Bucks saw a second-round bargain — Bennett suspects that some teams may have passed on Brogdon because he had foot surgery in college — and expected that he could have an immediate effect. He did not enter the N.B.A. as some timid kid.“They needed maturity,” Bennett said. “They needed leadership. And even though Malcolm’s a rookie, if you’re around him, you know he’s an old soul. He’s got leadership. He’s got command. And with a young team, they just need him to guard great players, make some plays and make some big shots.”AdvertisementBennett compared Brogdon to Terry Porter, a former guard who played college basketball for Bennett’s father, Dick, at Wisconsin-Stevens Point. During his 17-year career in the N.B.A., Porter was a steadying force for his teams: seldom flashy, always dependable. Bennett sees many of those qualities in Brogdon, although Brogdon is not averse to highlight-reel plays. In December, he dunked on the Cavaliers’ Kyrie Irving and LeBron James. The word unflappable comes to mind. During the regular season, Brogdon averaged 10.2 points and 4.2 assists a game.Bennett recalled recruiting Brogdon out of high school at an elite summer-league tournament known as the Peach Jam in South Carolina.“I love complete guards,” Bennett said, “and he just had a physicality and a toughness. You saw that he didn’t mind defending people. I just thought, ‘That’s the guy.’ You know it when you see it.”After the tournament, Bennett left the gym to make his first phone call to Brogdon, who was already on his way home. Bennett has since memorialized that moment. Whenever he goes to the Peach Jam, he walks outside to the same spot where he first called Brogdon — and calls him again.“And I’ll say, ‘I’m standing in the spot where I first saw you and we had our first conversation,’” Bennett said. “It’s just a little tradition I do.”Brogdon had that much of an impact at Virginia. The Bucks are hoping for more of the same.A version of this article appears in print on April 26, 2017, on Page B10 of the New York edition with the headline: Bucks’ Youth Portends Bright Future.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.See More »