By PETER MAYAPRIL 27, 2017
WESTFORD, Mass. — A silver 2006 Toyota 4Runner. Mint condition. Only 12,000 miles on the odometer. This is what the car dealer in East Providence, R.I., had to offer an up-and-coming star with the New England Patriots when he arrived at the lot in 2010.There’s a long tradition of businessmen hooking up with professional athletes for an exchange of goods — a quid pro quo for tickets, access to social outings, memorabilia. In this case, the car dealer, Jack Fox, would receive tickets to Patriots games and signed jerseys and footballs, and the player would make promotional appearances for the dealership.It seemed like the beginning of a good relationship. The player traded texts with Mr. Fox regularly and kept up his end of the bargain.“Every once in a while, out of the blue, he would send me a text telling me what was going on in his life and how things were,” Mr. Fox said.AdvertisementMr. Fox, 64, came to think he might in some way be filling a void in the player’s life from the death of his father several years earlier. He visited the player’s apartment, and met his fiancée and his uncle.AdvertisementThe only problem in the first two years was getting the player to bring in the vehicle for regular servicing. At one point, the player called the dealership in a panic because the car wouldn’t start. Mr. Fox dispatched a service employee to the player’s apartment. The car was out of gas.In May 2012, about 21 months since he had taken possession of the vehicle, the player brought it to Mr. Fox for what would be its last servicing. He had put nearly 38,000 miles on it.The player soon stopped communicating with Mr. Fox. Calls inquiring about service or a trade-in went unreturned.Mr. Fox tried a more personal approach, sending one of his salesmen to Gillette Stadium to see if the player would be interested in switching to a newer car. The player declined.The reason, Mr. Fox eventually discovered, was that the vehicle had been involved in a double murder in Boston in July 2012. The player was Aaron Hernandez, whom the authorities accused of shooting two men while inside the 4Runner as the two victims sat in their car at a stoplight.“Early on, I had gotten a call from a Boston detective asking me if I had seen the car,” Mr. Fox said. “I told him I hadn’t. He said, ‘I don’t think you’ll ever see it again. We’ve been looking for it and we can’t find it.’”In June 2013, after receiving a tip, the police finally found the 4Runner, stashed in the garage of Mr. Hernandez’s uncle’s house in Bristol, Conn. They impounded it. That was the same week that Mr. Hernandez was arrested in a separate case, the murder of Odin Lloyd, who was dating the sister of Mr. Hernandez’s fiancée. Mr. Lloyd’s body had been found nine days earlier.AdvertisementMr. Hernandez was indicted in the double murder in May 2014. Months earlier, in September 2013, Mr. Fox had testified in that case for 20 minutes before a Suffolk County grand jury. He testified again at the trial, seeing Mr. Hernandez for the first time since the tight end had made an appearance at a dinner at Kirkbrae Country Club in Lincoln, R.I., for the parts and services employees.“He was terrific that night, too,” Mr. Fox said. “He took pictures with everyone. He talked to the kitchen staff. He was great. He certainly didn’t act like someone who might be arrested for murder.”Seven months after the dinner, Mr. Hernandez was arrested and charged with Mr. Lloyd’s murder. He was convicted in April 2015. Ten months later, Mr. Fox’s lawyer petitioned the court to release the vehicle. The prosecution agreed, but Mr. Hernandez’s new defense team objected. The car would stay impounded for another 15 months.This month a jury hearing the double-murder case acquitted Mr. Hernandez, who was already serving a life sentence in the murder of Mr. Lloyd. Five days after the acquittal, Mr. Hernandez was found dead in his prison cell, an apparent suicide.Two days later, a tow truck showed up at an evidence management facility in the Hyde Park section of Boston. That is where the 4Runner had been impounded since 2013. The vehicle was taken to a used-car dealership here in Westford, where it now sits in a garage next to a vintage black 1957 Chevrolet Bel Air and two Hondas in for repair.Mr. Fox finally saw the car the day after it arrived in Westford. Having decided that he and the 4Runner had too much shared history, he gave it to an old friend, Buddy Clair, the owner of the Westford dealership.Mr. Fox even threw in an autographed Hernandez jersey.Mr. Clair has agreed to sell the car, and to divide the proceeds with Mr. Fox. “I think I’ll put it on eBay and see what happens,” Mr. Clair said. “In this day and age, you never know what someone might be willing to pay.”The vehicle’s side-view mirrors are damaged and dangling from their casings. But over all, it is in excellent condition, considering.The odometer reads 53,337. The right front tire needs a little air. And the leather interior is clean and the carpets vacuumed, though there remains a small amount of residue from the long-ago dusting for fingerprints.A version of this article appears in print on April 28, 2017, on Page B8 of the New York edition with the headline: Player’s Descent, Seen Through Rearview Mirror.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.