By ANDREW KNOLLAPRIL 26, 2017
The N.H.L.’s second round offers bad blood, new blood, potential Cinderella stories and tales of resiliency. The Washington Capitals and the Pittsburgh Penguins will square off in the main event, a matchup of the teams with the two best records in the league. The second round begins with two Western Conference games on Wednesday. A complete schedule can be found here.Washington Capitals vs. Pittsburgh PenguinsIn what is easily the fiercest and longest-standing rivalry of the second round, Washington (55-19-8) seeks to exorcise various demons against Pittsburgh (50-21-11), the defending Stanley Cup champion. The Penguins, reinforced with a healthier roster than they have had in months, ended the Columbus Blue Jackets’ franchise-best season in five games in the first round. The top-seeded Capitals got all they could handle from the young, inexperienced Toronto Maple Leafs. The six-game series tied an N.H.L. record with five overtime games, one of which reached double overtime.The players here are well-known — Sidney Crosby, Alex Ovechkin, Evgeni Malkin, Nicklas Backstrom — but the history may not be. The Capitals are at an impasse. They had the league’s top record and best goal differential, but face an off-season in which they could lose multiple key players. Since entering the league in 1974, they have not won the Stanley Cup and have been tormented by Pittsburgh. Each of the four times that the Penguins hoisted the Cup, they have beaten the Capitals on their journey. Over all, Washington has lost eight of nine playoff series against Pittsburgh, accentuating a legacy of postseason disappointment.The season series was fierce and high-scoring. The teams split four clashes that included an 8-7 thriller in January, and combined had a whopping 35 goals. Marquee players, heavy firepower and decades of antipathy make this the N.H.L.’s most appealing second-round matchup and potentially the most intriguing series of the playoffs. Game 1 is Thursday night in Washington.AdvertisementOttawa Senators vs. RangersThe Senators (44-28-10) have embodied persistence. Their goaltender Craig Anderson missed two months of the season after his wife, Nicholle, learned she had cancer. In the first round, he limited the Boston Bruins to fewer than two goals per game. Wing Bobby Ryan scored 13 goals during the season, less than one for every $500,000 of his salary. But he popped in four goals in the first round, including two game-winners. Ottawa’s captain, defenseman Erik Karlsson, not only produced six assists but also logged heavy minutes despite two stress fractures in his left foot. Wing Clarke MacArthur, who returned in early April after missing nearly two full seasons because of multiple concussions, scored the series-winning goal in overtime in Game 6. All six games of the series were decided by one goal, with four going to overtime.The Rangers (48-28-6) emerged from a chippy, low-scoring series with Montreal after six games. They won two games at home, where they had struggled, and two in Montreal, where Henrik Lundqvist had been beleaguered for most of his career. After an erratic regular season, Lundqvist was in vintage form against the Canadiens, rendering their captain, Max Pacioretty, among others, ineffective during the series.AdvertisementWith four points, the former Senator Mika Zibanejad was the Rangers’ leading scorer, part of a balanced if not explosive attack. The former Ranger Derick Brassard, who was traded for Zibanejad in the off-season, topped all Senators with eight points in the first round.Ottawa won two of three regular-season showdowns. Both teams have speed, depth and stellar goaltending, meaning this series may be as tight as those they just played. Game 1 is Thursday night in Ottawa.Anaheim Ducks vs. Edmonton OilersThe two top teams in the Pacific Division, which were separated by only two points in the standings, collide for a trip to the conference finals. Anaheim (46-23-13) vanquished the Calgary Flames in a four-game sweep, thanks to diligent work and fortuitous bounces. Edmonton (47-26-9) responded to a 7-0 bombardment by San Jose in Game 4 of their series with consecutive wins that ousted the Sharks, the defending conference champions.The Oilers won three of five regular-season meetings, including two overtime victories. Edmonton center Connor McDavid, the brightest young star in the N.H.L., won the Art Ross Trophy as the league’s top scorer, and he is also the favorite to claim the Hart Trophy as most valuable player after leading the Oilers to their first playoff appearance since 2006. McDavid, 20, had a short-handed goal and a couple of power-play assists in the first round, but he notched only one even-strength point, an empty-net goal. The Oilers were more than a one-man show, with a productive second line, an active back end and heroics from the grinding wing Zack Kassian, whose two first-round goals were game-winners.Anaheim’s top point producer, Ryan Getzlaf, and leading goal scorer, Rickard Rakell, carried their success into the playoffs. They each had five points, as did Shea Theodore, one of three young defensemen shouldering a larger load in the absence of Cam Fowler and Sami Vatanen. Those two, as well as defenseman Hampus Lindholm, should all be available during this series and possibly as soon as Game 1, which is Wednesday in Anaheim.Entering the postseason, the Ducks had won 10 playoff series and a Stanley Cup in the past 11 seasons. Before this season, the Oilers had won only five playoff series since 1993, three of which came during their improbable run to the 2006 finals.AdvertisementSt. Louis Blues vs. Nashville PredatorsThese teams won their first-round series without home-ice advantage and behind superlative goaltending. St. Louis (46-29-7) eliminated the Minnesota Wild by winning three one-goal games, including two in overtime. Nashville (41-29-12) throttled the top-seeded Chicago Blackhawks in a sweep even more stunning in execution than it was on paper. The Predators, the playoff team with the worst record, outscored the Blackhawks, 13-3. Nashville’s defensive structure was nearly impeccable, and goalie Pekka Rinne posted two shutouts in four games with a .976 save percentage. To further humiliate the heavily favored Blackhawks, Rinne added two assists, meaning he had as many points as any Chicago player.The Blues’ Jake Allen was nearly as dominant and without as much support in front of him. His .956 save percentage was a result of perseverance through a 52-shot Game 1 and a 41-shot Game 3 from Minnesota, which had the second-best record in the West. Allen allowed one goal in each of the first three games of the series, affording the Blues a 3-0 series lead. Their star right wing Vladimir Tarasenko had only one goal, but left wing Jaden Schwartz picked up the slack with five points, and defenseman Joel Edmundson became an unlikely playoff star.Before Game 1 on Wednesday in St. Louis, the Predators took three of five regular-season meetings between the teams. Viktor Arvidsson, Ryan Johansen and Filip Forsberg headline a deep, formidable forward group for Nashville, and its defense corps is arguably the most mobile and offensively potent in the league. If the Predators can continue to play at this level, they may go from having barely qualified for the playoffs to postponing their vacations until June.We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.