SEPT. 28, 2016
The best-selling sports books in August 2016, according to the New York Times best-seller list.1. THE BOYS IN THE BOAT by Daniel James Brown (Penguin). The American rowers who pursued gold at the 1936 Berlin Olympics.2. SHOE DOG by Phil Knight (Scribner). A memoir by the founder of Nike.3. SPARTAN FIT! by Joe De Sena with John Durant (Houghton Mifflin Harcourt). Thirty days of transforming mind and body by committing to grit.4. RUN FAST. EAT SLOW. by Shalane Flanagan and Elyse Kopecky (Rodale). A broad range of recipes for athletes created by an Olympic marathoner and a chef/nutrition coach.5. BARBARIAN DAYS by William Finnegan (Penguin). A Pulitzer Prize-winning surfing chronicle and memoir by a New Yorker writer that celebrates a lifelong obsession.6. UNBROKEN by Laura Hillenbrand (Random House). An Olympic runner’s story of survival as a prisoner of the Japanese in World War II.7. CHALKED UP by Jennifer Sey (HarperCollins). The author won the United States national gymnastics championship at age 17 in 1986, at the cost of severe injuries, an eating disorder and enormous sacrifices by her family. Originally published in 2008.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.8. FAST GIRL by Suzy Favor Hamilton with Sarah Tomlinson (Dey Street/Morrow). Bipolar disorder drove a former Olympic runner to become a high-priced Las Vegas escort.9. WRITINGS ON THE WALL by Kareem Abdul-Jabbar and Raymond Obstfeld (Time). The basketball legend shares his views on, and personal experiences regarding, the racial, religious and political divide, as well as his thoughts on possible solutions.10. THE THREE-YEAR SWIM CLUB by Julie Checkoway (Grand Central). Maui’s Sugar Ditch Kids and their quest for Olympic glory in 1937.11. WRECK MY LIFE by Mo Isom (Baker Books). The former Louisiana State soccer star shares her journey, which included recoveries from an eating disorder, her father’s suicide and a car accident.Rankings reflect sales for August 2016. The sports titles ranked here are selected by the editors from among all adult nonfiction books in all print and electronic formats, as reported to the New York Times best-seller list for the previous month. The definition of sports is deliberately broad and inclusive, so as to reflect all manner of the outdoor sports world, varying from the professional leagues to personal athleticism.A version of this list appears in print on September 29, 2016, on Page B15 of the New York edition with the headline: The Best Sellers: Filed Under Sports.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.