FEB. 28, 2016
The best-selling sports books in January 2015, according to the New York Times best-seller list.1. THE BOYS IN THE BOAT by Daniel James Brown (Penguin). A group of American rowers pursued gold at the 1936 Berlin Olympics.2. CONCUSSION by Jeanne Marie Laskas (Random House). The story of Bennet Omalu (who inspired the movie), the forensic pathologist who found proof that blows to the head caused the extreme mental deterioration of a former professional football star — unwelcome news to the N.F.L.3. UNBROKEN by Laura Hillenbrand (Random House). An Olympic runner’s story of survival as a prisoner of the Japanese in World War II; a 2014 movie.4. WAKE UP HAPPY by Michael Strahan with Veronica Chambers (37 Ink/Atria). The talk-show host and former football star offers personal stories and motivational advice to help readers reach their goals.Advertisement5. LIFE IS NOT AN ACCIDENT by Jay Williams (Harper). Memoir of the ESPN commentator whose early rise toward a promising career in professional basketball was cut short by a motorcycle accident. During a lengthy recovery he found his new destiny.Get the big sports news, highlights and analysis from Times journalists, with distinctive takes on games and some behind-the-scenes surprises, delivered to your inbox every week.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.6. EVERY DAY I FIGHT by Stuart Scott with Larry Platt (Blue Rider). A memoir by the ESPN anchor and commentator, who died of cancer in January 2015.Advertisement7. ABOVE THE LINE by Urban Meyer with Wayne Coffey (Penguin Press). A championship-winning college football coach shares his insights on team building and leadership.8. YOGA GIRL by Rachel Brathen (Touchstone). The instructor and Instagram celebrity offers routines, recipes and photographs.9. 50 YEARS, 50 MOMENTS by Jerry Rice and Randy O. Williams (Dey Street). A scrapbook of photographs and statistics commemorates the 50th anniversary of the Super Bowl.10. BARBARIAN DAYS by William Finnegan (Penguin). A surfing chronicle and memoir by a New Yorker writer.And One14. THE THREE-YEAR SWIM CLUB by Julie Checkoway (Grand Central). Maui’s Sugar Ditch Kids and their quest for Olympic glory in 1937.Rankings reflect sales for January 2015. The sports titles ranked here are selected by the editors from among all adult nonfiction books in all print and electronic formats, as reported to the New York Times best-seller list for the previous month. The definition of sports is deliberately broad and inclusive, to reflect all manner of the sports world, varying from the professional leagues to personal athleticism. A version of this list appears in print on February 29, 2016, on Page D5 of the New York edition with the headline: The Best Sellers: Filed Under Sports .  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.