By DAVID WALDSTEINJULY 13, 2017
WIMBLEDON, England — Shortly after breezing into the Wimbledon final on Thursday, Garbiñe Muguruza revealed a little ritual she has at the All England Lawn Tennis Club. She likes to look at the names etched into the walls of all the past champions and envision her name up there.Names are added over the years, but Muguruza, a Spaniard, noticed one that kept popping up.“For the last years, you see a lot of Williams surname,” she said, referring to Venus and Serena Williams, who have combined to win a dozen Wimbledon singles titles. “So I look forward to just have it there, I don’t know, to put a Spanish name back there.”The last Spanish name among the Wimbledon women’s champions belongs to Conchita Martínez, who beat Martina Navratilova in 1994. Both of those players — who faced each other again on Thursday night in the Invitational doubles, this time with Navratilova on the winning side — have connections to this year’s finalists.Navratilova was 37 years 258 days old the day Martínez beat her in 1994. Venus Williams will be 37 years 28 days old on Saturday, making her the oldest player in a Wimbledon final since then.AdvertisementAnd Martínez is Muguruza’s temporary coach, filling in for Sam Sumyk while he attends to the impending birth of his child. Martínez, the captain of the Spanish Davis Cup and Fed Cup teams, volunteered to pitch in. She will help advise Muguruza for her final against Williams, who beat Johanna Konta, 6-4, 6-2, on Thursday.Advertisement“She’s helping me to deal with the stress of the tournament, because it’s a long tournament,” the 23-year-old Muguruza said.She added: “She just knows how to prepare, how to train, what to do. Not that I’m doing something different, honestly. But to have her by my side gives me also this little confidence on having someone that has won before.”Muguruza, the No. 14 seed, said that she still spoke to Sumyk daily and that he and Martínez reached agreement before any decisions are made.The formula appears to be working, with Muguruza back in a major final for the first time since she won the French Open last year, when she beat Serena Williams, 7-5, 6-4.Her only other major final was at Wimbledon in 2015, when Williams defeated her, 6-4, 6-4.Under Martínez, Muguruza appeared to be relaxed and confident as she powered through the draw, defeating the No. 1 seed Angelique Kerber in the fourth round and No. 7 Svetlana Kuznetsova in a quarterfinal.Get the big sports news, highlights and analysis from Times journalists, with distinctive takes on games and some behind-the-scenes surprises, delivered to your inbox every week.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.But her 6-1, 6-1 demolition of a nervous and rattled Magdalena Rybarikova on Thursday was not necessarily the right preparation for the laser-focused and finals-tested Venus Williams.“I do think now that it’s all in Venus’s hands to go all the way,” said Kim Clijsters, a three-time United States Open champion who did analysis of Thursday’s semifinals matches on BBC television and radio. “If Venus plays like she did today, where she serves extremely well and returns really well, there is nobody who can beat her, except her sister. But if she drops her level a little bit, there are a lot of girls who can beat her.”AdvertisementClijsters practiced with Muguruza at the Australian Open and recalled that after Muguruza hit several forehands amiss, Sumyk asked Clijsters not to hit to her forehand any longer. Clijsters thought it was unusual. Instead of continuing to work on a deficiency, they simply abandoned it.“I think it’s all about confidence,” Clijsters said. “She was not playing very confidently, and I think they wanted me to get into a good rhythm with her. But she kept missing all her forehands, which was surprising to me.”There was no missing on Thursday as Muguruza had her run of the court against the 87th-ranked Rybarikova, who was playing her first Grand Slam semifinal. Martínez was smiling and cheering throughout, and Clijsters said Martínez’s jovial approach has loosened Muguruza’s intensity at the right times.“You can’t go through the two weeks of a Grand Slam being fully focused all the time,” Clijsters said. “You need to not think about tennis at times, too. You need to switch it on when needed, and switch it off when needed, too.”Muguruza has played Williams four times and won only one of those matches — at their most recent meeting, on clay at the Rome Masters this spring. Saturday will mark their first meeting in a Grand Slam event.Muguruza and Williams have powerful games from the baseline and serve very well. Williams demonstrated that repeatedly against Konta, especially on a 106-mile-per-hour second serve that saved a break point at 4-4, 30-40, in the first set.It was the turning point of the match as Williams held serve and then immediately broke Konta’s serve — and perhaps her confidence — in the next game to win the set.Muguruza had no such moments of excitement against Rybarikova, who managed only one break point, which she lost. Rybarikova, a 28-year-old Slovak, said she was impressed at how well Muguruza played, and she also acknowledged her obvious nerves from playing on Centre Court in such an important match.Muguruza knows that feeling from when she lost to Serena Williams in the final two years ago. Although she is once again playing against someone with the surname Williams, she said she would have a different approach this time.Advertisement“I was very nervous,” Muguruza said of the 2015 final. “It was all new to me. Now I am here at a final playing with one of the greatest players in history. Now I feel stronger, more self-confidence, and I have good results.”A version of this article appears in print on July 14, 2017, on Page B9 of the New York edition with the headline: Muguruza Sees Herself Among Tournament’s Winners.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.