JULY 15, 2017
The day after losing the Tour de France lead to Fabio Aru, Chris Froome and his Team Sky showed Friday that they still had cards up their sleeves.On the shortest stage of the 104th Tour, other than the two time trials, Sky brought Mikel Landa into play — sending Froome’s Spanish teammate racing off ahead on a fast and furious Stage 13 that became part chess and part a test of speed and endurance over a close-packed succession of three climbs in the Pyrenees.End result: Sky has two riders — Froome and Landa — in the top five. Until the July 23 finish in Paris, Aru will have to watch both and not let either race off ahead of him if he wants to keep the yellow jersey.“It’s perfect for us,” Froome said.At just 63 miles, less than half the distance of some of this Tour’s longest stages, the up-down, up-down, up-down route through the Ariege region of mountain cheeses and peak-perched fortresses delivered exactly what Tour organizers were hoping for: full-on racing. The Frenchman Warren Barguil won the stage on Bastille Day — the first French victory on the national holiday since David Moncoutie in 2005.AdvertisementBy finishing fourth in the leading pack that sped in nearly two minutes ahead of a chasing group that included the Tour’s top four riders over all — Aru, Froome, the French rider Romain Bardet and the Colombian Rigoberto Uran — Landa clawed back valuable time in the overall standings. From seventh at the start of the stage, Landa is fifth, just 1 minute 9 seconds behind Aru.AdvertisementThe Knicks promoted Steve Mills from general manager to president and hired Scott Perry as general manager. Mills takes over the position left vacant by Phil Jackson’s departure last month.“Today marks a culture change for our organization where we re-establish the pride, work ethic and responsibility that comes with playing for the Knicks and representing New York,” the team’s owner, James L. Dolan, said in statement. “I’m confident that Steve is the right person to take on this role, and ensure that we return to one of the elite teams of the N.B.A.”Get the big sports news, highlights and analysis from Times journalists, with distinctive takes on games and some behind-the-scenes surprises, delivered to your inbox every week.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.Mills returns to the role he held briefly before Jackson was hired in March 2014 and Mills was made general manager. Perry was the executive vice president of operations for the Sacramento Kings and previously held front-office roles for other organizations.LIBERTY LOSE TO THE SKY Stefanie Dolson scored 23 points and Chicago beat the Liberty, 78-68, for the visiting Sky’s third consecutive win. Chicago (6-12) was up, 53-52, heading into the final quarter before scoring 14 of the first 17 points in the period. Tina Charles had 21 points and 19 rebounds for the Liberty (8-9).Patrick Rodgers shot a seven-under-par 64 to take a two-shot lead after the second round of the John Deere Classic in Silvis, Ill. Rodgers had eight birdies and a bogey to finish at 13-under 129 at TPC Deere Run. Bryson DeChambeau was second after a 65.MCILROY MISSES CUT IN SCOTLAND Rory McIlroy is making an earlier-than-planned journey south to Royal Birkdale for next week’s British Open after missing the cut by two strokes at the Scottish Open. Padraig Harrington (68), Callum Shinkwin (68) and Alexander Knappe (65) shared the lead.LANGER LEADS SENIOR EVENT Bernhard Langer made five birdies on the back nine to take a two-shot lead over Corey Pavin before rain suspended play late in the second round of the Senior Players Championship in Owings Mills, Md.AdvertisementGio Gonzalez (8-4) pitched four-hit ball into the ninth inning, and Bryce Harper extended his mid-July tear with a pair of homers, leading the Washington Nationals to a 5-0 victory over the Reds in Cincinnati.PUIG POWERS THE DODGERS Yasiel Puig hit his second homer of the game with two out in the ninth inning in Miami, and the three-run shot helped the Los Angeles Dodgers beat the Marlins, 6-4, for their seventh consecutive victory.One of Ohio State’s most famous football stars sued the university over a marketing program he said used athletes’ images without permission and robbed them of compensation. Linebacker Chris Spielman filed the class-action lawsuit in federal court in Columbus on behalf of current and former Ohio State football players. The antitrust complaint targets marketing programs and contracts at Ohio State that promote the university using likenesses of athletes.Kyle Larson’s No. 42 Chevrolet failed inspection after qualifying, and he was stripped of his pole for the Nascar Cup race at New Hampshire Motor Speedway. Larson had turned a lap of 133.324 miles per hour, but his time was disallowed because of an unapproved rear deck fin lid. Martin Truex Jr. will start first on Sunday.A version of this article appears in print on July 15, 2017, on Page D4 of the New York edition with the headline: Cycling; Team Sky Now Has Two Riders Challenging.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.