AdvertisementSupported byBy The Associated PressCHICAGO — The Chicago Cubs found the pitching help they were looking for just a few miles from Wrigley Field. They hope it will give their scuffling team the kick it needs.The defending World Series champions acquired the left-handed ace Jose Quintana from the White Sox on Thursday in a major trade between crosstown rivals that could shake up the National League Central race.By landing Quintana, a 2016 All-Star, the Cubs made it clear they are not giving up on a difficult season despite arriving at the All-Star break two games under .500. They also added a pitcher who figures to be a crucial piece in the rotation for at least the next few years.“We had a bad first half,” said Theo Epstein, the Cubs’ president of baseball operations. “We did. We own that. We know we can do better.”The Cubs trail Milwaukee by five and a half games in the division, at 43-45, after ending a 108-year championship drought last fall. They believe they are set up to contend for years to come with stars like Kris Bryant and Anthony Rizzo.By trading for Quintana, they brought in an elite starter who is under club control through 2020. They had to give up two top prospects, outfielder Eloy Jimenez and right-handed pitcher Dylan Cease, along with the minor league infielders Matt Rose and Bryant Flete.Quintana has pitched better lately after a slow start, and he is 4-8 with a 4.49 E.R.A. in 18 starts this season. He won a career-high 13 games last season with a personal-best 3.20 E.R.A. while making his first All-Star team. Since his debut with the White Sox in 2012, he is 50-54 with a 3.51 E.R.A. White Sox General Manager Rick Hahn said letting him go was a difficult choice for the rebuilding team.“He’s a true professional who had to deal with everything from poor run support to the bullpen occasionally letting him down, the defense letting him down,” Hahn said. “He certainly never complained, never threw his arms up in the air, never rolled his eyes, never expressed any displeasure with his teammates. Instead, he was always supportive and continued to go about his business and set a wonderful example for the other young players in our clubhouse.”Epstein called the White Sox a “surprising dance partner” because of their proximity. But the deal makes sense given the needs of the two teams.Quintana joins a team that came into the season expected to dominate again on the heels of a 103-win season.Instead, the Cubs are struggling to come through with big hits. They are batting .230 with runners in scoring position — 27th in the majors. And the starting rotation has been shaky, with a 4.66 E.R.A. that ranks 17th in the majors.Their ace, Jon Lester, got pounded by Pittsburgh for 10 runs in two-thirds of an inning in his most recent start. Jake Arrieta, the 2015 N.L. Cy Young Award winner, has been inconsistent. Kyle Hendricks has been sidelined since June 4 because of tendinitis in his right hand, and John Lackey has a 5.20 E.R.A.Quintana is scheduled to make his Cubs debut at Baltimore on Sunday.“We know we’re getting a very quality, a very consistent starting pitcher who’s also a great person and great teammate,” Epstein said. “He couldn’t be a better fit for our situation.”Advertisement