
TV Sports By                     
 RICHARD SANDOMIR
 
FEB. 24, 2016
Bob Ley, who will anchor ESPN’s coverage of the FIFA presidential election on Friday, has a few delicious ways of describing what might happen.One: “I think Friday holds the potential to make the 1968 Democratic National Convention look like high tea.”Two: “ ‘American Hustle’ with shin guards.”FIFA’s so-called extraordinary congress to elect Sepp Blatter’s successor and approve (or maybe not) some much-needed governance reforms will not be visually exciting to those watching Mr. Ley’s updates on ESPN or the simultaneous, and continuous, coverage on FS1. Hours of procedural matters will lead into speeches by the five candidates, and only then will the delegates line up to deposit their paper ballots. Much will depend on the quality of the in-studio storytelling and analysis by both networks, as well as their on-site reporting and taped features.“The challenge we have,” said Alexi Lalas, who will be in the Los Angeles studio for FS1, “is to make something that on the surface, on an aesthetic level, looks boring and to give it context and to show that there is significance and depth to this moment even though it might not look like it on the screen.”AdvertisementESPN and FS1 are taking different approaches to the conclave that will start in Zurich at 3:30 a.m. Eastern, when most of America might only be dreaming of a post-Blatter FIFA.AdvertisementESPN plans to break into overnight replays and live editions of “SportsCenter” as necessary and to continue through “Outside the Lines” at 1:30 p.m. But FS1 will not leave the air until a new president is elected — sort of a threat to never miss any of the action, whether agenda item No. 3, “appointment of scrutineers,” or No. 6, “appointment of five members to check the minutes.”“We are the rights holder for the World Cup, and we need to be the network of record,” said David Neal, executive producer of FS1’s election coverage. “It’s important to do.”FS1’s decision not to miss a moment of the congress is a substantial reversal from last year, when it broke into Nascar practice twice with updates on what became Mr. Blatter’s re-election.ESPN attracted 359,000 viewers in the first hour of its coverage that day, from 9 to 10 a.m., and finished at 2:30 p.m. with 287,000.Mr. Ley and Jeremy Schaap earned appropriate praise for their work in the studio: a mix of journalistic rigor, wit and outrage that came two days after several top FIFA officials were arrested at their hotel in Zurich as part of a sweeping United States indictment that has shaken FIFA.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.During ESPN’s broadcast, Mr. Ley noted with amazement and frustration that FIFA had changed the order of its agenda, willy-nilly, delaying the presidential vote. He ripped up the agenda and said, “For those who say it is base canard and unfair that FIFA makes it up as they go along — they are making it up as they go along.”In an interview Wednesday, he said, “It was an honest reaction in the spirit of the moment; after 30 years of watching FIFA defy logic, it defied logic in the moment of its greatest test.”The FIFA saga, he added, “is singular in that it has uplifting entertainment value and hard news.”AdvertisementMr. Schaap, who will report from Zurich on Friday, has demonstrated his gravitas with terrific reports over the last few years on Mr. Blatter’s career, Qatar’s treatment of the migrant workers building its 2022 World Cup infrastructure and the torture of Bahraini athletes who supported the Arab Spring protests.Sheikh Salman bin Ebrahim al-Khalifa, a favorite to win Friday and a former president of the Bahrain Football Association, has been dogged by accusations that he helped identify players who took part in the protests. In an interview Wednesday with Sky Sports that was shown by FS1, Sheikh Salman guaranteed “on my authorities” that Bahraini soccer players were not tortured, but he spoke in circles about whether he helped pick out athletes for abuse.He has so far refused interview requests by ESPN and an earlier invitation from the network to participate in a live debate with the other four candidates, said Andy Tennant, the executive producer of “Outside the Lines” and “E:60.” (Sheikh Salman also declined to speak to The New York Times for an article published online on Wednesday.) ESPN will nonetheless replay some of the first-person accounts of torture on Thursday at 1:30 p.m. in a one-hour “Outside the Lines.”FS1’s performance on Friday, which will be hosted by Rob Stone, will be judged for its balance, in light of Fox Sports’ acquisition of World Cup rights through 2026.“There will be absolutely no holding back,” Mr. Neal said, adding, “Alexi has no filter.”Mr. Lalas, when asked Wednesday about the pacing of the long FIFA slog in the darkness of Friday morning, said: “We really should have a drinking game so that every time the word ‘transparency’ is mentioned, you have to take a drink. That’ll take people through the first few hours.”FIFA, he said, “is the gift that keeps on giving.”He added: “And if it weren’t so sad, it would be funny. If true change and true transparency are going to happen, this is where it will theoretically start.”Email: sandor@nytimes.com A version of this article appears in print on February 25, 2016, on Page B11 of the New York edition with the headline: Networks Seek to Breathe Life Into an Event Short on Visuals.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.See More »