By ALLAN KREDAJAN. 15, 2017
EAST MEADOW, N.Y. — Andrew Ladd joined the Islanders last summer with a seven-year contract worth $38.5 million and hefty expectations that he would help the franchise improve on last season’s 100-point finish and second-round playoff appearance.But halfway through a vexing campaign, Ladd has only eight goals and 12 points, and the Islanders are in last place in the Eastern Conference at 16-17-8 heading into Monday afternoon’s road game against the Boston Bruins.Ladd did not score his first goal with the Islanders until Game 14, on Nov. 7, and had only three goals in the first 25 contests. He scored four times in a four-game stretch at the end of December, but Ladd, a 6-foot-3 left wing, has no points in the Islanders’ first five games in January.“I honestly don’t think I started that bad — I just couldn’t put the puck in the back of the net, and it kind of snowballed from there,” said Ladd, who scored more than 20 goals in five of his previous six seasons. “Obviously, we’d like to have had a much better start, so it’s been a grind trying to keep the confidence up to find my place.”AdvertisementThe same can be said for the Islanders, who are facing a major uphill battle in the second half of the season to stay close to the playoff pack in a tough Metropolitan Division dominated by Columbus, Pittsburgh, Washington and the Rangers.AdvertisementBecause they have already had their league-mandated five-day break, the Islanders have played fewer games than some conference rivals, so a winning streak of any consequence could get them back into the race.The addition of Ladd after the longtime Islanders Kyle Okposo and Frans Nielsen signed elsewhere signaled that under the new owners Jon Ledecky and Scott Malkin, the team was willing to spend significant amounts on free agents. Ladd, at $8 million, is the Islanders’ highest-paid player this season.Picked fourth overall in 2004, by the Hurricanes, Ladd won the Stanley Cup with Carolina in 2006 and with Chicago in 2010. After five-plus seasons as captain of the Atlanta Thrashers and then the Winnipeg Jets, he was traded back to Chicago at last season’s deadline before becoming a free agent.Ladd said moving to Long Island had been a pleasant revelation. He has grown to enjoy the 45-minute train rides with teammates from Garden City to Barclays Center in Brooklyn and the proximity to Manhattan.“You don’t understand what life is like on the island until you have a chance to be here,” Ladd said. “Having a family and kids, it’s a great place.”Ladd has also found a groove lately on a line with the speedy playmaker Alan Quine and the rugged winger Jason Chimera, 37, who also signed with the Islanders in July as a free agent. But Coach Jack Capuano has also played Ladd with Brock Nelson and another struggling forward, Ryan Strome, in recent games.Get the big sports news, highlights and analysis from Times journalists, with distinctive takes on games and some behind-the-scenes surprises, delivered to your inbox every week.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.“Our pace makes us tick,” Ladd said. “Alan is highly underrated with his skill level and speed. And Chimer has been around a long time. He plays a strong north-south game, so you know what to expect. And he can score.”AdvertisementChimera, who played for the Washington Capitals the past seven seasons and is closing in on 1,000 career games, said that he and Ladd had needed time to adjust to new surroundings and that playing on the same unit had been a positive step.“We were both struggling, so putting us together could maybe get us going,” said Chimera, who had seven goals and seven assists entering Monday’s game. “Ladder is good at using my speed. He likes to shoot, and I like to get in on the forecheck. We play off each other’s strengths.”When Ledecky and Malkin took control last summer from the longtime owner Charles Wang, there was fresh optimism after the Islanders’ six-game win over Florida in the playoffs. It was the first playoff series win for the franchise since 1993.But victories did not come at the same rate as a season earlier as the Islanders started 6-10-4. The team’s fortunes were not helped by the muddle of having three goaltenders on the roster until Jaroslav Halak, who is still owed more than $7 million, was waived and sent to Bridgeport of the American Hockey League last month.The Islanders are 10-7-4 since Nov. 25, including Saturday’s 7-4 loss at Carolina after Friday’s 5-2 win at Florida, the latest example of their exasperating inconsistency.“We just have to stick with it,” right wing Cal Clutterbuck said. “You can’t look at the standings. Just go play.”Ladd finished last season with 25 goals with the Jets and the Blackhawks. His leadership skills, production and size made him a desirable target for General Manager Garth Snow.Having an extra voice of experience in the locker room is welcome to John Tavares, the team’s 26-year-old captain. Tavares leads the Islanders with 16 goals and 32 points.Advertisement“Andrew has his own personal makeup for how he handles things,” Tavares said. “He’s got a good sense of when to speak and when to step up.”Capuano, who has guided the Islanders to the postseason in three of the past four years, said Ladd and his teammates had room to improve with 41 games left.“We need a little bit more from all our guys, to be honest with you,” Capuano said.There is ample time on the schedule to make up ground in the standings, but the Islanders play the majority of their remaining games on the road, where they have only five wins so far.“I’ve learned over the course of my career to show up and do the right things day in and day out and lead by example,” Ladd said. “At the end of the year, you want to look back and feel like you produced and contributed.”A version of this article appears in print on January 16, 2017, on Page D4 of the New York edition with the headline: An Islander Works to Find His Footing.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.