By BEN ROTHENBERGJAN. 15, 2017
MELBOURNE, Australia — Shelby Rogers, who made one of last season’s most surprising surges, picked up where she left off by delivering the first major upset of the Australian Open on Monday.The unseeded Rogers beat Simona Halep, the fourth seed, 6-3, 6-1, in the opening match on center court at Rod Laver Arena. Rogers, of South Carolina, dominated the match with her serve, winning 71 percent of her first-serve points and 63 percent on her second serve. She faced only one break point, which she saved, and broke Halep’s serve four times during a 75-minute match.Rogers, 24, who is ranked No. 52 in the world, first made waves at the French Open last year, when she marched to the quarterfinals, losing to Garbiñe Muguruza, the eventual champion. Rogers was ranked No. 108 at the time.“The biggest thing I took away from that was just that I can compete with the top players in the world, and I’m good enough,” Rogers said. “Little things here and there I need to work on, but I’m here. I need to believe in myself.”AdvertisementHalep, ranked No. 4 in the world, took a medical timeout at the end of the first set as she struggled with her movement. She said after the match that she had painful tendinitis in her left knee, and that anti-inflammatories ultimately proved insufficient.”When you have the tension of the match, official match, the pressure, it comes harder,” Halep said. “So I had harder pain, and I couldn’t do what I wanted.”AdvertisementWith Halep hampered, Rogers used her superior power to control rallies and overwhelm Halep’s defenses.“I think I played great today, trying to be aggressive going out there,” Rogers said. “My game plan worked: Just move forward, hit your shots, be really aggressive. When I’m doing that, I’m playing well.”Halep, of Romania, beat Rogers easily in the third round of the 2015 United States Open, their only previous meeting.A two-time quarterfinalist in Melbourne, Halep also lost in the first round of last year’s Australian Open, losing to the Chinese qualifier Zhang Shuai.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.Another unseeded American, CoCo Vandeweghe, caused an upset Monday, beating No. 15 Roberta Vinci 6-1, 7-6(3). While Halep suffered an unfortunate repeating of history, her opposite number in the men’s draw narrowly avoided a similar fate. Fourth-seeded Stan Wawrinka was forced to a fifth set by 34th-ranked Martin Klizan, but ultimately prevailed, 4-6, 6-4, 7-5, 4-6, 6-4. Wawrinka, who won the most recent Grand Slam event, the United States Open in September, has followed a major win with a loss in the first round of the next competition before, when in 2014 he won the Australian Open only to lose in the first round of the French Open.“Wasn’t my best tennis today, but I was fighting, trying to stay in the game, fighting a lot,” Wawrinka said. “I think he was playing well. He didn’t give me too much rhythm. He made me play not my best tennis. I’m happy to get through, that’s the most important.”Fifth-seeded Kei Nishikori also escaped an upset bid in five sets, beating 45th-ranked Andrey Kuznetsov, 5-7, 6-1, 6-4, 6-7(6), 6-2. The night session began with top-seeded defending champion Angelique Kerber needing three sets to close out 51st-ranked Lesia Tsurenko, 6-2, 5-7, 6-2, after failing to convert a match point following an 18-shot rally at 5-4 in the second set.No. 17 Roger Federer closed out the evening on Rod Laver Arena with a wobbly but ultimately comfortable victory over qualifier Jurgen Melzer, 7-5, 3-6, 6-2, 6-2. The two 35-year-old veterans played even — if inconsistent — tennis through the first two sets before Federer asserted himself with his serve in the second half of the match. Of his 19 aces, seven came in the final set.AdvertisementFederer admitted he was rattled by his particularly shaky outset to the match, in which he shanked several shots badly.”It was like, ‘Whew, it’s not as easy as I thought it was going to be,’” Federer said. “I think I struggled for a while to find that groove, that rhythm and everything. Then you remind yourself how many times has it not been easy in the first round: almost every time, except if you get off a flyer and you keep rolling. But that’s not the whole time.”“So you’ve got to work. I’m happy I was made to work today.”We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.