By JONAH ENGEL BROMWICHJAN. 16, 2017
By week’s end, we will have reached the midpoint of the N.B.A. season.Last year, around this time, there was one big topic of conversation around the league: Could the Golden State Warriors break the 1995-96 Chicago Bulls’ regular-season win record?Gambling experts were unconvinced. On Jan. 18, a columnist for The Las Vegas Review-Journal reported that the main N.B.A. oddsmaker at a major casino gave the Warriors “no chance” to win 73 games.He bet wrong. Three months later, in their final game of the season, the Dubs, as the Warriors are sometimes called, romped past the Bulls and into the history books with a 73-9 record. (They went on to lose to the Cleveland Cavaliers in the N.B.A. finals, four games to three.)Sadly, there is no team record as compelling as that one to watch for this season. But there is an individual player chasing something nearly as exciting, and the odds against him seem even more daunting than they were against Golden State.AdvertisementRussell Westbrook of the Oklahoma City Thunder is averaging 30.8 points, 10.7 rebounds and 10.5 assists, a triple-double, per game this season. And commentators are beginning to wonder whether he can keep it up through April.AdvertisementThe first, and last, player to average a triple-double over the course of a regular season was Oscar Robertson, in 1961-62. If Westbrook matches that feat, it will be in a league bursting with superstars and top-tier defenders, many of whom see it as their top priority to foil Westbrook every night.Much like the Warriors last season, one of the chief obstacles between Westbrook and his goal is fatigue. But, of course, unlike Golden State, which had three superstars to rely on, the Thunder guard has no one to turn to but himself.On the other hand, he can do things like this.So maybe he will pull it off. I can’t wait to keep watching.Let’s get into some games.Have a question or a suggestion for this column? Send an email to NBAweek@nytimes.com, or bother me on Twitter: @Jonesieman.Cleveland at Golden State, Monday, 8 p.m. Eastern, TNTI messed up, you guys.On Dec. 26, in a post-Christmas haze, I wrote an article in which I stated that “Cleveland does not face Golden State again this regular season.”Get the big sports news, highlights and analysis from Times journalists, with distinctive takes on games and some behind-the-scenes surprises, delivered to your inbox every week.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.This was incorrect, as we soon noted. I had misread the schedule. And while this was embarrassing, it is also great news that we get to see these two teams play one more time. In the regular season that is. (I have triple-checked the schedule.)Since Dec. 11, Golden State has lost only two games, to the Cavs on Dec. 25 and to the Memphis Grizzlies this month. But its losses have not stopped commentators from wringing their hands.AdvertisementThere are two key issues. The first is the Warriors’ fourth-quarter worries, which we touched on last week: Golden State’s best players pass less in the final period and overtime than they do in the opening three quarters.The other issue that fans have fretted over is the play of Stephen Curry, last season’s most valuable player. He is averaging 24.7 points a game on .469 shooting, and shooting .398 from behind the 3-point line. Those are strong numbers for anyone else, but they fall well short of the superstar’s statistics from last season.Of course, Curry no longer has to score as much, now that he is playing with Kevin Durant. But even he has acknowledged that he is not playing up to his own standards.“I try to get better from year to year, so if you survey it from that standpoint just off of raw numbers, I’m not achieving my goal right now,” he told ESPN.In the same interview, Curry shrugged off talk of a “slump,” calling the use of the word “comical.” But Ethan Sherwood Strauss, who has covered the team, said the concern about Curry was legitimate.
            Yep. Observers/fans were wondering where the guy who had the ball a lot and destroyed defenders off the dribble was https://t.co/mheQFeYNsY But even as the interview went to press, Curry was having his best stretch of the season. He was named the Western Conference player of the week last Monday, and was averaging 30.6 points a game in his last five contests. Other Warriors, notably Andre Iguodala, have also been playing better.It’s easy to forget that the Warriors lost to the Cavaliers by a single point, 109-108, on Dec. 25. If the Warriors’ incremental improvements are what they seem, they could just be enough to get Golden State over the hump Monday night. A win would even the season series and stoke anticipation for what would be a third consecutive N.B.A. finals matchup between two teams that are busy creating one of the most exciting rivalries in recent N.B.A. history.Milwaukee at Houston, Wednesday, 8 p.m., ESPNThat Monday game is a must-see, but ESPN has a doozy of a doubleheader on Wednesday. Two great head-to-head matchups kick off at 8 when Houston’s beard (James Harden) meets Milwaukee’s freak (Giannis Antetokounmpo). Who needs Ringling Bros. when you’ve got the N.B.A.?AdvertisementOklahoma City at Golden State, Wednesday, 10:30 p.m., ESPNESPN’s second matchup on Wednesday is even sweeter. You’ve heard of this guy Westbrook? He has his team in sixth place in the West through sheer willpower. On Wednesday, he pays a visit to the man who may have revved up his engines. Durant is sitting pretty in Golden State with his new team, and Westbrook is eager to avenge a 122-96 November loss in Oakland to the Dubs.League Pass Games of the Week: Portland at Washington, 2 p.m. Monday; and Memphis at Washington, 7 p.m. WednesdayDon’t look now, but the Wizards have won 11 consecutive home games. But they will be tested at the Verizon Center twice this week, first by the Portland Trail Blazers, who are hanging on to the eighth seed in the West despite a record of 18-24, and next by the Memphis Grizzlies, one of the better teams in that conference. If Washington can make it out of the week with its home winning streak intact, its point guard, John Wall, is a stronger leader than anyone thought.In his continual quest to improve the N.B.A., Commissioner Adam Silver sometimes suggests that the rules may change. At a news conference in London last week, he said that the league was looking at ways to make the conclusions of games more exciting.The reason he cited caught some attention.“Obviously people, particularly millennials, have increasingly short attention spans, so it’s something as a business we need to pay attention to,” Silver said.I’m split on this statement. On one hand, I’m a millennial with a short attention span who often complains about how games can drag in the final minutes. On the other hand, how dare he? I am offended.I decided to find out for myself whether there was any truth to Silver’s comment. I started by typing “Do millennials have” into Google.I intended to write “short attention spans?” next. But Google autofilled in some funny answers after the first three words. So I decided to tweet about it.
            Here is what happens when you type "Do millenials have" into Google. pic.twitter.com/O8B3qYwiwC I then forgot what I was doing for the next 10 minutes.All of which is simply to say: Fair point, Mr. Silver. Let’s speed up those games. For the children, and also, for me.That’s all for now. See you all next week.All times are Eastern.We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.