By RICHARD SANDOMIRJAN. 15, 2017
Bud Lilly, a fly fisherman and conservationist whose fervent advocacy of catch and release inspired people to call him “a trout’s best friend,” died on Jan. 4 in Bozeman, Mont. He was 91.His son Michael said the cause was heart failure.Mr. Lilly began fishing as a young boy in Manhattan, Mont., where he was influenced by his father’s tales of trout fishing in his native California. After his father closed up his barbershop for the day, the two of them would fish.In time, Mr. Lilly’s youthful fascination with trout became a life’s work. He became a guide on the Madison, Gallatin and Yellowstone rivers; the owner of a renowned trout shop in West Yellowstone, Mont.; and an author, preaching the joys of casting artificial flies into rivers and streams.“I was always engaged by the instant of the strike,” he wrote in his autobiography, published in 1988. “It doesn’t matter how many thousands of trout I’ve taken since. I still have the same excitement when I put a fly over a trout and a miracle happens.”AdvertisementAnd, until the early 1960s, he viewed trout as a reward to be eaten, not as a natural resource that could be imperiled.Advertisement“Life was simple,” he wrote. “You caught a big fish; you killed it. Only an idiot would let it go.”But he eventually changed his mind. He heard about catch and release from fishermen from Michigan and made it his cause, reasoning that the popularity of fly-fishing in Montana might deplete the stocks of trout. He created a catch-and-release club in his shop, selling fishermen silver buttons that boasted of their releases of trout of various lengths.“The club caught on and a lot of anglers wore one or more buttons on his/her vest,” Paul Schullery, a friend who co-wrote Mr. Lilly’s books, said in an email. “Presumably, the button kind of replaced the trout as the ‘trophy.’”Mr. Lilly’s reputation in Montana as a fisherman, retailer and outfitter helped persuade reluctant anglers that they could change their behavior.“He had a megaphone, and people picked up on what he said,” Bruce Farling, executive director of Montana Trout Unlimited, a conservation group, said in an interview. “He wasn’t the only voice, but he was probably the most prominent one.”Mr. Lilly’s efforts were noticed by Arnold Gingrich, a founder of Esquire magazine, who called Mr. Lilly “a trout’s best friend” in his 1973 book “The Joys of Trout.” Mr. Lilly used that nickname as the title of his autobiography.Walen Francis Lilly II was born in Manhattan, Mont. — “on the kitchen table,” he said — on Aug. 13, 1925, to Walen Lilly, a barber, and the former Violet Collins, a homemaker.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.Fishing and baseball were young Bud’s passions. As a teenager, he played for a local men’s baseball team against a squad of black players, and, as he told the story, hit a single off the legendary pitcher Satchel Paige. He was talented enough, he said, to attract the attention of the Cincinnati Reds. But service in the Navy during World War II interrupted his baseball dreams.AdvertisementHe later graduated from Montana State University and became a high school biology teacher. He gave up teaching only after his fly-fishing catalog business took off in the 1970s. He owned Bud Lilly’s Trout Shop for more than 30 years until his wife, the former Patricia Bennett, who was his partner in the venture, got sick in 1981. He sold the shop in 1982; she died in 1984. The shop has changed owners a few times since then, but it has continued to bear his name.Mr. Lilly’s conversion to catch and release was one element of his conservation work. He also worked to end Montana’s practice of planting hatchery trout in rivers — which let fishermen increase their catches — to allow wild trout to thrive.In recent years, Mr. Lilly’s vision was diminished by macular degeneration, and he could no longer fish.“But he’d sit on the bank with lots of advice,” his son Michael said.In addition to Michael, he is survived by another son, Gregory; a daughter, Annette Lilly Russ; a stepson, Chris Lilly; a stepdaughter, Alisa Flores; his second wife, the former Esther Neufeld; five grandchildren; and two step-grandchildren.Mr. Lilly was known as a raconteur whose conversations often began with a joke. Last year, his stepson told his Facebook followers to visit him for a chat on the porch of his father’s home, a converted boardinghouse, in Three Forks, Mont.“Chances are he’s out front, taking in some vitamin D,” Chris Lilly wrote, “and waiting for a chance to talk about fishing or what it was like to be an officer in the Navy at age 19 during WWII.”An obituary on Monday about the conservationist Bud Lilly omitted several survivors. A stepson, Chris Lilly; a stepdaughter, Alisa Flores; and two step-grandchildren also survive him. In addition, the obituary misidentified the author of a 2016 Facebook post inviting people to visit Mr. Lilly. It was his stepson, Chris — not his son Gregory.A version of this article appears in print on January 16, 2017, on Page B6 of the New York edition with the headline: Conservationist Bud Lilly, Advocate of Catch and Release, Is Dead at 91.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.