By TIM ROHANMARCH 28, 2016
JUPITER, Fla. — The Mets had everyone on their major league roster take the 40-mile trip here on Monday for the team’s final Florida road game of spring training. It was a tradition, designed to be a bonding experience with opening day less than a week away.But all that got pushed to the side when it emerged that Matt Harvey, the team’s ace, had not made the trip. And after the game against the St. Louis Cardinals, the Mets revealed that Harvey would not make his start on Tuesday — scheduled to be his last one of spring training — because of an unspecified ailment that did not involve his pitching arm.Left in doubt was whether he would able to pitch on Sunday night, when the Mets open the regular season in Kansas City, Mo., against the Royals team that beat them in the World Series last fall.Both Mets General Manager Sandy Alderson and Manager Terry Collins declined to provide any details about Harvey’s problem, except to say what it was not. Alderson, at one point, described it as a “nonbaseball medical issue.” Collins, as he was pressed by reporters about the matter, raised his voice as he said: “His arm is fine! His arm is fine! O.K.? His arm is fine.”AdvertisementCollins later added, “It is mysterious, but I’m not at the liberty to discuss it right now.”In his last start against the Houston Astros, five days ago, Harvey surrendered six runs, seven hits and four walks in three innings — his first bad outing of the spring. Good pitchers often have at least one rough game during the exhibition season, and whether Harvey’s difficulties on the mound were in any way connected to his medical situation was unclear.AdvertisementAlderson said he had initially received word from the Mets’ medical staff that Harvey was dealing with a “symptom.” He said that Harvey had been examined, that additional evaluations would take place on Tuesday, and that it was possible Harvey would fly back to New York for still more medical attention.“I think it’s a little early to attach any level of concern,” Alderson said.Any significant setback for Harvey would be major blow for the Mets, who expect him to be the leader of a dynamic pitching rotation that has become the core of the team’s identity. Harvey missed the 2014 season as he recovered from Tommy John surgery, then had a solid comeback in 2015 that was constrained by the team’s desire to treat him carefully.The expectation was that this season, one more year removed from his surgery, he would again be at full throttle and, along with his fellow starters — Jacob deGrom, Noah Syndergaard and Steven Matz — might lead the Mets back to the World Series. For the moment, however, those expectations have been replaced by apprehension until Harvey’s situation becomes clearer.Harvey’s departure came as the Mets’ new shortstop, Asdrubal Cabrera, returned to the lineup after missing about two and a half weeks with a strained patellar tendon. Cabrera played five innings and went hitless in three at-bats, albeit with no reported discomfort. Collins and Cabrera agreed that he had enough time to prepare for the season opener.After the game, Cabrera sat on the floor at his locker, both of his hamstrings and his left knee wrapped in ice and bandages.“I felt really good today,” he said.Get the big sports news, highlights and analysis from Times journalists, with distinctive takes on games and some behind-the-scenes surprises, delivered to your inbox every week.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.The Mets signed Cabrera to a two-year deal worth about $18.5 million in the off-season, and he will team with the Mets’ new second baseman, Neil Walker. They have not had a chance to play together much this spring, but Cabrera said he was not worried.“He’s a great second baseman,” Cabrera said. “I don’t think we have too much to work through.”AdvertisementCabrera’s return came as the Mets lost again, 3-1, running their winless streak this spring to 11 games — eight losses and three ties. In recent days, Collins had grown irritated answering questions about whether spring training results mattered — few people think they do — but on Monday, the much bigger question was Harvey’s status and whether he would be available when the season starts.“It’s hard to say right now,” Collins said. “Don’t know just yet. What I do know, we’re just very lucky to have the pitching we’ve got. In case he can’t go, we’ll have someone else ready.”A version of this article appears in print on March 29, 2016, on Page B14 of the New York edition with the headline: Intrigue Surrounds Harvey’s Absence.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.