By BILLY WITZMARCH 29, 2016
CLEARWATER, Fla. —  As if six weeks of spring training had not been enough to define who belongs where in the Yankees’ pitching hierarchy, a bit of drama was manufactured on Tuesday.On a dark, drizzly afternoon, a pair of games on each end of the Campbell Causeway — the narrow strip of highway that spans Tampa Bay — further defined the most front and center questions: Will Masahiro Tanaka start on opening day, and will C. C. Sabathia be relegated to the bullpen?The answers, yes and no, were not announced officially.But Tanaka, pitching on the road against the Phillies, and Sabathia, throwing against the Pirates at Steinbrenner Field, did not have to make emphatic pronouncements — they only deserved the benefit of the doubt.Tanaka did so in four innings, allowing seven hits and one run before the game was called by rain. He also displayed more dip to his splitter, more bite to his slider and a fastball that touched 92 miles per hour — qualities that seemed absent in recent starts.Advertisement“I thought he dialed it up,” the pitching coach Larry Rothschild said.The Yankees had no qualms about sending Tanaka out in the rain, as long as the mound — which was treated with sand between innings, and which Rothschild continually monitored — was in good shape.AdvertisementRothschild and the starting catcher Brian McCann were with Tanaka on Tuesday, while Manager Joe Girardi remained in Tampa to monitor Sabathia, who pitched to Austin Romine. Sabathia allowed three hits, two runs and two walks and struck out two in four innings against the Pirates before that game was ended by the rain. Girardi said he was pleased with Sabathia’s cut fastball.“I feel good, man,” Sabathia said. “I got no complaints. I’ll be ready to go.”The Yankees will be committing $25 million to Sabathia and $22 million to Tanaka this season, but on Monday, Girardi injected some sense of urgency to both pitchers’ final spring starts. He wanted to be sure that Tanaka was not hiding an injury to his right arm and that Sabathia could make a reasonable case that he was headed in the direction he was taking last September, when he found his stride, thanks to a knee brace after what had been a mostly dreadful season.Two weeks ago, that hardly looked the case. Ivan Nova — the other candidate for the final spot in the rotation — had outperformed Sabathia noticeably during spring training. After four sparkling innings against the Red Sox, Nova had allowed two runs over nine innings in his first three starts.In his next two starts, Nova has allowed 10 hits, six walks and nine earned runs. He allowed three home runs against Baltimore in his last outing.“We’ve got one more time each,” said Nova, who is scheduled to make his final start Wednesday against Atlanta. “We’ll see what happens.”The more significant development this spring has been the steps forward seemingly taken by Bryan Mitchell, who Girardi said Tuesday has won a spot in the bullpen.Mitchell, whose mid-90s fastball has excellent movement, has allowed just one run on six hits and one walk in 142/3 innings. He has struck out 11.Get the big sports news, highlights and analysis from Times journalists, with distinctive takes on games and some behind-the-scenes surprises, delivered to your inbox every week.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.If Mitchell, as the long reliever, pitches as well as he has in the exhibition season, it will ease the burden on a staff that last season struggled to get far into games. With five bullpen spots spoken for — Chasen Shreve, who has not allowed a run, along with Andrew Miller, Dellin Betances, Mitchell and presumably Nova — two spots remain open for opening day. (One would have gone to Aroldis Chapman, but he has been suspended for 30 games over a domestic violence episode.)AdvertisementAmong the candidates are the right-handers Branden Pinder, Johnny Barbato, Anthony Swarzak, Kirby Yates and Nick Goody and the left-hander Tyler Olson.The Yankees’ reluctance to commit to Tanaka for opening day stemmed from his unwillingness in recent starts to fully commit to his pitches. Since Tanaka pitched with a slightly torn elbow ligament last season and had off-season elbow surgery to remove bone spurs, the Yankees were concerned that he might be hurting.“For one, you’ve dealt with a few arm issues, so you want to make sure that he’s healthy going into the season,” Rothschild said. “I think you want to have a pitcher in a good frame of mind to start the season, where he’s comfortable and he knows he can execute pitches the way he’s used to doing it. There’s a variety of reasons, health along with performance and getting him off to the right start.”Tanaka, who threw 90 pitches Tuesday — about 25 in an indoor bullpen session after the game was called — said he agreed with Rothschild’s assessment, which they had spoken about recently, and that his arm felt fine.As for being motivated by Girardi’s comments that he needed to dial up his performance on Tuesday, Tanaka was puzzled.“Actually, we didn’t have that sort of a conversation,” Tanaka said through an interpreter. “I didn’t even check the papers.”A version of this article appears in print on March 30, 2016, on Page B15 of the New York edition with the headline: Tanaka and Sabathia Soothe Yanks’ Doubts.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.