AdvertisementSupported byDevils 2, Bruins 1By The Associated PressWhile the Devils were fighting for a playoff spot with five games left in the regular season, it looked as if the Boston Bruins were trying to give one away.Reid Boucher scored a tiebreaking power-play goal early in the third period on Tuesday night, Keith Kinkaid made 39 saves, and the Devils kept their faint playoff hopes alive with a 2-1 victory over the Bruins in Brooklyn.“I think it was real important for the team,” Kinkaid said after the Devils halted a two-game skid. “We needed a bounce-back game from Carolina just to stay in the race. We can only control our games. We just have to hope there are a few losses from other teams. We just have to win our games.”The Devils moved to within 5 points of Philadelphia and Detroit in the race for the final playoff spot in the Eastern Conference. The Bruins remained in third place in the Atlantic Division — a playoff spot — despite losing for the sixth time in seven games.Detroit’s 4-3 loss to Montreal kept the Red Wings from taking over third, leaving them 1 point behind Boston.The Devils, Detroit and Boston all have five games left in the regular season.“You can look at it any way you want,” Bruins Coach Claude Julien said, “but you have to look at yourselves, and blame yourselves first, for this loss. You can say you tried, but at this time of year, it’s not good enough. The situation that we are in, we expect better from ourselves.”The Bruins did everything but win. They outshot the Devils, 40-15, but they were done in by penalties. The Devils went 2 for 5 with the man advantage, with Boucher and Travis Zajac setting up each other for goals.Boucher got the game-winner just seven seconds after the Bruins’ captain, Zdeno Chara, was called for boarding Devante Smith-Pelly. Chara objected on his way to the penalty box, and his frustration quickly mounted.The Devils won the face-off, and the puck eventually rolled to Zajac, who found Boucher alone in the right circle for his eighth goal of the season.“We were desperate, too,” Boucher said. “We’re not out of it by any means. We’re going to try and keep this going and see what happens.”Brad Marchand scored for the first time in nine games for the Bruins. Tuukka Rask made 13 stops.“You want to find ways to win and get at it,” Bruins center Patrice Bergeron said. “You don’t want to start banging on your heads and kind of get frustrated. It’s about getting results and putting your chin up and going out there and finding a way.”The Devils had lost five in a row against Boston.Kinkaid stopped 16 shots in the final 20 minutes. The most dangerous was a rebound attempt by Matt Beleskey with 8 minutes 40 seconds left, but he missed the net.Marchand tied the game early in the second period with a great individual effort on his way to his 35th goal. He took a pass from Chara at the Devils’ blue line, split defensemen Andy Greene and Adam Larsson, faked Kinkaid to the ice and deposited a backhander into an open net.The Devils jumped in front at 16:59 of the first period. Boucher, who took a high stick from Bergeron to set up a power-play opportunity, found Zajac on the inside of the right circle, and Zajac beat Rask for his 14th goal, his second in two games.Kinkaid was playing for the first time in five games because his game had slipped after he took over for the injured Cory Schneider.Scott Wedgewood had played well after being called up from Albany, with Kinkaid serving as his backup. The rest seemed to do Kinkaid good. He stopped all 11 shots in the first period, including a breakaway by Beleskey and two-on-one shots by David Pastrnak and Loui Eriksson.“A great response,” Zajac said of Kinkaid. “He’s a gamer. He had, like, five two-on-ones in the first period. He came up big, and we got the lead. We did a better job of closing it up and not giving them as many odd-man rushes.”Advertisement