By ROB NEYERMARCH 28, 2016
When the Seattle Mariners hired 22-year-old Amanda Hopkins in December, it was widely reported that she was the first full-time female scout employed by a Major League Baseball team since the 1950s — which seems to be true.In 1946, the Philadelphia Phillies hired Edith Houghton, and for nearly 65 years after Houghton left baseball in 1951, not a single woman, it appears, worked for an M.L.B. team as a full-time scout.It was also reported, when Houghton died in 2013, that she might well have been the last woman to work as a scout, part time or full time — which was not true.But the story begins before Houghton. It begins with the first known female scout: Bessie Largent, who teamed up with her husband, Roy, for 18 years.AdvertisementIn 1925, the Chicago White Sox hired Roy Largent as a full-time scout. Bessie signed on as Roy’s secretary, practically a necessity given his near or complete deafness. But Bessie had already seen plenty of baseball while serving as the scorekeeper for the high school baseball team that Roy coached. And in 1933, The Sporting News reported that together the Largents had “the eyes and judgment of a man; the cleverness and intuition of a woman.”In 1936, the Chicago Daily Tribune columnist Arch Ward suggested that Bessie, not Roy, had been largely responsible for the White Sox’ acquisition of shortstop Luke Appling, a future Hall of Famer.AdvertisementBy the time Roy died in 1943, Bessie had been struggling with severe arthritis for five years, and her scouting career ended around the same time. During their tenure with the White Sox, the Largents reportedly signed more than 150 players, with 25 reaching the major leagues.That brings us to Houghton. At 10 years old, she ranked among the United States’ best female baseball players, and she toured Japan in the 1920s with the Philadelphia Bobbies. Later she played with the New York Bloomer Girls and the Hollywood Girls, two of the top women’s barnstorming teams. Houghton also served during World War II in the Waves, the women’s division of the United States Navy.In 1946, with her playing career over, Houghton approached the Phillies’ owner, Robert Carpenter, and talked her way into a job as a full-time scout.During her five-plus years with the Phillies, Houghton reportedly signed 16 players, none reaching the majors. She was recalled to the Navy in 1951 and served until 1964, but little is known about the last 50 years of her life. What is known is that during that time, not a single woman worked as a full-time major league scout.Part-timers, though?In the late 1960s, the Kansas City Royals scout Art Stewart hired Lois Brandenburg, a legend in west-central Wisconsin, as an associate scout, or “bird dog,” after she told Stewart about a local player named Tom Poquette, whom the Royals drafted a year or so later.But bird-dog scouts were (and are) typically paid little or nothing, perhaps receiving a small bonus if they recommended a player who eventually signed a contract or reached the major leagues.AdvertisementAlso in the 1960s, Baltimore Orioles General Manager Harry Dalton hired Dorothy Fox, already a staple at Rochester Red Wings games in the Class AAA International League, to file reports on visiting players. Dalton later worked for the California Angels and the Milwaukee Brewers, and Fox followed him. Dalton retired from baseball in 1994, but Fox scouted for other clubs, including the Orioles again, according to The Democrat and Chronicle of Rochester.Roland Hemond, now a consultant with the Arizona Diamondbacks, said that when he was Baltimore’s general manager, Fox “wasn’t paid, but she got an Orioles jacket, and the Red Wings gave her a good seat for every home game.”In 1979, the Cleveland Indians signed a young pitcher from Massachusetts named George Merry. He had been scouted by Jennie Paul, the daughter of the Indians’ president at the time, Gabe Paul. She had first gotten the scouting itch a decade earlier while going to boarding school in Red Springs, N.C., which happened to be the home of a Minnesota Twins farm team.By 1979, Paul had worked as a flight attendant for Trans World Airlines, written for various newspapers and worked as on-air talent for local television stations. But she still wanted to scout, only to be told by at least one front-office executive that she could not do that and expect to be paid. (She never was.) Still, she found Merry in Ipswich, Mass.Paul still remembers his “huge feet, size 13 or something.” She also recalls that in spring training the next year, Merry “wouldn’t run” and was cut on April Fools’ Day.When Houghton died in February 2013, Frank Marcos, who was then the senior director of the Major League Baseball Scouting Bureau, a cooperative scouting service, suggested that Houghton had been the last female scout.“Would I like to change that?” he said. “Darn right.”A year earlier, Robin Wallace had paid her own way to attend M.L.B.’s scout school, an intensive two-week course in which students are taught the rudiments of evaluating the potential of young players. At the time, enrollment was by invitation only.“Because of her background in baseball,” Marcos said, “Robin just picked it up really well, had the ability to slow the game down. I felt very strongly that Robin was ready to go out and be a full-time scout.”AdvertisementMarcos added that he “tried to hire her from the day the program ended” but met resistance from M.L.B. headquarters in New York.Two years later, Marcos did hire Wallace, who had played baseball in college, been a member of the United States national team in the Women’s Baseball World Cup, and led the front offices of independent minor league teams. She also earned a law degree and opened a small private practice.“I think I’m able to recognize intangibles,” Wallace said when asked why she might have stood out at scout school. “Law school teaches you to better see the intangibles.”Get the big sports news, highlights and analysis from Times journalists, with distinctive takes on games and some behind-the-scenes surprises, delivered to your inbox every week.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.Wallace’s scouting workload from March through August, covering amateur players in most New England states, is practically full time. Officially speaking, though, Wallace is the scouting bureau’s only part-time scout (maintaining a law practice and raising a 16-month-old son will lead to some compromises).That leaves 22-year-old Amanda Hopkins in a class of her own.Bill Bavasi, who succeeded Marcos as the scouting bureau’s senior director, said that if the Mariners had not hired Hopkins, he would have.Hopkins might be the youngest scout in the game this year, but she has loads of experience. Her father, Ron, is the scouting director for the Pittsburgh Pirates, and he previously held the position with the Texas Rangers and the Oakland Athletics. Amanda Hopkins played college softball at Central Washington and was an intern for the Mariners for three summers.“We sent her to scout school, and she ranked pretty high in the class,” the Mariners’ scouting director, Tom McNamara, told MLB.com. “When I called to tell her we’d nominated her for scout school, she was in tears on the phone, literally in tears. It was kind of chilling. It meant a lot to her.”But that was just the first step. The next was being hired as a scout — and Hopkins was, taking over as the Mariners’ “four corners” scout, covering high school and college players in Utah, Colorado, New Mexico and Arizona.If one of Hopkins’s signees someday reaches the majors, that will be another first. If you don’t count Bessie Largent.A version of this article appears in print on March 29, 2016, on Page B11 of the New York edition with the headline: A Good Eye, Overlooked.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.See More »