By THE ASSOCIATED PRESSMARCH 29, 2016
ALAMEDA, Calif. —  The opportunity to reminisce and trade stories with old Raiders teammates is always one of the highlights for the Hall of Famer Fred Biletnikoff when he hosts his annual golf tournament.The fact that the event is one of the major fund-raisers each year for a cause so dear to Biletnikoff and his family makes the event even more special.The golf tournament and a crab feed held each fall are the main events that raise money for the Biletnikoff Foundation. In recent years, most of the money has been dedicated to a major renovation for Tracey’s Place of Hope — the home for at-risk teenage girls named after Biletnikoff’s daughter, who was murdered in 1999, when she was 20.Biletnikoff and his wife, Angela, have spent much of the time since then focused on building a legacy for Tracey, who kicked her own drug habit and was helping teenagers do the same when she was killed by her ex-boyfriend, an addict she was trying to get back into rehabilitation.Advertisement“It means the world to our family to know that with Tracey’s passing a few years ago now, the majority of these guys were the first ones to really call and ask if we need any help in any way and offer anything,” said Biletnikoff, 73. “When we started events, they were the first ones to sign up and come to play. They continue to do so, which means the world to Angela and me.”AdvertisementAmong the players expected at the tournament on May 2 at the Ruby Hill Golf Club in Pleasanton, Calif., are Tim Brown, Tom Flores, James Lofton, Cliff Branch, Daryle Lamonica, Richard Dent, Mike Haynes, Ted Hendricks, Jim Otto and Raiders Coach Jack Del Rio.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.The Raiders who gather for the tournament will spend some time remembering former teammates and coaches who died in 2015. The former defensive coordinator Charlie Sumner, receiver Art Powell, fullback Marv Hubbard and quarterback Ken Stabler all died last year.“When you find out they passed away, it shocks you because you never think of them passing away,” said Biletnikoff, a first-team All-Pro at receiver twice in his 14-year career. “That’s the thing that really gets to you emotionally. We all had a great run of friendship and years as players together and winning and having laughs and just having a good time. Don’t worry — all those names come up when we all get together, believe me. We have a lot of laughs. That’s the Raider way.”But the main cause is raising money to help finance the renovation that started last summer at Tracey’s Place in Loomis, Calif. The home accommodates six girls at once who are trying to overcome addiction, domestic violence and sexual abuse. Counselors help them recover and prepare for the next phase of their lives.The renovation will expand the kitchen and bathrooms and modernize the home to make it a better spot for the girls trying to get their lives back on track. It is expected to be completed in April.“It’s amazing to see,” Biletnikoff said. “We’re so happy with what’s being done inside. The girls are so excited and taken aback to see what’s happening from what it was. They really love it.”We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.