By NAILA-JEAN MEYERSMARCH 29, 2016
Every Tuesday, The New York Times will look at the week ahead in the N.H.L., highlighting hot — or not so hot — teams and players. (All times Eastern.)Blackhawks at Wild, Tuesday, 8 p.m.Winner of five in a row, Minnesota has built a 3-point lead over Colorado for the eighth and final playoff spot in the Western Conference. Zach Parise has led the charge, with five goals and two assists in the last three games. The Wild are 4-0 this season against Chicago, which has eliminated them from the playoffs the past three years. The Blackhawks are causing concern of late, losing five of six before two wins in Western Canada over the weekend. They have slipped to third in the Central Division and are only 4 points ahead of Nashville, which is in a wild-card spot. Goalie Corey Crawford has missed the past four games with an upper-body injury, and Coach Joel Quenneville could only say the Blackhawks “think” Crawford will be back in time for the playoffs.Capitals at Flyers, Wednesday, 8 p.m., NBCSNWashington clinched the Presidents’ Trophy on Monday, with seven games left. But the Capitals are the only Eastern Conference team that has secured a playoff berth. Philadelphia is staying in the hunt, earning points in 11 of its past 12 games. The Flyers enter Tuesday’s action in the East’s second wild-card spot by virtue of having a game in hand on Detroit, which plays Tuesday in Montreal.Rangers at Hurricanes, Thursday, 7 p.m.Eric Staal, a longtime Hurricanes star, returns to Carolina for the first time since being traded to the Rangers before the deadline. Staal is coming off a two-goal game Sunday against Pittsburgh, but has only three goals and two assists in 14 games with the Rangers.AdvertisementPenguins at Islanders, Saturday, 1 p.m.Pittsburgh wrapped up its season series against the Rangers with an overtime victory Sunday and has won eight of its last nine. The Penguins head to Brooklyn this weekend trying to stay ahead of the Islanders for third place in the Metropolitan Division. They then have a chance to thwart the playoff chances of the rival Flyers on Sunday at home.AdvertisementStars at Kings, Saturday 4 p.m.Dallas and Los Angeles are still in tight battles for their respective division titles. But the Stars, who lost the star forward Tyler Seguin two weeks ago, have won four of five, while the Kings are sputtering, losing four of five.Women’s World Championship, Through April 4The women’s hockey world championship tournament began Monday in Kamloops, British Columbia. Round-robin group play in the eight-team tournament continues through Thursday before the quarterfinals Friday and semifinals Sunday. There is no reason to believe the gold medal game on April 4 will not be between the United States and Canada, who have met in every final since the tournament began in 1990. Canada has won it 10 times and the United States has won six, including the last two. The Americans beat Canada, 3-1, in round-robin play Monday.The Blues are making a run for the top seed in the Western Conference, winning four in a row and 10 of 12 to tie the Stars with 99 points. St. Louis has done it with stingy goaltending. Brian Elliott and Jake Allen have combined for four straight shutouts, and entering Tuesday’s game against Colorado, the Blues have not allowed a goal in 240 minutes 18 seconds, a franchise record. The shutouts have been an emphatic response to giving up 13 goals in two games to the Flames and the Oilers before the streak began. The Blues are the first team with four shutouts in a row since Brian Boucher of the Coyotes set an N.H.L. record with five straight shutouts from Dec. 31, 2003, to Jan. 9, 2004.Jimmy VeseyAs the season winds down, the Nashville Predators (39-24-13) are one of the hottest teams in the league and can claim a playoff spot Tuesday with a win and a Colorado loss. But when the playoffs arrive, the Predators may not have their preferred lineup on the ice.In 2012, Nashville drafted left wing Jimmy Vesey in the third round. In the years since, Vesey became a star at Harvard. He has been a finalist for the Hobey Baker Award, given to college hockey’s best player, for the past two seasons, during which he compiled 56 goals and 48 assists in 70 games.Last year, in a somewhat surprising move, Vesey decided to play his senior season at Harvard rather than sign with the Predators, but they expected him to join them after Harvard’s season ended this year. They expected it so much, based on conversations with Vesey and his family, that it affected their plans at the trade deadline in February. General Manager David Poile said Vesey, who is from the Boston area and whose father works as a scout for the Maple Leafs, had been offered a spot on one of the team’s top lines.Harvard lost in the N.C.A.A. tournament over the weekend, with Predators officials in attendance. But by Monday it appeared that Vesey, 22, would test free agency rather than sign with Nashville for the rest of this season. Under the collective bargaining agreement, an N.H.L. team retains the rights to a drafted player who spends four years in college until Aug. 15 of the player’s graduation year. After that, the player can become a free agent.“We’ve been a big part of his development,” Poile told reporters Monday. “We’ve invested a lot of time. Our relationship is good. The fit and opportunity remain very good here for him in Nashville, and I am going to continue to see whether we can try to persuade him to change his mind.”We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.