AdvertisementSupported bySpecial Report: U.S. Open GolfBy Jeff ShainThe memories were set aside a long time ago, Dustin Johnson insists. No waking up in a cold sweat over that gasp-inducing trio of putts 50 weeks ago on the baked-out final green at Chambers Bay that cost him the United States Open title, which would have been his first victory in a major.If anything, he’s annoyed at the notion that anyone would think his poor finish might have lingering effects nearly a year later.“I don’t know if anyone’s aware of it, but I’ve played 20 freaking tournaments since Chambers Bay,” Johnson said on CBS television after a round last week. “It’s not that I’ll be O.K. I am O.K.”And in looking at the big picture, he is. Johnson’s third-place finish at the Memorial Tournament on June 5 was his 15th top-10 place in his past 30 starts worldwide. It also moved the South Carolina native up to No.6 in the world rankings.Johnson, 31, has victories in each of his previous eight PGA Tour seasons going back to his rookie year, the longest streak among active players on the circuit.That streak, though, begins to look a little worn as another U.S. Open approaches, beginning Thursday at Oakmont Country Club outside Pittsburgh. The last time Johnson added to his trophy collection was in March 2015, at the World Golf Championships event at Doral in Miami. Although the Chambers Bay disaster itself may not be a burden, it may be part of a larger malaise.“I’ve felt like I’m playing well,” Johnson said. “I just haven’t quite played up to my potential.”If potential had a greater influence on golf, Johnson might be on his way to the game’s Hall of Fame. There’s still plenty of time for that, of course. With his lanky build, languid swing and natural athleticism, Johnson is among the first golfers cited by fellow pros when asked who has the most natural gifts.“Dustin Johnson is arguably the most talented player on the PGA Tour,” said Jordan Spieth, the U.S. Open winner last year. “I think he’s not only a freak athlete, but a freak golf athlete. He has great hands, great clubface control. He hits some shots you won’t see anybody else trying.”Johnson averages nearly 310 yards per drive, so it’s no surprise he is among the PGA Tour’s top dozen in making birdies on par-5 holes. He ranks equally well in making birdie on par-4s and par-3s.“I feel like my golf game in total has been solid and consistent,” he said. “Every week I feel like I’m up there and I’ve got a chance to win.”The mystery, then, is why he hasn’t.The technical answer is that Johnson’s short game remains inconsistent. He saves par from a greenside bunker less than half the time, and his putting can run extremely hot and cold.“I feel like I’m burning the edges all the time,” he said. “It’s not like I feel like I’m hitting bad putts, it’s just barely off.”Nonetheless, that could spell trouble on Oakmont’s wickedly fast greens.The less technical answer to Johnson’s dry spell, of course, is that the long haul of weekends has become a stumbling block.“His physical attributes are wonderful,” said Notah Begay III, a Golf Channel analyst. “I think just maintaining the level of focus that a player needs to maintain for 72 holes — round-in, round-out — he has a tendency to lose focus. Sometimes it’s a couple of holes, sometimes it’s three or four, and it costs him.”Johnson’s Sunday shortcomings at majors are well chronicled: the three-shot lead heading to the final round of the 2010 U.S. Open that was gone within two holes; the bunker-rules gaffe that kept him out of a P.G.A. Championship playoff two months later; his pursuit of Darren Clarke at the 2011 British Open that ended with an out-of-bounds 2-iron on No.14 at Royal St. George’s in Sandwich, England; and the sting of that final hole at Chambers Bay.Needing an eagle to win or a birdie to tie Spieth and send the U.S. Open to a Monday playoff, Johnson found himself staring at an eagle chance after his approach came to rest 12 feet from the flag.That putt didn’t fall, nor did the 4-foot follow-up. That meant the title was Spieth’s, and both he and Johnson were left with looks of disbelief.“I felt like I did what I was supposed to do in that situation,” Johnson recalled. “It wasn’t really anything to be upset about or to be down on.”“I hit the shots I needed to hit in the situation and in that moment,” he added. “It was unfortunate the surfaces of those greens weren’t as smooth as they should have been, but it is what it is.”In reply to questions about how long that sting would linger, Johnson went out a few weeks later and blistered St. Andrews in Scotland with a 65 on the first day of the British Open Championship. A subsequent 69 in a wind-whipped second round left him with the 36-hole lead, but he then shot 75-75 over the final two days.He also led after the P.G.A. Championship’s opening round at Whistling Straits, only to follow with a 73 as Jason Day and Spieth began to pull away.There is a similar pattern in regular events this season. Johnson ranks among the PGA Tour’s top two in both first- and second-round scoring average, but he is outside the top 50 for the third-round average and doesn’t crack the top 100 for the final round.In Johnson’s five top-5 finishes this year, including a tie for fourth at the Masters, he has not turned in a final round lower than 69.“It’s the pressure we all put on ourselves,” said the Australian veteran Rod Pampling, who was paired with Johnson for two days at Memorial. “A little pressure here and there, and it changes a lot of things.”Only Johnson can change his current trends. Although Oakmont might seem an unlikely venue for a shift, Johnson is too gifted to be ruled out.Advertisement