MAY 26, 2016
The best-selling sports books in April 2016, according to the New York Times best-seller list.1. THE BOYS IN THE BOAT by Daniel James Brown (Penguin). A group of American rowers pursues gold at the 1936 Berlin Olympic Games.2. SHOE DOG by Phil Knight (Scribner). A memoir by the founder of Nike.3. BACK FROM THE DEAD by Bill Walton (Simon & Schuster). An autobiography of the former basketball player (and Grateful Dead fan), who has struggled with injuries.4. THE ARM by Jeff Passan (Harper). The intricate mechanics of the human arm and the epidemic of orthopedic injuries and operations in professional baseball and youth sports.5. UNBROKEN by Laura Hillenbrand (Random House). An Olympic runner’s story of survival as a prisoner of the Japanese in World War II; a 2014 movie.Advertisement6. THE LEGENDS CLUB by John Feinstein (Doubleday). A sportswriter’s account of three famous basketball coaches and their rivalry.Advertisement7. GAME 7, 1986 by Ron Darling with Daniel Paisner (St. Martin’s Press). On the 30th anniversary of the Mets’ 1986 championship season, the baseball analyst reflects on his failures and triumphs and signature career moments as a player then.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.8. BARBARIAN DAYS by William Finnegan (Penguin). A surfing chronicle and memoir by a New Yorker writer.9. I NEVER HAD IT MADE by Jackie Robinson (Ecco/HarperCollins). This autobiography was originally published in 1972, the year Jackie Robinson died; this edition has new introductory material.10. AMERICAN PHAROAH by Joe Drape (Hachette Books). A portrait of the Triple Crown-winning racehorse and the lives he changed during his championship.13. BOYS AMONG MEN by Jonathan Abrams (Crown/Archetype). The prep-to-pro generation of basketball prodigies of 1995 to 2005 and how they redefined the N.B.A.Rankings reflect sales for April 2016. The sports titles ranked here are selected by the editors from among all adult nonfiction books in all print and electronic formats, as reported to the New York Times best-seller list for the previous month. The definition of sports is deliberately broad and inclusive, so as to reflect all manner of the outdoor sports world, varying from the professional leagues to personal athleticism.A version of this list appears in print on May 30, 2016, on Page D6 of the New York edition with the headline: The Best Sellers: Filed Under Sports.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.