AdvertisementSupported byEssayBy Thomas HauserMuhammad Ali told me in 1997 that he planned on living until age 90. We were on a bus in Boston en route to an elementary school for an assembly devoted to teaching students about tolerance and understanding. Ali’s speech was noticeably affected by then as a consequence of Parkinson’s syndrome. But he was still physically strong, and his thought processes were clear.As we approached the school, Ali was reminiscing about some of the people who had played a significant role in his life: his father; Elijah Muhammad; Sonny Liston; a few others. “Ninety would be good,” he told me. “I think I’ll live to be 90. But if I’m feeling good when I’m 89, I might change my mind and ask God to let me live longer.”In the end, Ali died on June 3 at age 74, after a sad, slow physical decline that lasted three decades and was witnessed by the entire world.We watched Ali slowly and inexorably lose one physical characteristic after another: his movement, his voice, his good looks. Once, his face had sparkled with happiness. In his later years, it often did not. Instead, it almost seemed as if the suffering of the world was etched on his face.Ali’s long goodbye began in September 1984, when he checked into the Columbia-Presbyterian Medical Center in New York for eight days of diagnostic tests.“I’m not suffering,” Ali told reporters. “I’m in no pain. It’s really nothing I can’t live with. But I go to bed and sleep eight, 10 hours. And two hours after I get up, I’m tired and drowsy again. Sometimes, I have trembling in my hands. My speech is slurred. People say to me: ‘What did you say? I can’t understand you.’ I’m not scared, but my family and friends are scared to death.”By then, he was suffering from a series of symptoms — slurred speech, difficulty in maintaining balance, a facial mask and a tremor in his hands — known as Parkinson’s syndrome.Dr. Stanley Fahn is the director of the Center for Parkinson’s Disease and Other Movement Disorders at Columbia University. In 1984, he was the supervising physician for Ali’s evaluation at Columbia-Presbyterian. Fahn spoke openly with me several years later regarding Ali’s medical condition, with permission from Ali.His condition, Fahn concluded, had been caused by physical trauma that destroyed cells in his brainstem.“He has asked that I speak freely and completely,” Fahn said at the time. “So I’ll tell you my diagnosis that it was a post-traumatic Parkinsonism due to injuries from fighting. It’s highly unlikely that it all came from one fight. My assumption is that his physical condition resulted from repeated blows to the head over time.”Boxing takes a heavy toll on those who practice the trade. In his career, Ali had 61 professional fights against 50 opponents. Twenty-nine of those men died before he did. Ali inflicted brain damage on his opponents, too. The punishment wasn’t all one way.In the ring, Ali always got up. In and out of the ring, he was willing to pay the price to accomplish what he wanted to achieve. And as he grew older, we saw that price.Twenty-five years ago, Ali told me: “I don’t want anyone to feel sorry for me, because I had a good life before and I’m having a good life now. It would be bad if I had a disease that was contagious. Then I couldn’t play with children and hug people. But my problem with speaking bothers other people more than it bothers me. It doesn’t stop me from doing what I want to do and being what I want to be.”Lonnie Ali, his wife, built on that theme, saying at the time: “It’s scary for anybody to experience a physical decline. But when the whole world is watching and so much of your life has been defined by your physical skills, to lose that is very difficult.“And what happened was, for the first time in Muhammad’s life, he became intimidated. He stopped speaking as freely as before because he was afraid that as soon as he opened his mouth, people would say, ‘Listen to Muhammad; he can’t even talk.’ ”Ali’s physical condition worsened markedly in the years that followed. His symptoms became more pronounced. In his final years, when he tried to speak, the words didn’t come out. He found it increasingly difficult to communicate, not just with the public, but also with those he loved. It was sad for everyone who cared about Ali. And it was sad for Ali. But one had the sense that he was at peace with himself.“I accept it as God’s will,” Ali told me. “I know that God never gives anyone a burden that’s too heavy to carry. What I’m going through now is short in time compared to eternity.”Still, certain realities were hard to ignore.Jerry Izenberg knew Ali as well as any writer. “We had a pretty good idea of what Ali once was,” Izenberg said a year ago. “We don’t know what he is now. There’s a person inside. I know that. And he carries his personal history in him. But I don’t care what anyone says; he’s not Muhammad Ali anymore. I’m fighting to block what I see now from entering my mind any more than it has to. This isn’t the way I want to remember him.”Ali’s second wife also struggled with what she saw.Khalilah Ali grew up in the Nation of Islam. She married Ali on Aug. 17, 1967, when she was 17 and he was 25. They had four children together: three girls (Maryum, Rasheda, Jamillah) and a son (Muhammad Jr.). Ten years after they married, they were divorced.“The way it started for me in terms of seeing Ali’s illness,” Khalilah told me in December 2014, “was I hadn’t seen him for a while. Then I saw him at Maryum’s wedding," which was in the mid-1990s. “He was shaking and he was talking funny. I couldn’t understand what he was saying. It scared me. I said to him: ‘Something is wrong. You shouldn’t be like this.’ And he told me: ‘Sometimes I don’t talk clear. But I ain’t fighting no more. It will be O.K.’ ”Of course, it wasn’t O.K.“He didn’t deserve this,” Khalilah said during our interview. “In his heart, Ali is a good man. It hurts so much to see him like this. If he hadn’t gotten old so fast, who knows what else he might have done.”Then I asked Khalilah when the last time was that she’d seen Ali.“I think it was at Joe Frazier’s funeral," which took place on Nov. 15, 2011. “Lonnie and her sister, Marilyn, were trying to walk Ali in," she added. “I’m thinking, ‘Don’t try to walk him. Get a wheelchair. That’s what wheelchairs are for.’“He was suffering, trying to walk. I worked in a hospital. I know what it is to be a caretaker. Don’t make him struggle to walk. Get him a wheelchair. Finally, they got him in his seat, and I went over to say hello. Whenever I see him, I try to say something happy. He kept looking at me. He was trying so hard to be nice, but he couldn’t talk. It brought tears to my eyes, seeing him struggling to communicate.”Larry Holmes was also at Frazier’s funeral. Like Frazier, Holmes hit Ali hard, repeatedly.“Joe’s funeral was the last time I saw Ali,” Holmes said. “I went over and shook his hand. I’ve seen him on TV a few times since then. Each time, he looks worse than he did before.“It’s a shame,” Holmes continued. “But it was all up to him. Ali should have stopped fighting when he couldn’t get away from punches anymore. But he did what he wanted to do. I thought I’d be 25 for the rest of my life, too.”Mark Twain once observed: “It is curious that physical courage should be so common in the world and moral courage so rare." Ali had both. He didn’t change the world as much as he wanted to, and he didn’t reach age 90, either.But he did what he was meant to do, and in immeasurable ways he inspired the world.Thomas Hauser is the author of “Muhammad Ali: A Tribute to the Greatest,” which has been published by Pegasus Books in the United States and is being published by HarperUK in Britain. A longer version of this essay appears in the book.Advertisement