AdvertisementSupported byBy Karen CrouseOAKMONT, Pa. — The little evil voice plagued the Big Easy, as if mocking the nickname that had been bestowed upon Ernie Els because of his fluid swing. On bad days, the voice pounded his mind with negative thoughts. Even on Els’s best days, like the Monday playoff in the 1994 United States Open at Oakmont Country Club, the voice cleared its throat on his backswings as he started with a bogey and a triple bogey and found only six fairways before winning on the 20th hole.It was the first of four major titles for Els, who went on to spend a total of nine weeks as the world No. 1 in 1997 and 1998 and gain entrance into the World Golf Hall of Fame in 2011. In 2002, when he made the British Open at Muirfield his third major victory, his wife, Liezl, was pregnant with the couple’s second child. That baby, born three months after Els’s triumph, would deliver him from the little evil voice.But not right away. Born a Libra like his father, Els’s son was slow to crawl, slow to walk, and slow to talk. His bright blue eyes would not meet his father’s adoring gaze. The little evil voice that badgered the Big Easy on the course followed him home. “What did I do wrong?” Els wailed to his wife.His boy was different, that much was painfully obvious, and soon they would have a diagnosis: autism. It was a word Els and his wife knew only in the context of Dustin Hoffman’s character in the 1988 film “Rain Man.”“It was hard for him,” Liezl Els said. “I think he just wanted to know, were we in any way responsible for what happened to Ben? He was like: ‘I’m supposed to take care of this family. Where did I mess up?’”Ernie Els, 46, looks back at his 1994 self, the one anointed “the golfer of the future” by Jack Nicklaus after he separated himself from his playoff foes Colin Montgomerie and Loren Roberts, and he barely recognizes him. He is not the same person who will return to Oakmont this week for the 116th United States Open.“At 24, I was way ahead of my time as a golfer,” he said, “but as a man I was nowhere.”He embarked on the path that would lead to personal fulfillment in 2008, when he chose to go public with his son’s autism. Els and his wife formed the Els for Autism Foundation to raise awareness and money for the little understood neurodevelopmental disorder, which is characterized by impairments in social interaction and verbal and nonverbal communication and by restricted and repetitive behavior.According to the Autism and Developmental Disabilities Monitoring Network at the Centers for Disease Control and Prevention, roughly one in 68 children in the United States has autism spectrum disorder, representing every racial, ethnic and socioeconomic group.But many overwhelmed parents of children on the spectrum retreat into the shadows because they feel embarrassment and shame, as if it is a bankruptcy of their sometimes deep investment in a perfect family tableau. The Elses were no different.“In 1994, we were flying so high, not a care in the world,” Liezl Els said. “But who we are now, this journey from Oakmont to today, that journey was made even more interesting because of Ben.”She said her husband had undergone the most profound transformation.“Ernie’s relationship with Ben has gone from, ‘What am I going to do with this kid?’ to ‘When can I spend time with him again?’” she said. “It’s been a beautiful evolution.”Liezl Els was speaking last month from behind the wheel of her sport-utility vehicle as she navigated traffic on Interstate 95 in north Palm Beach County after an autism-related business lunch. The drive to publicize their son’s autism for the greater good began with her, generally more outgoing and outspoken than her husband, questioning his sense of direction.“He was the brave one,” she said. “It’s so funny with my big mouth and all, but I was the afraid one who wanted to hide my head in the sand. Even though it took him a longer while to come to grips with Ben’s autism, when he decided, ‘This is the way I’m going,’ he went full-tilt ahead.”For parents of children on the autism spectrum, the world becomes a giant booby trap, rigged for outbursts that lead only to a minefield of scorn and judgment. In 2013, Liezl Els was traveling with the couple’s daughter Samantha, then 14; Ben, who was 10; and her mother-in-law from London to Philadelphia to watch Els play in the U.S. Open at Merion.The trans-Atlantic flight to Miami was uneventful, she said, and the immigration officers whisked them to the front of the customs line after noticing Ben’s fitfulness. In the boarding area for the flight to Philadelphia, an overtired and overstimulated Ben launched into what she described as one of his “2-year-old tantrums.”The flight attendants informed her that unless she could calm her son, he would not be allowed on the plane. They were able to board only after one of the pilots intervened. The couple’s activism sprouted from a heap of such public indignities.“You get to that stage where your child’s autism is the elephant in the room in players’ dining or at the 18th green,” Ernie Els said. “When Ben would have an outburst, I could hear people whispering, ‘What’s wrong with him?’ And I decided: You know what? I need to tell people my son has autism. He’s a little different, but he’s my boy.”Ben’s sister, Samantha, who will soon be a high school senior, was the first to embrace her brother’s separateness. “She would come to me and say: ‘Mom, why are you trying to change him? Ben is unique,’” Liezl Els said.Her husband looks at the reigning United States Open champion, Jordan Spieth, who has a younger sister on the spectrum, and in him sees the same compassion and forbearance as his daughter. “Samantha’s such a special kid,” he said, adding that at times she seemed to be more of a parent to Ben than he and his wife were.In 2008, the family moved from their home base in London to Jupiter, Fla. Overwhelmed at times by their son’s special needs, the couple conceived of a nurturing place to learn for those on the autism spectrum and provided $6 million in seed money for the Els Center of Excellence. The $35 million center, which took eight years to build, opened last August with more than 100 students ages 3 to 14, including the Elses’ son.The fund-raising was undertaken by Ernie Els, who left his wife to oversee the construction of the school and the development of the 26-acre property. An upper school, for students up to 22 years old, is scheduled to open next year.Wielding a borrowed club like a hammer, Rickie Fowler, the fifth-ranked player in the world, drove in the final metaphorical nail for the addition in March, making an ace at a charity event to secure a $1 million donation that was matched by a South African businessman.From the soundproof classroom walls to the high ceilings and wide hallways, the lower school was constructed to provide a warm, welcoming environment. During a tour of the facility last month, Els’s son was in an exercise room working on his fine motor skills by pulling himself up on an inclined roller board.“Before, we had to drag him out of bed to go to school,” Els said. “Now he can’t wait. He says, ‘When the sun comes up, I go to school.’”Ernie Els spent four days practicing at home at the Bear’s Club before leaving for Memphis, his final tuneup for his 24th United States Open. As he hit balls on the range, he said his son sat in a cart behind him and read aloud from his “Lion King” and “Kung Fu Panda” books. Every few minutes, Els said, his son prevailed upon him — loudly — to stop hitting balls and read to him instead.“He’s 13 going on 4,” said Els, whose son’s favorite game on the golf course is to take off running around the driving range. “I have to chase him down and throw him in the palmetto bush after hugging him.”Ben accompanies him on his weekend recreational rounds. He will sit in the cart and, Els said: “He’s not very quiet. He talks or yelps a lot on backswings and putts. I used to go: ‘Guys, I’m sorry. I’m sorry. I’m sorry.’ But now guys don’t even hear it.”Els uses golf to get Ben outdoors, where he is free to run and exercise his mouth. In February, the week of the Honda Classic, Els oversaw a golf clinic at the tournament site for the students in the center. It quickly devolved into a spirited free-for-all. Any learning taking place was probably happening farther down the range, where some of the tour players took a break from their work to watch the students.“Whenever somebody asks me about Ben, it’s almost like they want to feel sorry for us,” Els said. “But it’s like with any other family. You’re going to have parents who have a kid with colic or teenagers with their own challenges or something going on. This is just our version of something going on.”Since the Masters, where his opening 80 doomed his aspirations of playing on the weekend, Els has missed the cut in four of seven starts. It has been a discouraging stretch, with a tie for 14th his only top-25 showing. But his frustrations fall away when he calls or has a video conversation with his family.His son’s chatter drowns out the little evil voice in Els’s head. Who knew that the Big Easy would be a nickname that better describes the son than the father?“When I’m around my boy, or talking to my boy, I change,” Els said. “I just go in his world. I’m kind of at peace because I’m listening to my boy being himself.”Advertisement