By THE ASSOCIATED PRESSJUNE 11, 2016
There may be no Olympic sport as dependent on technology as cycling, whose space-age, feather-light carbon fiber bikes can cost more than a car and make the difference between a gold medal and nothing.That has also made the sport ripe for an entirely new kind of doping: mechanical.It has long been rumored that riders were finding ways to hide tiny electrical motors in their frames, or were using magnets in their wheels, to produce a couple of extra watts of power. But it was not until a young cyclocross racer was discovered to have a motor hidden in her bike frame last year that it became a prominent issue.Now, mechanical doping is as controversial as biological doping.“I think when these rumors first started to surface, most normal people thought that it was fantastical, and nobody would stoop so low to cheat this way,” said Brian Cookson, president of the International Cycling Union, cycling’s world governing body.“But soon it became obvious the technology was available,” he said. “It was out there.”That is a marked change from the past. As recently as 2010, a predecessor of Cookson’s, Pat McQuaid, said that using hidden motors in bikes was “not practical” because a battery would need to be the size of a “bag of sugar.”AdvertisementBatteries these days are no bigger than a thumbnail. Motors are just as small. And that has forced the cycling union to develop tests to detect them in major races, including the Rio Olympics.The group will work with the International Olympic Committee to test bikes in Rio; both will use proprietary software that the governing body developed for iPads. The system essentially scans a bike for magnetic fields that could indicate the presence of motors, and it is advanced enough to distinguish between illegal technology and the electronic shifting systems that have become common among elite riders.AdvertisementThe cycling group began scanning bikes in January and has already examined several thousand, including every bike at the Giro d’Italia. The group’s technical manager, Mark Barfield, expects 12,000 tests by the end of the year.Still, some do not believe the system is foolproof. Video has circulated from European races believed to show heat signatures within bikes that could be consistent with the presence of hidden motors.The International Cycling Union countered that thermal imaging, X-rays and ultrasonic devices had been deemed ineffective.“We think we have a very effective defense against this,” Cookson said. “We’ve all heard the rumors and seen the allegations and videos, but at the end of the day, our method is the only method that has actually caught somebody.”U.S.A. Cycling has partnered with FLIR Systems, a thermal imaging manufacturer, to monitor bikes at its events. Cameras are set up at critical points of races to record images that can later be examined by U.S.A. Cycling officials.Get the big sports news, highlights and analysis from Times journalists, with distinctive takes on games and some behind-the-scenes surprises, delivered to your inbox every week.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.“These cameras not only allow you to see in total darkness, adverse weather, haze and smoke,” said Travis Merrill, vice president of FLIR Systems, “but they can detect unnatural heat sources, like those used in mechanical doping.”AdvertisementLast April, the international group set down rules for what Cookson prefers to call technological fraud. They include a minimum six-month ban and a fine of up to $206,000. Offending teams face disqualification, a suspension and fines of up to $1,035,000.“Your entire career is not only finished; everything you’ve achieved up until then is brought into question,” Cookson said.There is little to gain for riders competing in amateur races or small professional events. But when the stakes are hundreds of thousands of dollars in WorldTour races, or a life-changing gold medal from the Olympics, the temptation becomes harder to ignore.“Just like biological doping, it’s something we have to be watchful of,” said U.S.A. Cycling’s chief executive, Derek Bouchard-Hall. “The idea is to create a level where you keep honest people honest.”While the international governing body is confident its current testing system is effective, the challenge now — as with biological doping — is staying ahead of the curve. New technology is developed all the time, and the batteries and motors are becoming so small that eventually they may be invisible to the naked eye.“It never even crossed my mind when I was participating,” Bouchard-Hall, who competed for the United States in the 2000 Olympics, said of this new form of cheating. “It’s a phenomenon in the last five years. But yes, it’s something we have to be concerned about.”A version of this article appears in print on June 12, 2016, on Page SP2 of the New York edition with the headline: Officials Team Up, Before the Rio Games, to Combat ‘Mechanical Doping’.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.