By BILLY WITZAUG. 8, 2016
When Mariano Rivera bade farewell to Fenway Park, he was saluted with a video montage and the Boston Cello Quartet’s rendition of “Enter Sandman,” the song that had long accompanied his entrance from the bullpen.When it was Derek Jeter’s turn to say goodbye to Red Sox fans, a parade of Boston sports dignitaries turned out — Bobby Orr, Paul Pierce, Carl Yastrzemski, Luis Tiant among them — and the crowd at Fenway Park, which had for years greeted Jeter with boos, honored him with a standing ovation.Perhaps three World Series titles in a decade have done wonders to soothe a region’s animus toward the Yankees, or maybe it was simply an appreciation of one of the most enduring rivalries in sports, but even Jeter and Rivera were surprised at how respectfully they were treated on their way out.That graciousness will be put to a more severe test beginning Tuesday, when Alex Rodriguez returns to Fenway Park for the last time as a Yankee, and perhaps forever as a player. The Red Sox declined to say whether the team had any plans to honor Rodriguez.AdvertisementThe Yankees announced on Sunday that Rodriguez would be released after Friday’s home game against Tampa Bay and paid the remaining $27 million on his contract, which runs through next season. But until that last bow, there is the matter of three games against the Red Sox, thanks to a serendipitous — and perhaps fitting — turn of the schedule.Fenway Park is where Rodriguez made his major league debut as a sinewy 18-year-old, and as someone who has regularly seized the biggest stages, it is where he has had a starring role in this rivalry over the last 13 seasons.AdvertisementIt began in 2004, when Red Sox catcher Jason Varitek massaged Rodriguez’s face with his glove, touching off a bench-clearing scuffle, and it continued through last season, when Rodriguez won a game at Fenway with a pinch-hit home run that tied Willie Mays for fourth on the major leagues’ career home run list.Boston sports fans have no trouble identifying villains, from Magic Johnson to LeBron James and Roger Goodell. Rodriguez has been an inviting target as well because of his standing with the Yankees and his use of performance-enhancing drugs.But Rodriguez’s history with Boston fans is intricate. Within days after an iconic moment in the rivalry — Aaron Boone’s home run in Game 7 of the 2003 American League Championship Series, which sent the Yankees to the World Series — the Red Sox began to pursue Rodriguez aggressively. He was as eager to escape Texas as Tom Hicks, the Rangers’ owner, was to escape the final seven years of a 10-year, $252 million contract.Just before Christmas, they hammered out a three-way deal: Rodriguez would be sent to the Red Sox for Manny Ramirez and a young pitching prospect, Jon Lester. To create room at shortstop for Rodriguez, the Red Sox would ship Nomar Garciaparra to the Chicago White Sox for outfielder Magglio Ordonez. But the deal was blocked by the players’ union because Rodriguez had agreed to give money back to the Rangers in a restructured contract.When Boone tore knee ligaments playing basketball in the off-season, the Yankees suddenly needed a third baseman. Rodriguez said he would switch, and within days, the teams quietly put together a deal to send Alfonso Soriano to the Rangers for Rodriguez. The deal was announced on Valentine’s Day.“That made him a marked man,” said Gordon Edes, the Red Sox’ official team historian.Two incidents in Rodriguez’s first season in New York cemented his status as a scoundrel in Boston: when he slapped the ball out of the glove of Red Sox pitcher Bronson Arroyo during the 2004 playoffs, and three months earlier, when Rodriguez had his fight with Varitek after Arroyo had hit him with a pitch.Advertisement“That picture probably hangs in as many bars and living rooms in New England as J.F.K. did,” Edes said. “That certainly made him a villain. The fans got on Jeter, but they killed A-Rod.”Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.Not even a heroic turn — when Rodriguez snatched an 8-year-old boy from the path of a utility truck on a Boston street — could endear him to Boston fans.When tabloids published photos of Rodriguez, then married, canoodling with a blond nightclub dancer who was not his wife, hundreds of fans at Fenway wore blond wigs during his next visit. They cheered in 2013 when pitcher Ryan Dempster threw three pitches near Rodriguez and finally hit him with a fourth.It was suspected that Dempster, who was suspended for his actions, threw at Rodriguez because he and other members of the Red Sox were upset that Rodriguez had been allowed to play while fighting his drug suspension. In the midst of that dispute, Rodriguez’s lawyer pointed his finger at the Red Sox star David Ortiz as another user of performance-enhancing drugs, which fractured the relationship between them.So when Rodriguez returned last season, his reception at Fenway Park was different from what it was elsewhere. If the boos seemed perfunctory at most ballparks, they were often vigorous in Boston, especially when he was announced as a pinch-hitter in his first appearance after serving his suspension.Get daily updates during the Olympics as well as a weekly roundup of sports news.“Those boos were pretty intense,” Rodriguez said after that night. “It was pretty passionate.”He was smiling as he spoke, having just hit the winning home run, the 660th of his career. As Rodriguez circled the bases, in his distinctive preening trot, the ballpark fell silent.That, of course, is the other reason for the boos.Rodriguez has been habitually hard on the Red Sox. In 131 games at Fenway Park, he is a .287 hitter with 29 home runs and 88 R.B.I. The only opponents to hit more home runs at Fenway Park are Hall of Famers: Babe Ruth, Mickey Mantle, Harmon Killebrew, Lou Gehrig and Al Kaline. Rodriguez is tied with Joe DiMaggio for sixth.Rodriguez’s last home run in Boston came on May 1, his brightest moment in a desultory season. He hit it off the Red Sox ace David Price in a nationally televised Sunday night game. Rodriguez also doubled — the only time he has had two extra-base hits in a game this season — and drove in four runs.AdvertisementAlthough Rodriguez has found himself anchored to the bench — he has started one game in the last two weeks — Manager Joe Girardi said Sunday that he would let Rodriguez decide whether to play.Given Rodriguez’s insistence on Sunday that he could still be a dangerous hitter, and his gift for seizing the spotlight, it is hard to imagine him passing up the opportunity.It will be interesting, then, to see if the fans at Fenway Park can pass up one last opportunity to greet him the only way they know how.A version of this article appears in print on August 9, 2016, on Page B14 of the New York edition with the headline: Rodriguez’s Exit Gives Boston Fans a Chance to Weigh In.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.