By THE ASSOCIATED PRESSNOV. 16, 2016
INDIANAPOLIS — Adam Vinatieri’s reunions usually involve a personal trip down memory lane.At least there he can take a few moments to reflect on the six A.F.C. championship teams he has played on, the four Super Bowl rings he has won and all those famous kicks he has made along the way.Vinatieri, the Indianapolis Colts’ seemingly ageless kicker, said he figured that one day he would finally be able to participate in some of those memorable halftime celebrations, like the one set to take place Sunday at Lucas Oil Stadium.Forty players, nine coaches and the Hall of Fame executive Bill Polian are all expected to attend the celebration of 10th anniversary of Indianapolis’s Super Bowl title.But until then, Vinatieri, who at 43 is the league’s oldest player, will focus on what he does best: making kicks.Advertisement“There have been a few” missed reunions, he said Wednesday. “Some in New England, too. Yeah, they gave me the token invitation, knowing that I couldn’t go because I was still playing.”AdvertisementSome of the household names — Peyton Manning, Reggie Wayne and Jeff Saturday — are expected to attend.Some of the postseason stars — Joseph Addai, Marlin Jackson, Dan Klecko and Dominic Rhodes — are also coming back.Even a handful of forgotten players, such as Rocky Boiman and Bo Schobel, have made plans to attend.There will be several noticeable absences, too.Tony Dungy, the Hall of Fame coach, will miss the reunion because of his “Sunday Night Football” duties. Also, Marvin Harrison, a Hall of Fame receiver; Bob Sanders, the 2007 N.F.L. defensive player of the year; and Dwight Freeney, a record-setting defensive end now with the Atlanta Falcons, are not on the current list of confirmed guests.Then there are Vinatieri and Robert Mathis, the only remaining players from the title team still on the Colts’ roster.While they may try to sneak out for a reunion dinner on Saturday night, or find a few spare moments to meet with some old teammates, they know that this is a working weekend and that that may force them out of most of the festivities around town.Get the big sports news, highlights and analysis from Times journalists, with distinctive takes on games and some behind-the-scenes surprises, delivered to your inbox every week.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.“It’s a good problem to have,” Vinatieri said.Vinatieri and Mathis are still focused on collecting another ring, but they have taken divergent paths this season.AdvertisementMathis, 35, was slowed early by a bad knee and has struggled to round into form in the final year of his current contract.Through nine games, Mathis, the Colts’ career sack leader, has 19 tackles, two sacks and four tackles for loss.Vinatieri, however, has thrived. He has made an N.F.L.-record 44 consecutive field goals, including his last nine from 50 yards or longer.Regardless of where their careers stand now, neither has forgotten the lessons from their 2006 postseason success.Just four weeks after allowing 375 yards rushing to the Jacksonville Jaguars in mid-December, the defense completely shut down the Kansas City Chiefs’ Larry Johnson, the league’s No. 2 rusher.In the divisional round, Vinatieri made five field goals against the Ravens at Baltimore — in a 15-6 win that included no touchdowns.In the conference championship game, the Colts used two touchdowns from linemen to rally from an 18-point deficit to defeat their biggest antagonist, the New England Patriots.And the Colts capped off their title run by pulling away from the Chicago Bears in rainy Miami.“It was our time, and we just followed our leader, Tony Dungy,” Mathis said. “He drove the point home that it was our time and stayed the course. Faith is a powerful thing when you believe you can get things accomplished.”AdvertisementNow, like then, the Colts (4-5) are trying to defy those who have been counting them out. The quest continues Sunday against the surging Tennessee Titans (5-5).But while other members of that championship team spend time retelling stories, rekindling friendships and relaxing, Vinatieri and Mathis will happily spend the weekend working.“It’s for them, and we were part of that,” Vinatieri said. “But for me it’s about trying to win a game.”A version of this article appears in print on November 17, 2016, on Page B13 of the New York edition with the headline: Super Bowl Reunion Can Wait. Kicking Duty Beckons.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.