By MARC TRACYNOV. 16, 2016
The Wisconsin basketball players Nigel Hayes and Jordan Hill took a step behind their teammates during the national anthem before the ninth-ranked Badgers’ season opener on Friday. It was another in a long series of visible protests from one of college basketball’s most socially aware locker rooms.Hayes, a senior who was named the preseason Big Ten player of the year, has lobbied for players to be paid, serving as a plaintiff in a lawsuit seeking a freer market for top athletes and once showing up to an ESPN “College GameDay” set sardonically identifying himself as a “broke athlete.” Hayes has also posted about the Black Lives Matter movement to his more than 80,000 Twitter followers and recently joined other Wisconsin athletes in demanding university action after a fan appeared in a mask of President Obama and a noose at a Badgers home football game.Hill, a redshirt junior, also writes provocatively on Twitter. And in September, Wisconsin’s starting point guard, the senior Bronson Koenig, traveled to support protesters of the Dakota Access pipeline, many of whom are, like him, Native American.On the eve of the presidential election, the three teammates sat in the locker room at Kohl Center in Madison, Wis., after practice and discussed the challenges and opportunities of being athletes — particularly college athletes — who want their voices heard. The interview has been edited for length and clarity.AdvertisementAre you ever afraid to speak out knowing that you are not yet paid and could hurt your prospects?HAYES I’ve had people tell me: “Hey, Nige, you need to stop. Be quiet. Stop voicing your opinion. It may hurt your draft stock next year. Teams may not want you.” But at the end of the day, the quote I hang my hat on is, I was black before I picked up a basketball, and when I retire, I’ll still be black.AdvertisementI’ll be black more of my life than I’ll be a professional basketball player. It does not make sense for me not to say something at the point of my life when I can have the most impact. I’m playing basketball, and more of you are listening, which is why more of you are pissed and telling me to stop. So why would I not use this time to try to voice an opinion and bring about the most change?
            As a student, I demand change from @UWMadison. pic.twitter.com/NZEaqBeevP HILL It’s definitely a struggle. It would be stupid for me to say that I don’t want to buy my mom a house, a car, want to make money doing what I love to do and travel and see the world. At the same time, I’m not going to feel good about myself with the knowledge that I’ve gained just holding my tongue.KOENIG That’s kind of selfish.HILL Superselfish.KOENIG I don’t know why more people with the high profiles that they have don’t speak up. I don’t understand it. I get why they don’t, but as he was saying, it’s selfish.You probably did not get into basketball to have more of a voice. What is it like discovering you have yours amplified?KOENIG I think it’s weird that in the United States, athletes have as big of a platform as they do. We don’t really do anything that important. We’re playing a sport.It’s odd to me that people want to hear what we have to say and care what we have to say, whether they agree with us or not. But I’m thankful for the platform that I have.The position you’re in as an athlete — you’re kind of a role model whether you want to be or not. You have that voice. You have the right to choose whatever you want to do with it.AdvertisementColin Kaepernick really put himself out there.HAYES What he’s standing up for is obviously the right thing. His stance is that racial inequalities go on, particularly that occur with black people. You have a group of people that get upset about it, or a group of people that think he’s stretching the truth or that racism isn’t as prevalent as it is, and then you take a glance at Twitter, you see people calling him the N-word or saying, “Go back to Africa,” or, “I hope you tear your A.C.L.”Do you think he has less credibility with the general public because he is an athlete?HILL That would be the first inclination of people. But at the same time, he got up there and said what he said and was very, very eloquent. And he knows stuff to back it up. I don’t know if you know all the stuff he’s still doing now; he’s having camps to help kids understand their rights.They want you to come talk to their kids and come do this and help here and all that — as long as you’re doing exactly what they want you to do, which is tell them to work hard and tell them to stay in school and so on. Not that those are bad things. But for you just to be boxed in to, “All right, just say this, but don’t say anything on the issues that are actually plaguing the nation.”And even more, at that level, I respect it so much because he’s risking money. There are people who I’m sure disagree with him who may have sponsored him or planned on sponsoring him. That’s serious. That’s his livelihood.KOENIG You never know what’s going on in his life, behind the scenes. The people in his corner even might be like, “No, don’t say that because you’re going to lose money, sponsorships, whatever.” It’s unfortunate that we have a voice, that people want to hear what we have to say, but when it’s something they don’t agree with, we’re just dumb athletes.Madison has a reputation for being very liberal. It is also, I’d imagine, whiter than the average place.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.HAYES (laughing) By far.Do you feel it is easier to take politically active stands there than it would be elsewhere?KOENIG Kind of irrelevant. I’ve only seen the negative feedback around the comments of the articles that people write about me. Other than that, no one actually says anything to my face or even tweets at me. It’s all positive feedback.HAYES That makes one of us.After the Missouri football players concluded a strike last year, a team captain said the experience had really connected them with the rest of campus. Is it difficult, as big-time athletes, to feel you are students like any others? AdvertisementHILL I think there’s going to be a natural disconnection because we do something that they can’t do. I don’t think we owe you anything other than to do the best we can when it comes to the court. Anything else we do is just a bonus — but for y’all, not for us. And we’re not doing this because we’re getting paid.When did activism start for you guys?KOENIG We all matured through the years. We were saying that we wouldn’t have done this our freshman year.HAYES My awakening period was sophomore summer. I have my A.A.U. coach, he’s one of my greatest mentors, in Ohio. He gave me some books and some things to read, and it opened my eyes to things I’d never thought of or seen before.Bronson, tell us about your North Dakota trip.KOENIG I wanted to go out there and do something rather than just post an Instagram about it. Within five minutes of getting there, somebody recognized me. Two minutes later, someone handed me a microphone and said, “Speak to the whole camp.”We rolled into the reservation. There were some kids playing on the concrete court outside. It was dark by that time. We got out of the car to go ask them if they were coming to the basketball camp at the high school, and they recognized me. That was cool — in the middle of North Dakota.
            Praying EXTRA hard for all those people in North Dakota supporting the peaceful protest.. Can only imagine what will happen next.        What is the conversation like in the locker room when a teammate takes a prominent political stand?HILL I was really proud of him. I think it’s really important when people make the decision to stand behind their people. Is there a temptation to dial back on the activism during the season?KOENIG If anything, it’s a better time.HILL Just because that’s here doesn’t mean black people stop getting killed by police.HAYES If anything, we’re doing more. Bronson goes out and has 30 points Friday, and then Bronson at the news conference maybe says something that hits home about his Native American culture and people: what’s going on, the amount of military they’re sending up there.KOENIG A group of people from here just went there. I know a couple girls who did, and they said they got tear-gassed and stuff.AdvertisementHILL It’s amazing what a country will do to its own people because of a difference of opinion.HAYES It happens all the time. It’s happened for a while now. Hundreds of years, actually.A version of this article appears in print on November 17, 2016, on Page B11 of the New York edition with the headline: 3 Badgers United in Sport and Protest.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.