

 Scott Cacciola
 

ON PRO BASKETBALL
NOV. 15, 2016
PHOENIX — Devin Booker can remember his alarm going off at 4:30 a.m. The idea was to beat the summer heat when he and his father arrived at the beach for their morning workout. So Booker would rub the sleep from his eyes and then go about the unpleasant business of becoming a better basketball player.As the weeks passed, the routine hardened into habit: the pull of his weight vest, the hot sand between his toes, the slow burn of his muscles as he skipped past traffic cones and leapt over barriers. Booker was 15 and living with his father on the Gulf Coast in Mississippi, and those workouts — influenced by his father’s career in Europe — helped form the foundation.“I mean, I had YouTubed players doing this sort of stuff,” Booker said. “But you never think it’s real until you actually go out there and do it.”Booker, now a second-year guard with the Phoenix Suns, has established himself as one of the most promising young players in the N.B.A. At 6 feet 6 inches, he has a multidimensional game. He can pass and defend and score, averaging 20.2 points a game for the Suns (3-8), who are — how to put this politely? — enduring some growing pains.AdvertisementAround the team, though, Booker is known for showing up to practice early, for his meticulous shooting routines, for refusing to leave the gym until he wins the final game of knockout and for complaining to teammates if they clear the premises before he gets the chance.Advertisement“Extremely competitive,” his father, Melvin, said in an interview before a recent home game. “He wants to win at everything.”That became apparent to Melvin Booker when his son was 12 and lost to a bigger, stronger boy in a game of one-on-one. Devin Booker insisted that his opponent stay for another game.“Once he beat the kid, he said, ‘Let’s go,’” Melvin Booker recalled.The problem for Phoenix is that there are no do-overs in the N.B.A., and the early-season losses have mounted. But Booker, who spent just one season at Kentucky before the Suns selected him 13th over all in the 2015 draft, represents enormous hope. He turned 20 in October. The team is already leaning on him.“Leadership is a thing that you can develop over time,” Coach Earl Watson said, “but he has to learn how to embrace that at a young age.”Booker picked up a great deal from his father, who, as a point guard at the University of Missouri, was the Big Eight Conference’s player of the year in 1994. Melvin Booker went on to have a productive career that included stops in Italy, Turkey and Russia, as well as a total of 32 games with the Houston Rockets, the Denver Nuggets and the Golden State Warriors.He could have hung on for a couple of more seasons in Europe, he said, but he knew that he had lost a step. He also wanted to nurture his son’s development.“I saw that he had a special talent and a gift,” Melvin Booker said. “And he was coming into high school, so it was important for me to be with him.”Devin Booker was living with his mother in Michigan at the time, and it was left to his father to make the pitch that he ought to go live with him in Mississippi.Advertisement“It took me a year to convince Devin and his mom that he needed to make the move,” Melvin Booker said, “because neither of them really understood the work that it takes.”Once Devin Booker arrived, the “grind,” as he described it, began. It was an adjustment.“At first, we used to get into it,” Devin Booker said. “I didn’t understand going to practice two hours early, going hard in practice, and then staying an extra hour after that. But once I started doing it, my game didn’t feel right if I didn’t do it.”Their workouts together — on the beach, in the gym — were the product of everything his father had learned over the course of his peripatetic career, especially while playing overseas.“Which is a totally different game — a fundamental game,” Melvin Booker said.So he steeped his son in the classics, from maintaining a proper defensive stance to shooting jumpers with a quicker release. He wanted his son to play like a European.“I knew he wasn’t going to be the fastest, and I knew he wasn’t going to jump the highest,” Melvin Booker said. “So we worked solely on fundamentals.”Get the big sports news, highlights and analysis from Times journalists, with distinctive takes on games and some behind-the-scenes surprises, delivered to your inbox every week.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.At the same time, Melvin Booker applied constant pressure on his son, waving a hand in his face whenever he lined up a 3-pointer and bodying him on the perimeter when he defended him in pickup games. Sometimes Melvin Booker would ask his son how many consecutive shots he wanted to make to punctuate a workout. Only 10? Make it 15.“I would never let him get comfortable,” Melvin Booker said.Above all, Devin Booker learned that preparation was paramount. When he was a high school senior, he was invited to participate in a 3-point shooting contest at an event sponsored by Under Armour. So he bought three Under Armour basketballs to practice with them and to adjust to the way they felt. (“Super grippy,” he said.) He won the contest.Advertisement“You have to remember, sometimes you’re dealing with a culture and a lot of kids we recruit who don’t have a lot of parental support,” Barry Rohrssen, a former assistant at Kentucky, said in a telephone interview. “This is a case where, fortunately for Devin, his dad was very involved and had been through this sort of process for himself.”As a first-year player with the Suns last season, Booker coped with inconsistent minutes, at least early on. His father took on a new job.“Therapist,” said Melvin Booker, who moved to the Phoenix area. “It’s good for him to have family here.”Devin Booker has since settled into a more predictable role, with more minutes and more responsibility. But his father has stuck around.“I’m there,” Melvin Booker said, “in case he calls and says, ‘Dad, I need to work.’”A version of this article appears in print on November 16, 2016, on Page B11 of the New York edition with the headline: A Rising Star in Phoenix, Schooled by His Father.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.See More »