By JOHN DUERDENNOV. 15, 2016
BANGKOK — Many expected there would be tears at the Rajamangala National Stadium on Tuesday when Thailand played Australia in a World Cup qualifier only a month after the death of the host country’s much-loved king. But it was a little surprising that they came at the end of the 90 minutes.The national anthem — accompanied by images on the video scoreboard of the monarch, King Bhumibol Adulyadej, attending soccer-related events — was sung with somber gusto. A crowd that had once been told that cheering would not be allowed instead offered loud, appreciative support. But it was only after the final whistle that Thailand’s coach, Kiatisuk Senamuang, could not hold back his emotions any longer, shedding tears after his team, which had lost all four of its group stage games, had fought Australia, the reigning Asian champion, to a 2-2 tie.“It was emotional,” Kiatisuk said. “I want to thank the king, and I want to thank the fans and media for getting behind us all the way. I am just disappointed we could not get the 3 points, but this 1 point can bring happiness to the Thai people.”Australia has been a member of the Asian Football Confederation (A.F.C.) since 2006, but its trip to Thailand presented perhaps its most unusual match. The A.F.C. did not exist when King Bhumibol took the throne in 1946, and with the government initiating an official yearlong period of mourning after his death in October, Tuesday’s match almost did not go ahead.AdvertisementAfter King Bhumibol’s death, the country’s professional soccer league ended its season with three games left to play, with final positions settled by whatever ranking each club held at the time. There were calls to play the qualifier against Australia behind closed doors or in a neighboring country.On Oct. 21, it was announced that the match would go ahead, but with no cheering permitted. On Nov. 3, that restriction was lifted, replaced by calls for respectful behavior.“I think it is important we pay respect to the people of Thailand due to the passing of the king and understand that it is a difficult time for the whole country,” Coach Ange Postecoglou of Australia said. “As visitors here, we are mindful that while there is a game of football to be played, there are more important things to be addressed.”AdvertisementWith the end of the first month of mourning passing just before the game, the public intensity for it in Bangkok had seemed to drop perceptibly. The passengers on Bangkok’s Metropolitan Rapid Transit system were still not dressed as colorfully as usual, and they occasionally bowed to the in-train video monitors showing scenes of the king’s life. But slowly, life also was returning to normal.Public television stations were able to show commercials again. The annual Loy Krathong festival had gone ahead the previous day, albeit without the usual fireworks. And it was announced that Christmas and New Year celebrations could proceed as well, but with the entertainment levels toned down, out of respect.In soccer, however, it is difficult for fans to tone anything down. An official at the Football Association of Thailand acknowledged that once it was announced that the game was on, there was never a possibility of enforcing a no-cheering policy, especially with about 2,000 Australian supporters — both visitors and expats — expected to attend.As it was, there was a smattering of jeers from the blue-shirted home fans before kickoff when the traveling supporters, some of whom wore black ribbons on their gold Australia shirts, started a chant, but generally the atmosphere was genial.While the traffic was typically terrible, with the usual motorcycle taxis ferrying fans from the nearest, but still distant, stations, fans sat on the grass outside the concrete stadium, receiving candles to light before kickoff. There were still bottles of beer being drunk, but the prematch atmosphere was a little more subdued than usual, with some supporters all in black even if most still sported the usual blue.“We respect Thailand and the fact that the king has passed away,” said Michael Huckle, who was visiting from Melbourne. But he added that he was happy the restrictions on cheering had been lifted. That was, he said, never realistic.“Once the game starts, the emotion flows, especially when you score a goal,” he said. “Football is not tennis; it is built on emotion.”The Thai players were offered a bonus by their soccer association’s president, Somyot Poompanmoung, of 10 million baht (about $280,000) if they defeated Australia.Advertisement“I know that anything can happen in the match, but I want them to play with their heart,” Somyot said. “I don’t want them to play for money. I want them to play for His Majesty the King.”It was a tall order. Thailand’s team may be improving, but Australia is one of the continent’s powerhouses, and when Mile Jedinak, who plays his club soccer in England, put the visitors ahead with a penalty after nine minutes, the day was looking ominous.Get the big sports news, highlights and analysis from Times journalists, with distinctive takes on games and some behind-the-scenes surprises, delivered to your inbox every week.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.Yet Thailand, with a fully domestic-based roster, responded with two goals from the hugely popular striker Teerasil Dangda. A famous win was in the cards until a second, hotly disputed penalty kick in the 65th minute, again converted by Jedinak, gave the Socceroos a tie.It was the least Thailand deserved. “Thailand played really well,” Postecoglou, Australia’s coach, said. “We knew that in these special circumstances, they would play with a lot of passion, and they did just that.”The home fans applauded the players off the field, the journalists applauded the coach into the news conference, and both were applauded back into the Emerald Hotel by hundreds of happy supporters when they returned there after the game.“We wanted to put a smile back on the faces of Thai fans, and we did,” said Kiatisuk, who added that he and his team were not giving up on dreams of qualifying for the 2018 World Cup despite taking just 1 point in their first five games.“It is not over,” he said. “There are five games left and three at home. We played well against a strong team. We still have hope.”A version of this article appears in print on November 16, 2016, on Page B15 of the New York edition with the headline: Mourning a King While Respectfully Cheering a Tie.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.