By KEN BELSONNOV. 15, 2016
The N.F.L. agreed not to push its teams to set minimum ticket prices on online ticket exchanges as part of a settlement with several state attorneys general.Earlier this year, Eric T. Schneiderman, the New York State attorney general, started an investigation into whether the league’s ticket pricing practices, which included putting a “price floor” on tickets sold on league websites, violated antitrust laws.According to the terms of a settlement with attorneys general from Florida, Massachusetts, New York, Ohio, Pennsylvania and the District of Columbia, the N.F.L. will let each team decide whether it wants to set minimum prices for tickets resold on online exchanges. The league said it would stop “formally or informally coordinating or encouraging pricing practices among its member clubs” that would result in minimum resale prices.Get the big sports news, highlights and analysis from Times journalists, with distinctive takes on games and some behind-the-scenes surprises, delivered to your inbox every week.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.The league also agreed to pay about $100,000 to cover the costs borne by the attorneys general.Teams and the league have blamed resellers like StubHub for declines in attendance because, they say, the reselling of cheap tickets online makes it more difficult for them to sell full-price tickets at the box office. To combat that competition, some teams have prevented season-ticket holders from selling tickets at prices below face value.AdvertisementStill, Schneiderman and his colleagues said in the settlement that they had not found any instances in which consumers were harmed by the price floor on the N.F.L.’s Ticket Exchange.In a statement, Brian McCarthy, an N.F.L. spokesman, said that the league was pleased with the “favorable settlement” and that the investigation “did not identify any injury to consumers” because of the leaguewide price floor.AdvertisementThe N.F.L., he added, rescinded the leaguewide price floor requirement before the start of this season.A version of this article appears in print on November 16, 2016, on Page B16 of the New York edition with the headline: N.F.L. Yields on Pricing for Reselling of Tickets.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.