AdvertisementSupported byBy Victor MatherNow that Cleveland has finally won a title, the mantle of most cursed sports city must be passed on. But which unlucky city gets it? Here are 10 candidates.(For the purpose of this exercise, we’ll focus on the big four leagues — Major League Baseball, the N.F.L., the N.B.A. and the N.H.L. — but consider titles in other pro leagues as well.)Last major title: 1971 Bucks.The agony: Lost a three-games-to-two lead in the 1982 World Series to the Cardinals. Led Game 7 before Keith Hernandez and George Hendrick drove in runs to give the Cardinals the lead.Mitigating factor: Although the Packers, winners of the Super Bowl after the 2010 season, nominally play in Green Bay, they are essentially Milwaukee’s N.F.L. team.The future: The Bucks missed the N.B.A. playoffs, and the Brewers were 17 ½ games out entering Monday.Last major title: 1991 Redskins.The agony: Despite a talent-laden roster, the Nationals barely broke .500 last season, which culminated with a dugout fight between the star Bryce Harper and closer Jonathan Papelbon. The Capitals had the best record in hockey but lost in the playoffs yet again.Mitigating factor: D.C. United has won four M.L.S. Cups, most recently in 2004.The future: The Nationals are still loaded with talent and are among the favorites to win the World Series, and the Capitals should be great again. The Wizards were .500, and the Redskins are owned by Daniel Snyder.Last major title: 1995 Rockets.The agony: The Colt .45s/Astros have been playing since 1962 and finally made the World Series for the first time in 2005. They were swept by the White Sox, with every game decided by one or two runs.Mitigating factor: The Comets were the first dominant team in the W.N.B.A., winning four consecutive titles.The future: The Astros were 11 games out entering Monday, and the Rockets were .500. Although the Texans were shut out by the Chiefs in the first playoff round, they are not terrible, and any team would love to have defensive end J. J. Watt.Last major title: 1995 Braves.The agony: Since the Braves were widely considered the best team in baseball for a decade or more, their one World Series title feels like an underachievement. The Falcons were 13-3 in 2010 and 2012 and wound up with one playoff win. (A year ago, the Upshot chose Atlanta second on a list of cursed cities, behind Cleveland.)Mitigating factor: Atlanta got to host the 1996 Olympics.The future: The Braves are atrocious, the Falcons are mediocre, and the Thrashers left town. The Hawks have made the playoffs nine straight years, but with a top three of Paul Millsap, Al Horford and Jeff Teague, they do not seem ready to challenge the elite.Last major title: None.The agony: The Titans lost Super Bowl XXXIV when Kevin Dyson came inches short of the goal line as time expired.Mitigating factor: The Oilers/Titans have been around since only 1997 and the Predators since 1998, so the agony is relatively fresh.The future: The Titans, coming off 2-14 and 3-13 seasons, are one of the worst teams in the N.F.L. The Predators, who lost in the second round of the playoffs, are solid but seem below championship caliber.Last major title: 1991 Twins.The agony: The Twins have lost in division series in their last five trips to the playoffs. The Vikings are 0-4 in Super Bowls and have not been to one since 1977.Mitigating factor: The Lynx of the W.N.B.A. have won three titles in the past five seasons.The future: The Twins are very bad, but despite losing at home to the Seahawks in the first round of the playoffs on a missed field goal, the Vikings have hope for the future behind Teddy Bridgewater.Last major title: 1993 Blue Jays.The agony: After that Series win, the Blue Jays did not make the playoffs until last season, the longest drought in sports.Mitigating factor: The Argonauts have won four Grey Cups since the Jays’ last title, most recently in 2012.The future: The Maple Leafs were the worst team in hockey, but the Jays are in the playoff hunt again, and the Raptors were the second-best team in the Eastern Conference.Last major title: 1963 Chargers (A.F.L.).The agony: The Padres made two World Series, and both times ran into one of the best teams in baseball history. They lost, 4-1, to the 104-58 Tigers in 1984 and were swept by the 114-48 Yankees in 1998.Mitigating factor: The San Diego Sockers won four straight indoor soccer crowns from 2010 to 2013. The weather is also fantastic.The future: The Padres are in last place, and the Chargers are coming off a 4-12 season.Last major title: 1990 Reds.The agony: The Bengals’ last seven playoff trips have ended in the wild-card round, including the last five years. The Reds were leading their division in 1994 when the season was canceled by a strike.Mitigating factor: The now defunct Cincinnati Excite won the American Indoor Soccer League title in 2005-6.The future: The Reds are in last place, but the Bengals were 12-4 behind a big season for quarterback Andy Dalton.Last major title: 1965 Bills (A.F.L.).The agony: How much time do you have? Four consecutive Super Bowl losses, including the “Wide Right” game against the Giants and a 52-17 shellacking by the Cowboys. The Music City Miracle. The longest active playoff-less streak of any major sports team (by the Bills). The Sabres have 29 trips to the playoffs in their history without a Stanley Cup.Mitigating factor: The Western New York Flash, based in nearby Elma, won the Women’s Professional Soccer title in 2013, just before the league went out of business.The future: The Bills were 8-8 under Rex Ryan. The Sabres were seventh of eight teams in the Atlantic Division but did have the exciting rookie Jack Eichel.Advertisement