By JAMES WAGNERAPRIL 25, 2017
The skidding Mets had reasons for optimism entering Tuesday. Left fielder Yoenis Cespedes and catcher Travis d’Arnaud were originally back in the lineup for the first time since late last week, welcome developments for a team dealing with numerous injuries only three weeks into the 2017 season.Then came the rain that forced the Mets to postpone their game against the visiting Atlanta Braves, giving them a beneficial second straight day of rest after Monday’s scheduled day off.The Mets entered Tuesday as losers of four straight games, three of them in a sweep by the Washington Nationals over the weekend. Tuesday’s game was rescheduled as part of a single-admission doubleheader on Sept. 25, in the final week of the season.The Mets expected to return to play on Wednesday. They will skip Robert Gsellman, who was supposed to start Tuesday, and use him in the bullpen over the next few days. Noah Syndergaard will start on Wednesday, followed by Matt Harvey on Thursday.AdvertisementCespedes, given his original availability on Tuesday, seemed likely to be in Wednesday’s lineup. His tight left hamstring, which forced him out of last Thursday’s game, felt improved enough for him to tell the Mets he could play Tuesday. He didn’t pinch-hit all weekend, as his leg wasn’t ready.Get the big sports news, highlights and analysis from Times journalists, with distinctive takes on games and some behind-the-scenes surprises, delivered to your inbox every week.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.On Tuesday, Cespedes did not test his hamstring by running on the field, as the Mets originally hoped, because it was wet outside. But “he did some stuff in the weight room today that was good enough for the trainers and the medical staff,” Manager Terry Collins said.AdvertisementStill, even if the Mets had played as scheduled on Tuesday, Collins said he ultimately would not have used Cespedes if the field conditions were slick and the weather poor, not wanting to risk aggravating the injury.D’Arnaud may not be in Wednesday’s lineup because Rene Rivera usually catches Syndergaard, but his improvement was encouraging for the Mets. D’Arnaud was off to a good start to the season at the plate, and the Mets’ uneven offense would have welcomed his bat.D’Arnaud’s right wrist, which he hit on an opponent’s bat during a throwing attempt against a runner trying to steal a base last Wednesday, felt well enough for him to throw again. That was the last improvement needed for him to get back into the starting lineup; he served as a pinch-hitter all weekend.“To get both of those guys back is going to be big,” Collins said. “All of a sudden you’re looking at one or two guys closer to having your regular lineup out there.”Even with the expected returns of Cespedes and d’Arnaud, the Mets’ disabled list includes third baseman David Wright, first baseman Lucas Duda, backup infielder Wilmer Flores, backup outfielder Brandon Nimmo, and pitchers Steven Matz and Seth Lugo.We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.