AdvertisementSupported byBy Billy WitzDave Dombrowski, the Boston Red Sox’ president for baseball operations, may have left the baseball world slack-jawed last December with his latest chips-to-the-center-of-the-table gamble, packaging a haul of his best prospects to the Chicago White Sox for pitcher Chris Sale. But he did not leave his Yankees counterpart at a loss for words.“That’s a wow,” Yankees General Manager Brian Cashman said at the time.“Boston’s like the Golden State Warriors now in baseball. They’ve got their Durant and Green and Thompson and Curry,” he added, referring to the Golden State stars Kevin Durant, Draymond Green, Klay Thompson and Stephen Curry.Dombrowski’s deal, and Cashman’s framing of it, helped recast the latest version of this longstanding rivalry, which resumes for the first time this season on Tuesday when the Yankees begin a three-game series at Fenway Park.Games between the teams have evolved somewhat in recent years, with the intense mini-dramas that were so common in the previous decade gradually giving way to encounters that occasionally felt more pedestrian.The reason for that, in large part, was that both teams have gone through some down moments. The Yankees have reached the postseason only once in the past four years, and the Red Sox have gyrated between a World Series championship in 2013 and a division title in 2016 and last-place finishes in the American League East in 2012, 2014 and 2015.Sometimes, the rivalry still seemed to sizzle. Sometimes, it did not, when not enough was at stake. In fact, the two teams have not been in the postseason together since 2009.But now, with Alex Rodriguez and David Ortiz retired, and with both organizations brimming with young talent, the decks have been cleared for a new generation of personalities to emerge and push the rivalry into a new chapter. Once, that is, after fans of both teams figure out whom they now want to hate.Asked whom the Fenway Park crowd might jeer now that Rodriguez is gone, Yankees third baseman Chase Headley said: “I have no idea. I’m sure they’ll find somebody.”One difference in the current teams is that the Red Sox are further along in their transition to youth after winning the A.L. East last season on the backs of their killer B’s: outfielders Mookie Betts and Jackie Bradley Jr. and shortstop Xander Bogaerts. A late call-up last year, outfielder Andrew Benintendi, has the name — and the game — to join those three.So when the Red Sox added the redoubtable Sale to team with the previous year’s big-ticket signing, David Price, and the reigning A.L. Cy Young Award winner Rick Porcello, they looked to be as certain a shot to win the A.L. East this season as the Warriors’ Curry and Thompson are from beyond the 3-point line.But while the Red Sox have begun the season reasonably well — they are 11-8, a half-game behind the Yankees and two behind Baltimore in the A.L. East — their start has been anything but smooth.Price is not scheduled to return until the middle of next month after having complained of elbow pain during spring training; the versatile Brock Holt is on the disabled list with vertigo; and a flu bug hit the Red Sox so hard that it sent reliever Robbie Ross to the disabled list and prompted the team to fumigate the home clubhouse at Fenway.On Tuesday, Boston may be without second baseman Dustin Pedroia, who has not played since being spiked on a slide by the Orioles’ Manny Machado last Friday.The play prompted outrage from the Red Sox at the time, and then apparently inspired reliever Matt Barnes to throw a fastball behind the head of Machado on Sunday, touching off angry words between the teams and leading Pedroia to apologize to Machado for Barnes’s actions. (Barnes was suspended for four games by Major League Baseball on Monday and plans to appeal.)It was the type of dust-up that was reminiscent of those between the Red Sox and Yankees, whether it was Pedro Martinez tossing Don Zimmer to the ground in the 2003 postseason, or Jason Varitek giving a face wash to Rodriguez in 2004, or, in something of a throwback, Ryan Dempster plunking Rodriguez in 2013 after he had been linked again to performance-enhancing drug use.Actually, the Yankees’ most rancorous games recently have been with the Toronto Blue Jays, who blitzed past them down the stretch to win a division title in 2015 and who have feasted on the Yankees the past two seasons. The teams had two bench-clearing episodes the last time they met in 2016.It was also late last season that the Red Sox and the Yankees shared a notable encounter at Fenway. The Yankees arrived there on Sept. 15 for a four-game series, trailing the first-place Red Sox by four games with the Orioles and Blue Jays packed in between them in the wild-card chase.And the Yankees were on their way to closing the gap in the series opener until the bottom of the ninth inning, when the Red Sox scored five times — the final three when Hanley Ramirez blasted a 99-mile-per-hour fastball from Dellin Betances over the center-field wall for a 7-5 victory.The Yankees never recovered, getting swept in the series and losing eight games out of 10 to drop out of contention.When the Yankees later swept the Red Sox at Yankee Stadium, a series that included a game-ending home run of their own by the retiring Mark Teixeira, it was mostly an afterthought. By then, the Yankees clearly were not going to the postseason.But now it is 2017, and as the Yankees packed their bags on Sunday in Pittsburgh and prepared to head to Boston, they seemed to be girding for a measuring-stick series.When Cashman compared the Red Sox and the Warriors last December, he was asked who the Yankees were. He shrugged and said he did not know. This series, the first real gauge of the young season, will be his first chance to find out.Advertisement