By MIKE VORKUNOVJULY 13, 2017
A little more than two weeks ago, after the Knicks unexpectedly parted ways with the team’s president, Phil Jackson, they set out to find a front-office replacement who could help stabilize the floundering organization.They appeared to have found their solution on Thursday night, reaching an agreement with Scott Perry, the Sacramento Kings’ executive vice president, to become their new general manager, according to a person with knowledge of the deal who requested anonymity because the deal had not yet been announced. Steve Mills, who helped run the search along with the adviser Tim Leiweke, will be elevated to team president, taking Jackson’s old job.Perry, a longtime N.B.A. executive who has worked for several teams, will take over when the Knicks and the Kings can agree on compensation for him to switch teams, according to multiple news media reports.CSN Chicago was the first to report Perry’s agreement.Mills’s new role will probably allow him to retain final say on basketball decisions. He has been head of basketball operations since Jackson’s exit, and was running the team as it signed Tim Hardaway Jr. last week to a $71 million contract.Get the big sports news, highlights and analysis from Times journalists, with distinctive takes on games and some behind-the-scenes surprises, delivered to your inbox every week.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.By bringing in Perry, Mills gets an experienced executive with more than a decade of experience in N.B.A. front offices. Now, with its management structure completed, the team can move on to the next significant item on its agenda: orchestrating a trade of Carmelo Anthony.AdvertisementThe Knicks had chased bigger names before agreeing to a deal with Perry. They were linked to Masai Ujiri, he Toronto Raptors’ president, although acquiring Ujiri probably would have required substantial compensation. Over the weekend, the Knicks had a brief flirtation with David Griffin, the Cleveland Cavaliers former general manager.AdvertisementBut by Sunday, Griffin had pulled his name out of consideration. Griffin, who helped construct the Cleveland teams that have made three consecutive N.B.A. finals and won the title a year ago, was never offered full control over basketball operations, according to two people with knowledge of the discussions.Instead, it seems that Jackson’s departure created an opportunity for Mills to consolidate power, even as the Knicks come off a third consecutive season with more than 50 losses. Mills has been a constant in the universe of the Knicks and their owner, James L. Dolan, for much of the last two decades. Mills was a high-ranking executive for the Madison Square Garden Company for a decade before leaving in 2009, then returned as president and general manager in 2013 before Jackson took over.Perry’s path to New York has been winding. Upon joining the Knicks, he will have worked for three organizations in the last four months alone. He was part of wholesale changes in Orlando in April, then lost his job after the Magic fired General Manager Rob Hennigan as they stagnated in the draft lottery. Perry took a job with the Kings later that month, becoming General Manager Vlade Divac’s top deputy. Sacramento seemed to be stabilizing after several smart acquisitions this month, along with a savvy N.B.A. draft night.Perry joined the N.B.A. ranks after spending 12 years as a college head coach and assistant. Perry was the Pistons’ director of player personnel during their run of six consecutive Eastern Conference finals, including an N.B.A. title in 2004.A version of this article appears in print on July 14, 2017, on Page B9 of the New York edition with the headline: Knicks Turn to Kings for General Manager; Mills Will Be President.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.