By WALLACE MATTHEWSJULY 14, 2017
Inside the ring, Joe Smith Jr. is what boxing people describe as a bricklayer: heavy-handed, with knockout power in either fist.The designation is appropriate in more ways than one. Outside the ring, Smith has another description: laborer.Between fights, Smith, the World Boxing Council international light heavyweight champion, becomes just plain Joe, a member of Laborers Local 66, a union on Long Island. On the job, Smith might sweep a floor one day and break one up with a sledgehammer the next.“We do it all in the six-six,” he said.Smith has been laboring to make ends meet since he graduated from William Floyd High School in Mastic Beach, N.Y., a decade ago.AdvertisementHe went back to work a couple of weeks after beating Andrzej Fonfara to win the W.B.C. international light heavyweight title 13 months ago, and a couple of weeks after knocking Bernard Hopkins out of the ring last December.AdvertisementRegardless of what happens Saturday night when he fights Sullivan Barrera at the Forum in Inglewood, Calif., Smith will return to his day job. Smith, a 27-year-old from Shirley, N.Y., with a 23-1 record, will earn about $150,000 for the fight, the opener of a three-bout HBO card headlined by the super featherweights Miguel Berchelt and Takashi Miura. After paying his promoter, manager and trainer, and his taxes, Smith will probably clear little more than half.“I’ll definitely still go back to work because you never know what can happen with this sport,” he said.Smith is a throwback to the days when professional athletes had to work off-season jobs to pay the bills. At $38 an hour, pounding concrete is a more reliable way to earn a living than pounding opponents.There is historical precedent for such a narrative. The journeyman heavyweight James J. Braddock took time off from working as a longshoreman to beat Max Baer in 1935 for the heavyweight title in one of the most unexpected upsets in boxing history. Books have been written and a movie made about the so-called Cinderella Man, but Smith’s story is still in the development stage.Smith’s victory over Hopkins was not quite as earth-shattering as Braddock’s decision over Baer. (Hopkins was a month shy of 52 at the time and taking a victory lap on an outstanding career that had been on hiatus for more than two years.) But it was a lot more emphatic.Using the “bricks” he carries in both gloves, Smith sent Hopkins hurtling out of the ring in the eighth round and left him flat on his back on the concrete floor of the same arena in which he will face Barrera.“I was supposed to be Bernard’s going-away present,” he said. “He thought I was somebody he could take advantage of, I guess.”AdvertisementSmith’s story is not unlike that of a lot of boxers. He was a young man with a penchant for getting into scrapes whose father took him to a boxing gym, hoping to straighten him out. Smith said he scored his first knockout as a 13-year-old, a couple of weeks after he first tried on a pair of boxing gloves.His personal life is not unlike that of many sons of blue-collar families. Joe Smith Sr. was 15 when he fathered Joe Jr., who became a father at 18 and turned down a scholarship to Dowling College on Long Island to seek work to support his daughter.Few of those boys’ lives proceed the way Smith’s has, nor do many contain a signature moment like knocking a fighter of Hopkins’s reputation out of the ring.The temptation is to market Smith as a sort of Average Joe. But there is nothing average about a man who will get up at 6 a.m. or earlier to muster at a union hiring hall, put in a full day — often doing a couple of miles of roadwork during his lunch break — and head to the gym for sparring at night.There is nothing average about a fighter who sustained a broken jaw in the second round of a six-round bout, as a 20-year-old Smith did against Eddie Caminero in his seventh pro fight, and continued for two more rounds before the fight was stopped for his only loss.Get the big sports news, highlights and analysis from Times journalists, with distinctive takes on games and some behind-the-scenes surprises, delivered to your inbox every week.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.Nor is there anything average about a guy who could easily have gone back to his decent-paying union job, with its health care and other benefits, but opted to go back into the ring after spending six months with his jaw wired shut, causing 40 pounds to melt off his 6-foot-1 frame.“The doctor told me I shouldn’t fight again,” he said.His manager and his trainer, Phil and Jerry Capobianco, scions of a longtime Huntington, N.Y., boxing family — their father, John Sr., was the original trainer of an amateur heavyweight named Gerry Cooney — also extended him the opportunity to make a graceful exit from a sport that had treated him rather roughly.“They told me, we understand if you want to quit, but if you continue, we believe you can go all the way,” Smith said. “But honestly, I didn’t want to quit at that point. I saw guys at my other job still swinging sledgehammers at 60, shoveling dirt and picking up concrete. I didn’t want to be doing that.”AdvertisementAfter missing nearly a year to recuperate, Smith ran off 15 consecutive victories, 11 by knockout, before being matched with the heavily favored Fonfara in his hometown, Chicago. Smith scored a first-round knockout, shocking many boxing insiders but somehow convincing Hopkins that he had found the perfect foil for what he expected to be his triumphant exit from boxing.“I was aware that he thought I was nobody dangerous,” Smith said. “But we watched videos of him, and we just knew that he had nothing for me. We seen that he didn’t have much power or anything; he was just slick. We knew we just had to keep the pressure on him and eventually he would fold.”Almost as soon as he hit the floor, the loquacious Hopkins began accusing Smith of pushing him out of the ring.“The guy was unconscious on the floor for about three seconds,” Smith said. “I couldn’t believe how fast he came up with that excuse. That was impressive.”But that victory does not ensure Smith financial security through boxing. Although he is the front-runner for a lucrative match against the former champion Sergey Kovalev — who lost two fights to Andre Ward in the past year — all bets are off if Smith doesn’t get past Barrera (19-1, 13 knockouts), a 6-2 Cuban.His punching power and his back story make Smith marketable to programmers like HBO.“If he keeps on knocking guys out he’s not supposed to knock out,” said the matchmaker Ron Katz, a member of Smith’s camp, “he could be a huge attraction.”Win or lose, in a week or two, Smith will be back at work, earning a living with his hands, one way or another.A version of this article appears in print on July 15, 2017, on Page D5 of the New York edition with the headline: Laborer by Trade Turns Champion in the Ring.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.