By VICTOR MATHERJULY 13, 2017
If it had been the fight, they would have stopped it.The colorful mixed martial artist Conor McGregor was the clear choice of the Brooklyn public as the news media circus for his fight against boxing legend Floyd Mayweather Jr. arrived at a nearly full Barclays Center on Thursday night.Shirtless beneath a long white fur coat, McGregor swaggered along the runway. Much of what he said cannot be quoted because of its heavy reliance on obscenity. Many of his bons mots were little more than blunt vulgarities.It mattered little. The thousands in attendance roared their approval at McGregor’s every utterance, their enthusiasm apparently undimmed by an hour-and-a-half delay to the start of the festivities or by a sound system that swallowed some of the comments made on stage.Many in the stands were wrapped in Irish flags, leaving little doubt as to their loyalty to the McGregor, an Irishman. (Perhaps in an effort to win some of them over, Mayweather arrived draped in an Irish flag of his own.)AdvertisementAs in the first two stops in Los Angeles and Toronto (with London still to come on Friday), the two future combatants each got a turn at the mike to hype themselves and hurl abuse at their opponent.AdvertisementWhen it was his turn, Mayweather, wearing a star-spangled tracksuit and a big gold chain, threw a stack of bills in the air, befitting his nickname Money. But despite an animated performance, Mayweather, one of boxing’s all-time greats, was showered with boos and chants of “pay your taxes.”Only the officials in suits who spoke before the fighters were heaped with more scorn from the impatient crowd.Tension, whether manufactured or real, seemed to be at a higher pitch than at the earlier promotional events.“It gets worse every city we go to,” said Dana White, president of the U.F.C., earlier in the day. “By the time we leave London, I’m pretty sure they’re not going to like each other much.”An inexperienced boxer, McGregor will be a big underdog when the two fight in Las Vegas on Aug. 26.He and his fans do not seem to be fazed.“He’s going to be unconscious,” McGregor said. “That is a fact.”We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.