By BEN ROTHENBERGJULY 13, 2017
WIMBLEDON, England — Jurij Rodionov’s bleached-blond man bun did not offend Wimbledon sensibilities before his third-round boys’ singles match Thursday, but something nearly invisible did: his blue underwear.As Rodionov stood at the net for the coin toss, the chair umpire, Philip Lodge, inquired about Rodionov’s underwear; Rodionov obligingly yanked down the waistband of his white shorts to reveal the color. A supervisor, Lucy Grant, soon came onto court.“Ah,” she said, seeing the underwear when Rodionov, 18, again dutifully lowered his shorts. “This is the problem we have: If you’re serving, the shorts could become visible.”Grant sent out a sartorial S.O.S. on her walkie-talkie.“Can we have some underwear to Court 18 — boys’?” she asked as Rodionov laughed.
            ...and here was the supervisor who came out to look at his underwear yet again. He (Jurij Rodionov) then left court to change. #Wimbledon pic.twitter.com/rU1q7tpqDo Although Wimbledon’s intensified all-white dress code explicitly includes “any undergarments that either are or can be visible during play (including due to perspiration),” tournament officials were disappointed that the problem had been addressed publicly.Advertisement“It is our preference that any issues regarding the ‘all-white’ rule and undergarments are discussed and dealt with between matches,” a statement from the All-England Club said. “Unfortunately, we have been made aware of a couple of instances where this was not the case, but we will ensure this happens in the future.”AdvertisementRodionov, an Austrian, said he had worn black underwear in his previous round without incident, but that Lodge had spotted the blue color through his white shorts and declared, “We have a problem.”Offered a choice of medium or large, Rodionov selected medium, and he was also given an extra pair for his doubles match later. Rodionov said the episode was not stressful but rather eased his pre-match nerves.“It was fine — I got more relaxed, actually,” he said. “So I think it helped me.”Rodionov won his match, 6-3, 6-7(4), 6-3, over Blake Ellis of Australia.An on-court investigation into underpants also took place before a boys’ doubles match on Wednesday. The top-seeded pair, Zsombor Piros and Wu Yibing, as well as one of their opponents, were told to change after the umpire saw Piros’s blue underwear peeking through.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.Wimbledon provided legal white underwear for those players, too. After the incident was featured on the BBC that night, Piros’s and Wu’s entire six-minute news conference the next day focused on underwear questions, which amazed Piros.“I didn’t realize it was such big news,” he said.Undergarments have been an occasional obsession at Wimbledon for generations. In 1949, the American Gertrude Moran (known as Gorgeous Gussie) scandalized the tournament by wearing white underpants with lace trim that was visible under her short skirt. The All England Club criticized Moran for “bringing vulgarity and sin into tennis.”Decades later, Chris Evert failed an inspection because of the red ruffles on her white bloomers.“They weren’t noticeable at all because our dresses were longer,” Evert said in 2014. “But the guy, he lifted up my skirt and looked at the red and told me to go back to the changing room and change them.”The fascination with underwear has persisted into this century. In 2007, Tatiana Golovin wore a preapproved short white Lacoste dress with red undershorts. After her first-round victory, several newspapers printed pictures with her head cropped out, focusing instead on her hemline. The first question Golovin was asked in her news conference was, “Can I ask you about your knickers?”Advertisement“I played so bad that year,” said Golovin, who is working as a commentator at Wimbledon this year. “It was the last thing I wanted to get attention for.”Boundary-pushing soon became the norm. Serena Williams won her 2010 and 2012 Wimbledon titles with bright red and then purple undershorts. Wimbledon responded by enforcing its stricter rules in 2014.During her first-round match last week, Venus Williams wore a bra with visible pink straps. She was not questioned about the garment during play, but after a midmatch rain delay, she returned with no offending color visible.Asked about the change after the match, she said: “I don’t like talking about bras in press conferences. It’s weird.”A version of this article appears in print on July 14, 2017, on Page B9 of the New York edition with the headline: Knickers In a Twist Over a Hint Of Color.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.