By REBECCA R. RUIZAPRIL 22, 2016
LAUSANNE, Switzerland —  The Olympic rings decorate everything here, from the train station to the police uniforms, flaunting this city’s identity as the capital of international sports.For more than a century, Lausanne has been home to the International Olympic Committee, inspiring dozens of organizations overseeing sports as different as baseball and taekwondo to put down roots, too.Their world has been largely independent — lightly taxed, exempt from Swiss anticorruption laws and boasting its own arbitration court, based in a chateau here. It also generates serious money: Sports organizations bring more than a billion dollars to Switzerland annually, according to a six-year study published in 2015.But city and state-level government officials see room for growth, in spite of the corruption scandal surrounding FIFA, soccer’s Switzerland-based governing body, which has inspired federal lawmakers to impose stricter regulations that will take effect this summer.AdvertisementLausanne and the Swiss canton, or state, of Vaud are actively recruiting federations to move here — offering to pay their rent for two years, to help employees house-hunt and to coordinate visa applications — having committed to filling a new office building by 2018.Advertisement“We’re the Silicon Valley of sports,” said Sabrina Attias, delegate for international sport for the city of Lausanne. “For a long time, we didn’t have to do anything to attract them. Then we realized the opportunities and decided to be proactive.”Ten years ago, the city, together with the state and the I.O.C., built an office complex called the Maison du Sport International, a sort of corporate Olympic Village that houses dozens of governing bodies — archery, boxing and weight lifting share a building — as well as other important organizations, like the World Anti-Doping Agency.The venture has been so successful, with a waiting list for office space, that a four-story fourth building is under construction. With two years until it opens, the government has promised developers that it will fill 80 percent of the new offices, causing city workers like Ms. Attias to hustle to woo more tenants.“It’s a risk, but we’re going to succeed,” she said, pointing proudly to the complex’s amenities: colorful common areas evoking Google’s headquarters; a gym and adjacent soccer fields and tennis courts; and a carnotzet, or traditional Swiss-French wine cellar with the air of a speakeasy.Officials are confident that a new law criminalizing bribery and corruption in sports federations, which were previously immune from investigation unless they requested it, will not dull the appeal of Switzerland once it takes effect in July.Beyond the magnetism of the I.O.C., sports organizations have long been attracted to Switzerland for its political neutrality, geographic centrality, favorable tax structure and friendliness to private arbitration, said Lucien W. Valloni, a sports lawyer in Zurich.But Lausanne and the canton government have sweetened the pot with more incentives yet: Any federation that relocates to the city, as a tenant in the Maison du Sport or elsewhere, receives two years of free rent, permanent exemption from taxes and help from Ms. Attias and her team with tasks like finding places for employees to live and securing permits to work in Switzerland.Get the big sports news, highlights and analysis from Times journalists, with distinctive takes on games and some behind-the-scenes surprises, delivered to your inbox every week.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.Those lures have attracted an array of newcomers over the years, as the government has ramped up its recruitment and some sports have sought to improve their standing with the I.O.C. The International Hockey Federation uprooted itself from Brussels, the Judo Federation from Dublin, the Sambo Federation from Moscow. Last year, the World Bowling Federation moved its headquarters from Arlington, Tex.AdvertisementSome organizations have followed the path of the Sailing Federation, which in 2014 opened an office in Lausanne while maintaining its headquarters in Southampton, England. Others, like the International Basketball Federation, moved to the region from other parts of Switzerland.Lausanne, now a city of roughly 140,000 people, has seen its population grow along the way, by about 10 percent in the last decade.“A good 75 percent of all Olympic sports DNA is in Lausanne,” said Claude Stricker, chief executive of the International Academy of Sports Science and Technology in Lausanne and author of a 2015 economic impact study on sports organizations in Switzerland. “We’re lucky.”More than a dozen other federations, including cash-flush FIFA, have their headquarters elsewhere in the country, making for roughly 65 sports organizations in Switzerland.The organizations are particularly beneficial to the Swiss economy, Mr. Stricker said, because they make the vast majority of their revenue outside Switzerland while spending a significant amount within the country and inspiring further spending. For every Swiss franc a sports organization spends in Switzerland, Mr. Stricker’s study found, the local economy sees an impact of 1.55 francs.But recognizing that the number of federations to recruit is not limitless, the Swiss have also set their sights on regional associations — European sports confederations, for instance — and other sports associations or businesses, like the International World Games Association, which opened an office last year.Even after successfully attracting organizations to the region, the government is increasingly focused on making sure they stay. Ms. Attias invoked a roster of events: seminars, ballet outings, ski trips in the Alps and an annual dinner for top sports federation officials and Swiss government officials, including the country’s president, to socialize.AdvertisementRoland Rino Büchel, a member of the Swiss Parliament who spearheaded the recent legislation in Switzerland, called such coziness dangerous. “Can you imagine if the same police raid that happened at FIFA happened at the I.O.C.?” he said. “A policeman with the I.O.C. logo on his sleeve has to search the I.O.C.”Mr. Büchel said that before the new law passed, he feared that sports organizations could damage the reputation of Switzerland. “People think of FIFA on the same level as the banks,” he said. “But come July, this nice life will be over for federations.”Since last year, the Swiss authorities have heightened their scrutiny of nonprofit sports associations. The office of Switzerland’s attorney general, which had never previously investigated FIFA, opened criminal inquiries into the organization’s top leaders after the United States announced a related case.Switzerland has also newly classified sports officials as so-called politically exposed persons, recognizing them as prominent public figures at greater risk for bribery and corruption. That new standing subjects sports officials and their friends and relatives to financial scrutiny and corruption investigations.Even in the face of such new measures, Mr. Valloni, the Swiss lawyer, said he thought it impossible for sports associations to operate so flexibly elsewhere. “Swiss law is very, very liberal,” he said. “There’s no other place that would be so favorable.”If such a place did exist, Mr. Büchel said, “Good luck to the country that says to the sports federations: ‘Leave Switzerland because you can’t be corrupt there anymore.’ ”A version of this article appears in print on April 23, 2016, on Page D1 of the New York edition with the headline: Swiss City Is ‘the Silicon Valley of Sports’.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.