By FILIP BONDYJULY 12, 2017
Tournament organizers devised a wide-reaching plan to stop the chant. They enlisted players to read a pledge about fans’ setting an example for children, and they empowered stadium security officials to eject offenders who shouted it anyway. They even devised a technical solution to block the chant from reverberating through television viewers’ living rooms.But like the Mexican federation and FIFA officials before it, organizers at the Concacaf Gold Cup have discovered that an offensive chant by Mexican soccer fans is more easily screamed than screened.Despite a concerted effort to dissuade a large bloc of supporters from routinely shouting a particularly vulgar word during Mexico’s matches at the Gold Cup, the regional championship tournament being played across the United States this month, officials from Concacaf — the Confederation of North, Central America and Caribbean Association Football — now concede, less than a week into the tournament, that such behavior modification remains a long-term challenge.“Success won’t happen overnight,” said Philippe Moggio, the general secretary of Concacaf, the governing body for soccer in the region. “We are tackling this knowing that it’s going to be a long-term, incremental effort.”AdvertisementThe chant in question is bound to occur again on Thursday night in Denver, when a noisy faction of partisan supporters at a Mexico-Jamaica match can be expected to disobey another pregame fan pledge and to ignore pleas from the team captains. As fans did when Mexico beat El Salvador in San Diego on Sunday night, they are very likely to shout, “Eeehhhh … puto!” whenever the Jamaican goalkeeper boots a ball upfield.AdvertisementThe word “puto,” which may be translated as male prostitute, is a slur often used in Mexico aimed at gay men. The chant has evolved into a long-practiced, full-throated tradition at matches involving the Mexican national team, and many fans who delight in shouting it contend the insult is harmless fun, with no malice intended. But because of the verbal and physical abuse historically endured by gays in that country, others believe that the word carries a more hostile weight. Soccer officials have admonished and repeatedly fined Mexico — to no avail so far — in an effort to stamp it out.Concacaf optimistically hoped to prevent, or at least tame, the chant at the Gold Cup through a variety of strategies, which included an education program, public fan pledges and an assist from Pancho Villa’s Army, a sympathetic Mexican-American group of supporters. If all else failed, Concacaf figured, it would block out the chant by adding pretaped crowd noise over it on its international broadcast feed, which is being aired domestically on several Fox networks this month.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.But when Mexico opened the tournament on Sunday night, the chant was plainly audible during the broadcast — easily loud enough to be picked up by the uncensored microphones of Fox’s commentators.A day later, Moggio, who has made it a mission to end the chant inside the region’s stadiums, acknowledged that such a goal may take longer than he would like. “This campaign is about changing attitudes among the fan base by working with our partners, including the fans themselves, on education and action toward reducing and eventually eliminating the chant,” he said after problems arose Sunday.The Mexican soccer federation has already been fined a total of more than $100,000 by FIFA, world soccer’s governing body, for at least eight violations of rules about fan behavior related to the chant. But rather than stop it, there is a fear that the chant is spreading; FIFA has cited several other countries for homophobic taunts during the current World Cup qualifying cycle.FIFA put in place its own plan to stop offensive chants at the recent Confederations Cup, even threatening teams with forfeits. But that tournament took place in Russia, where fans were unfamiliar with the “puto” chant, so that specific issue was not a problem at the event.More radical punitive options like point penalties in World Cup qualifying or stadium bans are not likely to be enforced at this tournament. It would be difficult to penalize Mexico specifically for the actions of fans at matches held in American stadiums, anyway.“We’ve seen different approaches to this,” Moggio said. “It’s hard when you think of punitive messages that do not address the problem at its root. We don’t want to take actions that affect integrity of games.”A version of this article appears in print on July 13, 2017, on Page B11 of the New York edition with the headline: Mexico Fans Disregard  Pleas to End  Crude Chant.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.