
On Pro Football By                     
 TYLER KEPNER
 
JAN. 15, 2017
FOXBOROUGH, Mass. — t’s funny how different kinds of athletes celebrate success. In baseball, when a team advances to the league championship series, the players turn the locker room into a nightclub — music and dancing in a raucous blizzard of alcohol. It’s all a bit much, but no more peculiar, perhaps, than the scene at Gillette Stadium late Saturday night.The New England Patriots had just done something no N.F.L. team had ever done, by securing a berth in the conference championship game for the sixth year in a row. Stopping there is unfulfilling, as the Patriots know; they failed to reach the Super Bowl in three of those previous five seasons. But still, no team, until now, has had six straight shots to get there. It’s a big deal.Of course, Coach Bill Belichick was not about to reflect on it after a 34-16 victory over the Houston Texans. He had expected more, and lamented some chances the Patriots wasted.“Like a lot of things tonight, if we don’t improve in those situations the next time we play, then it’ll probably be the last time we play,” he said. “We’ve got to take advantage of our opportunities. We’ve got to coach and execute better.”AdvertisementYou expect such gloom from Belichick; the sculptors in Canton, Ohio, you’d imagine, will one day chisel a frown on his bust for the sake of accuracy. More surprising was the summary from running back Dion Lewis, who had just scored three touchdowns.“I feel like this was my worst game ever, actually,” he said. “The fumbles, just putting my team in a bad position. I don’t think this was my best game.”AdvertisementYes, Lewis fumbled twice. The first, on a kickoff return with 11 minutes 29 seconds left in the second quarter, quickly turned into a touchdown for Houston. That cut the Patriots’ lead to 14-13 and silenced a crowd that had reason to expect a blowout.By the time of Lewis’s second fumble, it had arrived. The Patriots recovered that fumble, late in the fourth quarter, and then kicked a field goal for the final margin of victory. They had entered the game as 16-point favorites, the highest for a playoff game in nearly two decades — and they covered the spread.Lewis had been the star. He had a receiving touchdown, a rushing touchdown and a kick-return touchdown, a hat trick never before achieved in the N.F.L. postseason. The last two players to do it in the regular season: Kansas City’s Tyreek Hill this season, and the great Gale Sayers of Chicago in 1965.So why dwell on the bad after a night with so much good?“That’s just how I am,” Lewis said. “Never worry about the good stuff. I’m supposed to do stuff like that, and my teammates trust me to do stuff like that. I’m worried about ways to get better to keep helping my team win for next week.”Get the big sports news, highlights and analysis from Times journalists, with distinctive takes on games and some behind-the-scenes surprises, delivered to your inbox every week.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.Lewis has done nothing but help his team win in New England. That’s not an overstatement: He has played 15 games the last two seasons, and the Patriots are 15-0. Belichick, Tom Brady and a lot of others deserve more credit, and it’s just a quirk of the stat sheet. But facts are facts.“I’m on a great team, I’ve got great teammates, a great coach and a great quarterback,” Lewis said, smiling. “It ain’t me, believe that.”AdvertisementThe Patriots have been so good for so long that it’s easy to grow weary of seeing them win all the time. New England fans really do have it best — think of this as San Diego in reverse, with rough weather but lots of trophies — and soon they may stage yet another parade.But besides Brady, the players who make it happen, who bring Belichick’s brilliance to life, come and go. For some of them, this is all special and new. Lewis had never appeared in a playoff game before Saturday. Tight end Martellus Bennett was making his Patriots playoff debut and was eager for a smooth start.“It’s like a first date with a girl you really love,” said Bennett, who had one catch for 4 yards. “She steps in a puddle or gets in a car accident, it’s not really great.”Lewis had the puddle and the car wreck, but a whole lot of fun, too. He deserved to bask in the spotlight, but demurred. The Patriots did not grant him a stage in the interview room, the domain of Belichick and Brady. He spoke at his locker like a chastened newcomer; no time to think much about his journey.“No, the only thing I’m thinking about is ways that I could protect the ball better so that won’t happen again,” Lewis said. “That’s what I’m thinking about right now.”His path to the Patriots, and his singular playoff achievement, was arduous. A fifth-round draft pick by the Eagles in 2011, from the University of Pittsburgh, Lewis played two seasons for Philadelphia as a kick returner and backup running back. In 2013, he was traded to Cleveland, hurt his leg and spent the year on injured reserve. The next year, he was cut by the Browns and the Indianapolis Colts.Lewis came to the Patriots in February 2015 — five days after they beat Seattle in the Super Bowl — but tore his anterior cruciate ligament that November. He missed more than a year before returning, and though Saturday’s touchdowns were his first of the season, he averaged 4.4 yards per carry.“He’s quick, he’s hard to tackle, he’s got good balance,” Belichick said. “He’s worked extremely hard; there’s no question about that. He was working really hard last year at this time, when the team was at the end of the season and in the playoffs. This year, he has an opportunity to play.”Last year, the Patriots’ playoff run ended in Denver with a 20-18 loss in the A.F.C. title game. They have earned another chance at another Super Bowl — the Steelers or the Chiefs will come to Foxborough next — and if they get there, Lewis will know how to act. In 15 games as a Patriot, he has learned how things work: Win, but don’t get too excited about it. Not yet, anyway.Advertisement“Glad we got a win,” Lewis said, after the best worst game of his life, “but we know in order to advance next week, we’ve got to play a lot better.”A version of this article appears in print on January 16, 2017, on Page D3 of the New York edition with the headline: A Mere Three Scores? A Patriot Vows to Do Better.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.See More »