By SCOTT CACCIOLAJAN. 14, 2017
HOUSTON — At first, it was just a vision. Eric Gordon, a free agent at the time, listened as Mike D’Antoni, the newly installed coach of the Houston Rockets, described his offensive system and how Gordon would fit as an important piece.Gordon, a 28-year-old shooting guard, could begin to see it unfold at that meeting in July: all the transition layups, all the defenders collapsing on James Harden, all the open 3-pointers against opponents that the Rockets had stretched like rubber bands with their unremitting ball movement. D’Antoni made a convincing case.As Gordon said in an interview last week, “Why not take a chance?”Gordon took his mother, Denise, with him when he signed with the Rockets for four years and $53 million — a contract that, halfway through this season, is shaping up as one of the best bargains of last summer’s free-agency period. Gordon has played excellent basketball, and everything that D’Antoni and the team’s front-office pitched to him has come to fruition.In fact, the Rockets, who were 31-11 on the season going into their game on Sunday night against the Nets in Brooklyn, have exceeded even their own expectations.Advertisement“I think he knew, more or less, the type of basketball we’d be playing, with the free rein on 3-pointers and all that,” D’Antoni said of Gordon. “But I don’t think I could even articulate in the summertime exactly what we’d be doing, because I didn’t know we’d be doing this.”And what is this, exactly? The Rockets, already partial to the 3-point shot before D’Antoni arrived in June, are on pace to obliterate N.B.A. records for 3-pointers attempted and made in a season. But more than merely operating as long-range gluttons, the Rockets are producing quality shots, sinking 37.2 percent of their 3-point attempts going into Sunday night’s game. They were on track to make 1,213 this season.AdvertisementWith Harden, a leading candidate for the league’s Most Valuable Player Award, acting as the offense’s guiding force at point guard, Gordon is averaging 17.7 points in 30.6 minutes per game. He is also averaging a career-high 3.7 3-pointers per game, the second most in the league, just behind the Golden State Warriors’ Stephen Curry. Just as significant, Gordon is doing his handiwork while coming off the bench, a role he accepted without apparent reservation when D’Antoni was searching for rotational balance early in the season.“It was just something we were experimenting with to see if it could work out,” Gordon said. “And I’m like: ‘Try it. If we win a whole bunch of games, why not?’”That phrase — why not? — has become something of a verbal tic for Gordon, who seems fully aware by now that so much about his chosen profession is beyond his control. He knows about injuries and outsized expectations. He knows about losing and armchair critics. So he must feel as if he has fallen through storm clouds and landed in basketball nirvana.“I’ve never shot this many 3s,” he said. “Guys are looking for me all the time.”Gordon, a former first-round pick of the Los Angeles Clippers, had spent the past five seasons with the New Orleans Pelicans, joining the team when it was still known as the Hornets. He did not describe his time with that franchise as the most fulfilling phase of his professional career.“It was a rough patch,” he said.Gordon was hindered by injuries from the start, playing only nine games in his first season in New Orleans. He wound up missing a total of 173 regular-season games with issues that included loose cartilage in his right knee, tendinitis in his left knee and a torn labrum in his left shoulder. Last season, he broke his right ring finger — twice.Get the big sports news, highlights and analysis from Times journalists, with distinctive takes on games and some behind-the-scenes surprises, delivered to your inbox every week.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.“A lot of freaky stuff,” D’Antoni said. “But he plays very violently — a lot of jerks and starts.”AdvertisementD’Antoni and Gordon already knew one another from their involvement with U.S.A. Basketball. Gordon was among the final players cut from the national team that won the gold medal at the 2012 Olympics, even though D’Antoni said he was “arguably the best player in camp.” But Gordon was coming off an injury-marred season — and vying for a spot with Harden.As he mulled his options in free agency last summer, Gordon identified the Rockets as an appealing destination. Long known as an attack-the-rim guard who absorbed his share of punishment — his Pelicans teammates called him Bulldog — Gordon was not averse to shooting more from the perimeter. Perhaps there was an element of self-preservation involved.Rockets forward Ryan Anderson said, “This is the type of team that saves years on your legs.”The prospect of continuing to play alongside Anderson, a former teammate in New Orleans, was also enticing to Gordon. Both were free agents last summer, and after Anderson signed with the Rockets, he immediately called Gordon to make his pitch.“I just told him how awesome it would be if he came along,” Anderson recalled. “And he told me, ‘I think this might be what I’m going to do.’ He’s so much happier here. You can just tell. He’s so much more talkative. He’s so much more aggressive. Guys have complete faith in him every time he has the ball in his hands.”It has been a season of redemption for the Rockets. Redemption for D’Antoni, whose up-tempo style of offense is wreaking havoc on the rest of the league after he struggled to get it going in previous stops with the Knicks and the Lakers. Redemption for Harden, who has silenced any critics by orchestrating the offense as — wait for it — a pass-first point guard. And redemption for Gordon, who has largely remained healthy and thrived.Gordon, who is naturally on the bulky side, worked to slim down before the season, D’Antoni said. Gordon appeared in the team’s first 39 games of the season before he missed two last week with a sprained toe. No one could blame Gordon — or the Rockets — for wanting to exercise caution, given his injury history.In recent years, Gordon has gone to unique lengths in search of physical well-being. Since 2014, he has augmented his off-season workouts by spending a couple of weeks in Germany each summer training with Bayer Leverkusen, a soccer club in the top-shelf Bundesliga. Gordon, who used to play competitive soccer before choosing to focus on basketball, said he had been introduced to the club by Barrence Baytos, a trainer and neuromuscular therapist based in Los Angeles.“Their stuff over there is very good,” said Gordon, who described lifting heavy weights to increase his explosiveness. “It’s almost like they know your body better than you do.”AdvertisementDirk Mesch, a spokesman for Bayer Leverkusen, said Gordon had visited the club’s high-class training facility — known as the Werkstatt, or workshop — several times.“Eric fulfilled his personal training and regeneration program,” Mesch said in an email, “and both gave and gained inspiration from the contact with our players.”D’Antoni acknowledged knowing next to nothing about soccer despite having spent much of the 1990s playing and coaching basketball in Italy, but he did say that Gordon’s background in soccer did not surprise him. D’Antoni noted some similarities between Gordon and Steve Nash, who was D’Antoni’s high-octane point guard with the Phoenix Suns and who, like Gordon, has a soccer background.“Eric has that real good footwork,” D’Antoni said.Gordon also has an intuitive feel for spacing, D’Antoni said, and a knack for reading the floor. With the Rockets, Gordon can finally see the possibilities.A version of this article appears in print on January 16, 2017, on Page D1 of the New York edition with the headline: Signed by Rockets, Then Encouraged to Fire 3-Pointers.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.