By KAREN CROUSEJAN. 15, 2017
CHICO, Calif. — As flood advisories were issued here last Sunday, patrons at the End Zone Bar & Grill — who braved slick, debris-strewn roads to watch an N.F.L. playoff game together — had something more distressing on their minds. The bar’s big-screen TVs showed the Green Bay Packers’ offense, commanded by Aaron Rodgers, Chico’s native son and favorite quarterback, clogging like a storm drain.The fans tried to cajole the quarterback as the Packers punted on their first five possessions against the Giants. It was never “Come on, No. 12” or “Let’s go, Rodgers.” It was always Aaron, as in “Aaron, this is not your first rodeo. Let’s make a first down.”The patrons were on a first-name basis with Rodgers because many attended school with him, or have children who were his classmates, or have a family member receiving chiropractic treatment from Rodgers’s father. Even those who weren’t born when Rodgers was a scrawny, 5-foot-3-inch high school freshman feel as though they know him; he made an impression on the teenagers on Pleasant Valley High School’s newly crowned state championship football squad by delivering a pep talk by video that they watched before they won a state title in December.It seems everyone in this college town of about 88,000 has some connection to Rodgers, a two-time most valuable player in the N.F.L. and the middle of three sons of Ed and Darla Rodgers, graduates of California State University, Chico. When Rodgers rebounded from a 4-for-11 start against the Giants to complete 21 of his final 29 passes in the Packers’ 38-13 victory, the bar pulsed with pride.AdvertisementRodgers’s celebrity is a source of unmitigated joy everywhere here except in what used to be his innermost circle.AdvertisementA rift in the Rodgers family became public fodder when Aaron’s younger brother, Jordan, appeared as a contestant on the reality TV show “The Bachelorette.” While romancing the show’s star, JoJo Fletcher, Jordan told her that she probably would not meet Aaron on a coming visit to Chico, because the quarterback had distanced himself from his kin.With Jordan’s comments, the spotlight burned brighter on a family still adapting to Rodgers’s sky-high profile, which soared after the Packers’ Super Bowl victory in February 2011 and the start of his relationship with the actress Olivia Munn in 2014.“One in the news is enough for us,” Rodgers’s father said. He spoke at his office on Monday morning during a break between patients, looking down at his hands, clasping and unclasping them.“Fame can change things,” he added.As was the case throughout the regular season, Ed and Darla Rodgers did not travel to Green Bay last weekend to watch their son play, and they had no plans to attend the Packers’ N.F.C. divisional playoff game on Sunday near Dallas, even though Jordan recently moved there to live with Fletcher, who is now his fiancée.As Rodgers tries to lead the Packers to their eighth consecutive victory and their second N.F.C. title game appearance in the last three seasons, his parents will be in Ukiah, 140 miles southwest of Chico, looking after Darla’s mother, Barbara Ann Pittman, who was widowed last May after 65 years of marriage.Ed Rodgers described as accurate a Bleacher Report article published in November, which revealed, among other things, that Rodgers had not spoken to his family since the end of 2014, a few months after he began dating Munn, who has appeared on “The Daily Show” on Comedy Central, in “The Newsroom” on HBO and in the film “X-Men: Apocalypse.”Asked if there had been any thaw in their relationship, Rodgers’s father said, “It’s hard to tell sometimes.”In Wisconsin, Rodgers politely declined to discuss the rift. “I just don’t think it’s appropriate talking about family stuff publicly,” he said Thursday at the Packers’ practice facility. Asked if his brother Jordan would be at the game on Sunday, Rodgers replied: “I don’t know. I really don’t.”AdvertisementBut even as Rodgers keeps his distance from his family, he maintains close ties to his hometown. He stays in touch with Craig Rigsbee, a Chico resident and the athletic director at Butte College, a community college about 25 miles outside town. Rigsbee coached the football team when Rodgers played at Butte for one season before he moved onto Division I football at the University of California, Berkeley.Rigsbee watched the Packers’ game against the Giants with friends at home in his “fan cave,” with a full bar and a big-screen television with surround sound. In another room hang a half-dozen Packers jerseys signed, sealed and delivered by Rodgers to be auctioned off to raise money for the school’s athletic fund.Rigsbee said he last saw Rodgers in July when he watched him play in a celebrity golf tournament in Lake Tahoe, Calif.A friend in Chico who has Cowboys season tickets offered Rigsbee a seat for Sunday’s game, but he had to turn it down. This weekend is the college’s main athletic department fund-raiser, the Crab Feed, where at least one of the signed Rodgers jerseys in his closet will be auctioned off.Rigsbee knows that if he were to show up at AT&T Stadium in Arlington, Tex., Rodgers would welcome him warmly. “Everything I’ve asked him to do, he’s done,” Rigsbee said. “He’s been really gracious to us.”Rigsbee — whose son Jordan followed Rodgers to Cal-Berkeley and is an offensive lineman for the Carolina Panthers — has been to several Packers games over the years as Rodgers’s guest, but none recently by his own choice.After Rodgers led Green Bay past the Pittsburgh Steelers in the Super Bowl six years ago, the river of celebrity rose so high, so fast, it threatened to suffocate Rodgers, said Rigsbee, who backed away, lest he get pulled into its current.Advertisement“The problem when someone achieves a level of fame like Aaron has is that it makes you more guarded, because people will try to play off the people around him to gain access,” Rigsbee said. “I can’t tell you how many companies have called me and said we’ll give you this or that and oh, could we just go to dinner with Aaron. Or people will ask me if I can get him to sign this or that.”Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.He recalled dining out with Rodgers in Chico the spring after the Packers’ Super Bowl victory.A woman approached their table and started bowing in an “I’m not worthy” gesture and gushing that Rodgers was the greatest. Rigsbee said Rodgers offered to sign a napkin for her if she would stop making a fuss over him. He told her that she was making him uncomfortable.As Rigsbee recalled, Rodgers said, “For all you know, I could be the biggest creep in the world.”When Rigsbee was recruiting Rodgers to Butte, he sat in the family’s home, then located a couple of cul-de-sacs from his own, and ate chocolate chip cookies baked by Darla Rodgers. He still has lunch on occasion with Rodgers’s father. When he is around the couple, whom he described as “really, really nice, good-hearted people,” he avoids asking about Aaron. “It’s not my place,” he said. “I’m very supportive of both Aaron and his family.”Mark Cooley, who took over as the Pleasant Valley High football coach in 2012, was grateful for the generosity of Rodgers and his father, who together bought 100 new helmets for the Vikings before Cooley’s first season.Four years later, as Cooley guided Pleasant Valley to an overtime win against St. Anthony of Long Beach in the state 4-A title game, Rodgers used his smartphone to keep track from a hotel room in Chicago, where the Packers would beat the Bears the next day.“I was watching it and refreshing it, and I couldn’t find any live video link,” Rodgers said. “But there was a live updater with a scroll that would give the description of the play.”Rodgers helped pay for the team’s travel to the game. He contacted Cooley after one of his 2.82 million Twitter followers alerted him to a fund-raising campaign for the trip to Long Beach. Rodgers also surprised Cooley by sending the inspirational video.On Monday, Cooley called the video up on his smartphone and pressed play. The 33-year-old Rodgers, wearing a Pleasant Valley billed cap and T-shirt, filled the screen. Looking into the camera, he was “pumped” for them and said: “You guys have accomplished so much this season. You’ve got a lot to be proud of.”AdvertisementHe said he still thinks about his high school games “from years ago” and added, “Have fun out there, relax and trust your instincts.”Aaron Rodgers at the Academy Awards last year with the actress Olivia Munn, whom he began dating in 2014.Since Cooley took over the program, he has preached that no player is better than any other, a message affirmed by the arrival of Rodgers’s video.“The kids were in awe that he knew what they were doing and took the time to acknowledge it,” Cooley said.Ed Rodgers said he and his wife were heartened to hear of their son’s show of support for his high school alma mater.“It’s like the old Aaron, really,” his father said.The circumstances in which the family’s private business became a national story were “weird,” Ed Rodgers acknowledged. “Airing public laundry is not what I would have chosen,” he added.But he said he was not upset that it had happened. “It’s good to have it all come out,” he said.It has been easier in some ways, he said, since “The Bachelorette,” which included a scene at the Rodgers home in Chico of Jordan and Fletcher dining at a table with Ed, Darla and their oldest son, Luke, and two empty chairs reserved for Rodgers and Munn.Ed Rodgers said he no longer had to brace himself for the inevitable questions from his patients first thing Monday morning about how he managed to get back for a morning appointment when his son played two or three time zones away the day before.Now the people whose pain he is relieving reciprocate by not inquiring about Aaron. And when they do, Rodgers’s father tends to keep his answers short.Advertisement“It’s complicated,” he said. He spoke haltingly, but hopefully, adding, “We’re all hoping for the best.”Rob Reischel contributed reporting from Green Bay, Wis.A version of this article appears in print on January 15, 2017, on Page SP1 of the New York edition with the headline: A Dropped Connection.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.