By THE ASSOCIATED PRESSJAN. 14, 2017
RALEIGH, N.C. — Brock McGinn had a goal and three assists on Saturday night, Jordan Staal and Elias Lindholm each had a goal and two assists, and the Carolina Hurricanes pulled away late to beat the Islanders, 7-4, for their fourth straight victory.The Hurricanes overcame a 3-1 deficit with three goals in the second period and improved to 14-1-1 in their last 16 home games.Carolina scored three more times in the third to turn the game into a rout, including a goal by Lee Stempniak that broke a 4-4 tie 5 minutes 42 seconds into the period.Get the big sports news, highlights and analysis from Times journalists, with distinctive takes on games and some behind-the-scenes surprises, delivered to your inbox every week.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.McGinn has scored in three straight games and has seven points over all in that span.Justin Faulk, Brett Pesce and Teuvo Teravainen also scored for Carolina. Cam Ward made 28 saves.AdvertisementJohn Tavares scored twice for the Islanders a night after recording a hat trick against the Florida Panthers. Thomas Greiss gave up all seven goals on 43 shots before being pulled.The Hurricanes outshot the Islanders, 45 to 32.The Islanders were in control early. Tavares and Anders Lee scored in the first period, and Jason Chimera made it 3-1 early in the second when he streaked down the middle and buried a pass from Anthony Beauvillier in the left corner of the net.AdvertisementThen the Hurricanes rallied, with help from the Islanders’ defense.Shortly after Chimera’s goal, Faulk launched a wrist shot from the face-off circle. Greiss made the save, but Islanders defenseman Scott Mayfield kicked the rebound through Greiss’s legs and into the net.A version of this article appears in print on January 15, 2017, on Page SP2 of the New York edition with the headline: Islanders Take Control Early, but Hurricanes Roar Back.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.