By THE ASSOCIATED PRESSAUG. 9, 2016
A study of N.C.A.A. Division I major infractions cases from 1953 to 2014 indicated that football and men’s basketball, which attract the most revenue, accounted for 83 percent of the total.It also determined that probation and public reprimand and censure were the most common penalties.The Temple University Sport Industry Research Center prepared the report, which was released for the N.C.A.A. Division I Committee on Infractions.The center’s director and the report’s co-author, Jeremy Jordan, said the study was the first to review all major infractions cases for Division I. Of the 554 cases, 459 involved football, men’s basketball or both.Universities from Power Five conferences accounted for 40 percent of all major infractions cases. The report found that the members of those conferences were generally treated no differently from universities in other leagues, in terms of penalties.AdvertisementT.C.U. EXTENDS COACH’S CONTRACT Texas Christian’s football coach, Gary Patterson, signed a one-year extension that takes his contract through the 2021 season.AdvertisementTerms of the deal were not disclosed.Patterson is entering his 16th season as head coach of the Horned Frogs and has the most wins in team history, 143.Giants wide receiver Victor Cruz, who has missed most of the past two seasons because of leg operations, sat out a large portion of the team’s training camp practice in East Rutherford, N.J., on Tuesday because of a groin muscle injury. Afterward, Cruz said he felt the muscle tighten during practice, and he took himself out as a precaution. He added that the injury could affect his ability to play in the Giants’ first preseason game against the Miami Dolphins on Friday night at MetLife Stadium.“It’s a little tightness, and I didn’t want to push it and make it worse,” said Cruz, who has been involved in full practices. “It’ll be all right.”The Giants have never indicated whether Cruz was expected to play in the first preseason game. Coach Ben McAdoo has declined to weigh in on Cruz’s status for the game until Thursday.BILL PENNINGTONTEBOW TURNS ATTENTION TO BASEBALL With professional football not working out, Tim Tebow is going to give baseball a try.Tebow, the 2007 Heisman Trophy winner and a former N.F.L. first-round draft pick, plans to hold a workout for Major League Baseball teams this month. Tebow last played organized baseball in high school.ESPN first reported the news.Tebow has been training in Scottsdale, Ariz., with the former major league catcher Chad Moeller.AdvertisementMultiple news media outlets reported that the Texas Rangers slugger Prince Fielder may be forced to end his career after his second neck operation.Fielder had a cervical fusion on July 29 to repair a herniation between two disks in his neck. That was done just above the area where Fielder, 32, had a similar operation in May 2014.Fox Sports was the first to report that Fielder would not continue to play.The Rangers said that Fielder would be available to the news media on Wednesday after the team returned home following an eight-game trip.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.Meanwhile, Adrian Beltre hit a two-run double, Elvis Andrus added a tiebreaking single, and the Rangers scored four runs in the eighth inning to beat the Colorado Rockies, 7-5, at Coors Field in Denver.LINCECUM ACCEPTS DEMOTION Tim Lincecum, a two-time National League Cy Young Award winner, has accepted a demotion to the Los Angeles Angels’ Class AAA team.The Angels said that Lincecum planned to report to Salt Lake City this week.Los Angeles designated Lincecum for assignment on Saturday after he went 2-6, with a 9.16 E.R.A., in nine starts after signing a one-year deal on May 20 following left hip surgery. The right-handed Lincecum, 32, had the right to refuse a minor league assignment after no other team claimed him off waivers.FRANCONA FALLS ILL Cleveland Indians Manager Terry Francona was not on the job after experiencing chest pain while speaking to reporters before a road game against the Washington Nationals.The Indians said Francona was examined by an emergency medical technician at Nationals Park and remained at the stadium. The team added that Francona felt better by the first pitch and called the decision to rest him precautionary.Francona, 57, has twice dealt with a pulmonary embolism.Later, Francisco Lindor singled to break up Max Scherzer’s no-hit bid and scored in the seventh inning, and Trevor Bauer pitched Cleveland to a 3-1 win over Washington.AdvertisementCUBS REACH 70 WINS Kris Bryant hit his 28th home run, John Lackey outpitched his former teammate Jered Weaver, and the Chicago Cubs beat the Los Angeles Angels, 5-1, at Wrigley Field for their eighth straight victory. Willson Contreras also homered and Ben Zobrist added a run-scoring double for the major-league-leading Cubs, who won their 70th game and moved to a season-high 29 games over .500.Emerging from the shadows, Paul Pogba removed his hood, looked straight into the camera and uttered the words Manchester United fans had been waiting to hear — “I’m back.”With that 26-second video teaser, Pogba, 23, a French midfielder, became the world’s most expensive soccer player in a deal worth $116 million as United continued its heavy spending.Pogba left United four years ago for the Italian club Juventus — and virtually for nothing at $1.9 million — when his first contract with United expired.His new five-year deal includes an option for a sixth year.REAL MADRID WINS SUPER CUP A goal by Dani Carvajal just before the end of extra time gave the Champions League winner Real Madrid a 3-2 victory over its 10-man Spanish rival, Sevilla, the Europa League champion, in the UEFA Super Cup in Trondheim, Norway.Manny Pacquiao confirmed that he would be coming out of retirement to fight Jessie Vargas, the World Boxing Organization’s welterweight champion, on Nov. 5.Pacquiao, a Filipino world champion in eight divisions, made the announcement after meeting with his promoter, Bob Arum, in Manila.“Yes, the fight is on,” Pacquiao said in a statement. (AGENCE FRANCE-PRESSE)A version of this article appears in print on August 10, 2016, on Page B13 of the New York edition with the headline: Study Says Big-Money Sports Draw Most Major Infractions.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.