By THE ASSOCIATED PRESSJAN. 13, 2017
Nearly a year after Coach Jim Boeheim led Syracuse on a surprising run to the Final Four for the fifth time in his 41-year career, he finds himself searching for answers to his current team’s struggles.With a daunting stretch of the schedule — and March — fast approaching, the Orange are at a make-or-break point.“We need to get better,” Boeheim said. “That’s what I can say for sure.”Before the end of the month, the Orange (10-7, 2-2 Atlantic Coast Conference) have three games against ranked opponents — at No. 11 North Carolina and No. 20 Notre Dame and hosting No. 9 Florida State. Those three teams had a combined record of 46-6 heading into this weekend.After tinkering with his lineup, Boeheim guided Syracuse to convincing wins at home last week over Miami and Pittsburgh. The defense rose to the occasion, and point guard John Gillon had 11 assists in each game to inject some needed confidence after a lackluster nonconference schedule that produced five losses.AdvertisementAny hope that Boeheim had finally pieced together a lineup that would take care of the team’s early-season problems was dashed on Tuesday night in a 10-point road loss to Virginia Tech. The Hokies shot nearly 50 percent, while Gillon was 2 for 9 from the floor in a performance that produced just three assists with two turnovers.AdvertisementPerhaps the most telling statistic of all: Virginia Tech scored 17 points in transition to zero for Syracuse, a team that has traditionally thrived in transition.Get the big sports news, highlights and analysis from Times journalists, with distinctive takes on games and some behind-the-scenes surprises, delivered to your inbox every week.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.“I think that they forgot we won two games in a row because our defense was good,” Boeheim said. “Our defense was horrendous, and our offense isn’t going to quite be good enough to make up for that level of defense.”The long-range offense certainly was not there, either. Syracuse was 5 of 17 (29.4 percent) on 3-pointers, a subpar performance for a team that has hit 154 3-pointers, second in the A.C.C. to Notre Dame.An injury early in the game to forward Tyler Lydon, the team’s leading rebounder and No. 2 scorer, did not help either. Lydon entered the game averaging 13.5 points in league play but scored just 2 against the Hokies in 29 minutes.“He said he was all right,” Boeheim said. “Probably should have not played him. He didn’t move very well.”Syracuse returns to action Saturday by hosting Boston College (9-8, 2-2 A.C.C.), and the memory of their first meeting of the season has probably not faded for either team. Two weeks ago in the Orange’s A.C.C. opener, the Eagles ran wild in the Syracuse zone, hitting 16 of 26 shots from 3-point range in a 96-81 triumph.Boston College is coming off a 74-66 win at home over North Carolina State on Thursday night. This clearly is not the team that a year ago went 0-18 in the A.C.C. during the regular season and lost its only conference tournament game. Jerome Robinson has scored 20 or more points in eight straight games and an A.C.C.-best 13 times over all, ranking third in conference scoring (20.9), and the freshman Ky Bowman is already an Orange killer, having hit 7 of 8 from beyond the arc in their first meeting.And so it goes for the Orange, whose postseason hopes seem to be teetering.“We did have a lot of potential coming into the year,” said Andrew White, a graduate transfer and the team’s leading scorer. “But potential doesn’t mean much when you don’t execute to get the most out of what you have.”We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.