AdvertisementSupported byBy Jonah Engel BromwichLast season, the Atlanta Hawks were a surprise offensive success. Relying heavily on the 3-pointer, the Hawks took the N.B.A. by storm, shooting their way to the top seed in the Eastern Conference with one of the most efficient attacks in the league.This season, the Hawks’ calling card has been their defense. Since 2016 began, Atlanta has been the most efficient defensive team in the league, holding opponents to 97 points per 100 possessions. However, until recently, it seemed like the Hawks had to make a choice: When they effectively stopped opponents from scoring, they stopped scoring as much themselves.No longer. Since losing in overtime to the Golden State Warriors on March 1, the Hawks have won 11 of 13 games, peaking in the last full month of the regular season. Their offensive efficiency has taken a corresponding leap. Though the Hawks have yet to reach the heights of last season, they have left the low-scoring doldrums.Atlanta, which is in third place in the conference, will be put through its paces in the next couple of weeks, playing two games apiece against the first-place Cleveland Cavaliers and the second-place Toronto Raptors, and hosting the fourth-place Boston Celtics.Entering Monday, Atlanta was a half-game ahead of Boston, and playoff matchups were still very much in flux. The Hawks have not been considered a threat to the East’s top teams, but if they continue to play as well as they have recently, they will have a chance to challenge for the Eastern Conference championship.Atlanta’s success is predicated on its big men, Al Horford and Paul Millsap. They are the Hawks’ two top scorers, as well as the two most efficient players on the roster, and that does not even take into account much of their hard work on the defensive end. Their willingness to switch and to pressure wings before returning to the paint swiftly enough to cover any vulnerability has been a key to Atlanta’s defense.Horford and Millsap have been aided by the recovery of Jeff Teague, who has played far better in the second half of the season — even if he has not returned to all-star form. After averaging fewer than 12 points per game in January, he is shooting and passing far better, and looks to be in sync with the offense in a way that was sorely missing earlier in the season.But the Hawks are hampered by a lack of depth and scoring talent. Aside from Dennis Schroder, the young point guard who seems as if he is being groomed to take Teague’s place, there are few promising players who could tip a playoff series in the Hawks’ favor.That leaves the Hawks vulnerable to teams like the Celtics, the Raptors and the Miami Heat, who have deeper rosters. Despite the Hawks’ place in the standings, they will need to steal a couple of wins against the conference’s top teams to demonstrate their potential for the playoffs.This week will provide the Hawks with a chance to measure their postseason mettle with a visit to Toronto and Friday’s game against the Cavaliers in Atlanta (8 p.m. Eastern, ESPN).Cleveland is still, by far, the conference’s best team, though LeBron James’s erratic behavior on social media and losses this month to the depleted Memphis Grizzlies, the Utah Jazz and the Nets have left some fans scratching their heads. Nevertheless, James has been playing near his peak recently, putting up two triple-doubles in his last four games. But his social media posts about mistakes, the danger of taking shortcuts and his desire for tougher players on the roster have some worried that he may lack faith in his team, which could affect his teammates. Kyrie Irving and Kevin Love, his star sidekicks, still seem unable to reach their potential playing side by side. Love is best when Irving is unavailable; against the Knicks on Saturday, Love had 28 points and 12 rebounds with Irving sitting out.James seemed to realize that things had gone too far, and he made a point of expressing his faith in his team on Saturday. The Cavaliers’ presence in the N.B.A. finals is widely considered a foregone conclusion. But James has taken a risk by drawing attention to potential problems in Cleveland. Now, if his team encounters any friction in the playoffs, he has given his teammates reason to doubt themselves, and potentially subjected them to excessive scrutiny.If Atlanta — or Toronto or Miami or Boston — defeats the Cavaliers, even in a single game, James’s comments could end up haunting the team.Advertisement