By TIM ROHANMARCH 27, 2016
PORT ST. LUCIE, Fla. —  Juan Lagares was in the New York area one day this winter, grinding through another grueling training day with Jose Reyes, when a Mets fan approached him and said that the Mets were re-signing Yoenis Cespedes, the slugger who had become a fan favorite during the Mets’ 2015 playoff run and had displaced Lagares in center field.Surprised but not dejected, Lagares continued his mini boot camp with Reyes, building his agility and strength as he never had before. Lagares reported to spring training last month having lost about 20 pounds, ready to compete for playing time in the Mets’ crowded outfield.His teammates did double takes when Lagares walked into the clubhouse the first time.“Man, you’re skinny,” said shortstop Wilmer Flores, one of Lagares’s closest friends on the team.“Did you see him?” Manager Terry Collins asked the assembled group of beat writers during one of his first news conferences. “Oh, my God. Unbelievable shape. Tremendous shape.”AdvertisementDuring one early batting practice session, while most of the hitters were still adjusting to live pitching, Lagares smashed a home run off Jacob deGrom. Everyone gasped.AdvertisementA year ago at this time, after winning a Gold Glove Award in 2014, Lagares had appeared to be on the brink of a breakout season. He batted .359 that spring, Collins talked about batting him in the leadoff position, and the Mets gave him a four-year, $23 million contract.But a lingering elbow injury, sustained in the second half of the 2014 season, derailed Lagares’s momentum. The Mets cautioned him to save his arm and not go all out on every throw, essentially neutering one of his best traits. Lagares started getting scared whenever he reared back to make a big throw — not because pain was coming but because it might come.Lagares regressed at the plate and in the field. From 2013 to 2014, according to FanGraphs, Lagares had compiled 52 defensive runs saved, among the most in baseball. In 2015, in comparatively limited action, he saved only two runs; analytics indicated that his arm actually cost two runs. At the trade deadline, the Mets sought a center fielder to replace Lagares for the stretch run.When the Mets acquired Cespedes from Detroit, though, it actually helped Lagares, giving him time to develop away from the spotlight. Playing mostly against left-handers gave him confidence. In the three playoff games he started against left-handers, he went 4 for 8 and scored five runs. Playing less often also allowed him to rest his arm, and it felt better at season’s end.This winter, Lagares played in the Dominican Republic and recorded five outfield assists in 16 games — two more than he recorded in his 139 games in the outfield for the Mets last year.After that, Lagares sought out Reyes, the former Met who still lives and trains in the New York area. Lagares watched Reyes work and picked his brain about the game, base running in particular.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.As Lagares got into shape, he realized that he had to make drastic changes in his diet. No more eating at 2 or 3 a.m. after night games, and he had to cut back on the rice and beans.“Before, I just didn’t really care,” Lagares said. “I had no idea what to eat to stay in shape. Sometimes, I ate late at night. Any kind of food.”AdvertisementNow, Lagares said, he feels “100 percent,” and he’s batting .308 this spring. Tom Goodwin, the outfield coach, has noticed that Lagares is getting to even more balls than he did before, when he was perhaps the best defensive center fielder in baseball.“He looks a lot more explosive, too, stealing bases, his first three or four steps,” Goodwin said, meaning that Lagares could be given the green light to go more this season.That is, if Lagares receives playing time. With Cespedes in center and Curtis Granderson and Michael Conforto in right and left field, Lagares may be relegated, again, to playing against left-handed pitchers and coming in as a defensive replacement late in games.Cespedes has drawn some criticism for his defense. On the first pitch of the World Series, he misplayed a fly ball, giving the Kansas City Royals an inside-the-park home run. The other day, he mistakenly called for time while a ball was still in play, under the padding of an outfield wall, allowing another inside-the-park home run. Video of the blunder spread widely on the Internet.The next day, Lagares made a running, over-the-shoulder catch in center field, drawing more gasps from the crowd, the type of spectacular play he once made look routine.“This guy’s got a Gold Glove,” Collins said earlier this spring. “You don’t let those guys just rot on the bench.”INSIDE PITCHSteven Matz had his best outing of the spring on Sunday, holding the Nationals to one run over five and two-thirds innings of a game that ended in a 4-4 tie. “Very encouraged,” Manager Terry Collins said, because, in his first four spring outings, Matz had posted an 8.31 E.R.A.A version of this article appears in print on March 28, 2016, on Page D5 of the New York edition with the headline: Lagares Pushes Hard for Playing Time .  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.