By THE ASSOCIATED PRESSMARCH 29, 2016
Dwyane Wade found out before the game that he would be without his point guard, Goran Dragic, who was ill, and then was worried in the first quarter about the pain shooting through his left hand and wrist.Neither situation slowed him down — and neither did the Nets.Wade scored 30 points on 14-of-19 shooting, Hassan Whiteside added a career-high 27 points off the bench, and the host Miami Heat clamped down defensively in the second half to beat the Nets, 110-99, on Monday night.“We all had to breathe collectively today, without our point guard, without somebody who puts pressure around the rim and attacks,” said Wade, who jammed his wrist early but had no ill effects the rest of the way. “I took it upon myself to be that one to attack tonight.”That is usually the case when he faces the Nets. In his past seven games against them, Wade has averaged 27.1 points. He has never scored fewer than 20 against the Nets in a regular-season game — the then-New Jersey Nets held him to 13 in what was a 30-point Heat win in March 2012, a game Wade left early with an injury.Advertisement“Dwyane Wade, he’s like wine,” the Nets interim coach, Tony Brown, said. “He gets better with age. He was great, he attacked us all night.”Get the big sports news, highlights and analysis from Times journalists, with distinctive takes on games and some behind-the-scenes surprises, delivered to your inbox every week.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.Josh Richardson scored 16 points, starting at point guard in place of Dragic, and Justise Winslow added 13 for Miami. The Heat allowed the Nets to shoot 61 percent in the first half, then held them to 46 percent after halftime to ensure that Joe Johnson’s first game against his former team would end in victory.Advertisement“In the second half, you could see our intensity level, physicality, aggressiveness defensively, was much, much better,” Heat Coach Erik Spoelstra said. “That’s hopefully something we can build on.”Brook Lopez scored 26 points for the Nets, who had their streak of seven straight games with 100 or more points — the team’s longest in two years — come to an end. Thaddeus Young made his first 10 shots and scored 20 for the Nets, who got 14 from Sean Kilpatrick.“It was tough once D-Wade got going,” Lopez said. “We had to focus a lot on him. He definitely controlled the game, controlled the tempo. Obviously, he’s integral to what they do. He made a lot of tough baskets, vintage D-Wade stuff.”We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.