
On Baseball By                     
 TYLER KEPNER
 
JUNE 12, 2016
One man in pinstripes hit a home run on Sunday at Yankee Stadium: Hideki Matsui, who belted a David Cone pitch into the second deck inside the right-field foul pole on Old-Timers’ Day. Matsui turned 42 on Sunday, still younger than Bartolo Colon and Ichiro Suzuki. But he is not coming back to save his old team.“I’d probably last not even one game,” Matsui said through his interpreter, Roger Kahlon. “I’d go on the D.L. as well.”That is a pity, because Matsui actually did play first base on Sunday. Of course, so did Ron Guidry, the great left-hander, who is 65. For their latest first baseman, the Yankees plan to bring in the son of a former Yankee: Ike Davis, the ex-Met whose father, Ron, made an All-Star team as a Yankees reliever.Davis was hitting .268 with four homers and a .350 on-base percentage for the Class AAA affiliate of the Texas Rangers, who released him from his minor league deal on Sunday. The Yankees cleared a roster spot for Davis by sending the reliever Chad Green to the minors. Nick Swisher, the prodigal bro, hit two homers on Sunday for Class AAA Scranton/Wilkes-Barre — too late, it would seem, for a promotion.AdvertisementRob Refsnyder played first on Sunday, and the Yankees pinch-hit for him with two outs in the ninth inning against the Detroit Tigers’ Francisco Rodriguez. Brian McCann struck out looking at a high, outside curveball, and protested politely with the plate umpire. Manager Joe Girardi smirked and retreated to the clubhouse.AdvertisementIt was one of those days for the Yankees, a 4-1 loss to the rookie Michael Fulmer, who extended his scoreless streak to 28⅓ innings. On Saturday night they lost to a veteran master, Justin Verlander. Before that, they had won five straight.The loss dropped the Yankees back under .500, at 31-32. It is hard to know exactly what kind of team they really are.“I think we have a pretty good read,” Girardi said. “We know what our formula is for winning. Verlander’s been throwing well, Fulmer’s been throwing well, and we didn’t score a lot of runs these last two days. And we’ve been in a long, long stretch.”Get the big sports news, highlights and analysis from Times journalists, with distinctive takes on games and some behind-the-scenes surprises, delivered to your inbox every week.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.Sunday’s game was the 40th in 41 days for the Yankees, who will rest on Monday before two games in Colorado and four in Minnesota. They had started this stretch in crisis, with an 8-15 record after a sweep in Boston. They have since gone 23-17, and their pitchers give them a reasonable chance to win most games.“I think we’re playing much better, and I think our starting pitching has been much better,” Girardi said. “And, really, that’s a big part of it. When your starting pitchers are doing their job, you’re going to win a lot more games.”That is true, and if the Yankees pitch the way they have, they will compete. And if they compete, it is hard to imagine the team trading Dellin Betances, Andrew Miller or even Aroldis Chapman. The first two would have plenty of value in the winter, anyway, and Chapman could bring back a high draft choice if he leaves as a free agent.The Yankees’ next 11 games are against the Rockies and the Twins, with the San Diego Padres up ahead at the start of July. It is easy to imagine the Yankees using the soft schedule to rise above .500, stay there for a while, and keep all their veterans. Again, they would pass on a chance to get younger for the future.AdvertisementWith two wild cards available, a winning record essentially puts a team in the pennant race. The Yankees believe their formula could work in October, when the best bullpens can dominate. Do not expect them to retreat.But the Yankees would also have to beat good pitching to have a real chance in the postseason, where they would face pitchers like Verlander and Fulmer. The lineup still lacks impact hitters who inspire confidence.“In baseball, you look for larger sample sizes,” third baseman Chase Headley said, dismissing the lost weekend. “I think we’ve been swinging well the last 10 or 15 days.”The Yankees should be proud of their emergence from the April abyss. But everything counts, and their on-base plus slugging percentage, .693, is among the worst in the game. They needed Alex Rodriguez and Mark Teixeira to avoid injury and duplicate their 2015 production, which was probably too much to ask. Rodriguez has a .238 on-base percentage since coming off the disabled list in late May, and Teixeira is out with torn cartilage in his right knee.“Injuries have really set back the team,” said Matsui, who works as a special adviser in baseball operations. “Guys have to really grind it out, so they haven’t had a chance to really get the full roster out there and compete. But it’s not even halfway yet.”Matsui, of course, finished his Yankees career as the most valuable player of the 2009 World Series. He homered and drove in six runs in the clincher, which remains the last World Series game the Yankees have played.A version of this article appears in print on June 13, 2016, on Page D3 of the New York edition with the headline: As Yankees Honor the Past, Their Prospects Look Murky.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.See More »