AdvertisementSupported byOn Horse RacingBy Joe DrapeIt was hard during Saturday’s Belmont Stakes not to think about American Pharoah, the colt who a year ago delivered a historic performance at the race in becoming just the 12th Triple Crown winner ever and horse racing’s first in 37 years.When the jockey Victor Espinoza and American Pharoah turned for home, they transformed this grand old racetrack on Long Island into a soul-quaking monument to pandemonium. The colt had pulled into Belmont Park promising greatness, and over the mile-and-a-half marathon fittingly known as the Test of the Champion, he delivered it. His five-and-a-half-length victory was simply a masterpiece.American Pharoah had packed the place. He made the $11 beers that the New York Racing Association was selling taste like Dom Pérignon at Pabst Blue Ribbon prices. He sent strangers into one another’s arms.That is worth remembering because odds are that it will be an equally long time before we see another horse with enough talent and magic to sweep the Kentucky Derby, the Preakness Stakes and the Belmont Stakes.We were reminded of — no, bludgeoned with — that likelihood over the last five weeks as the owners and trainers of the current crop of 3-year-olds measured their horses against American Pharoah and Triple Crown history.On paper at least, the most formidable challenger was Nyquist. He rolled into the first Saturday in May as the reigning 2-year-old champion and was undefeated over seven races. He easily won the Kentucky Derby and had a résumé far more impressive than American Pharoah’s at that point in his career.Nyquist was missing something, however. He is a smallish colt who, while consistently doing enough to win, never gave anyone the sense that he was a dominant competitor. He did not possess the wow factor that American Pharoah had.Even as a weanling — a mere child, called the Littleprincessemma colt after his mother — American Pharoah took away the breath of Frances Rellihan, a seasoned horsewoman who had had her hands on thousands of colts over her career but to that point had never seen one so perfectly engineered, with an intricate mind to match his physical gifts. It was a combination that bowled over seasoned horse people at every point of American Pharoah’s development and still makes his Hall of Fame trainer, Bob Baffert, wish he had him for one, two, six more races.“I never got to the bottom of him,” Baffert said. “He was still getting better.”Nyquist, on the other hand, although recognized as a nice horse in his formative years, was treated as a commodity rather than a gift from the heavens. He was sold three times before reaching the racetrack, finally fetching a modest $400,000 in a 2-year-old-in-training sale in Florida.Luck and magic took their turn along American Pharoah’s career.Early on, his owner, Ahmed Zayat, tried to sell the colt, needing cash to help settle his stable’s bankruptcy. Lucky for him, the colt banged his ankle in the days before a yearling sale at Saratoga. Zayat had thought he might get millions in the auction ring; instead, no one wanted the modestly bred colt with the unsightly leg.Magic was bestowed on American Pharoah when Espinoza got on his back. He was not the first choice to ride the colt, nor was he the second or third. Martin Garcia had ridden American Pharoah in his debut, a loss, and did not get along with him. Baffert had hoped to get Gary Stevens or Mike Smith, two Hall of Famers, but they were not available. He settled on Espinoza, whose happy-go-lucky nature and intuitive riding style fit American Pharoah perfectly.For Nyquist, however, bad luck and black magic landed on him like an anvil in the Preakness. A wet week in Baltimore and a misty, rainy race day served up a soupy track at Pimlico Race Course, one that he had never seen before.His chief rival, Exaggerator, was a proven mudder and took to the surface, which gripped hooves like peanut butter gliding over a sandwich. He emphatically dispatched Nyquist, who developed a fever in the days afterward, persuading his connections to skip the Belmont and let the colt catch his breath for a second-season campaign into the Breeders’ Cup Classic.Exaggerator, a hard-trying colt, was out of gas in the Belmont Stakes. He is somewhere between a nice horse and a very good one but looked like neither in finishing 11th.So the 148th running of Belmont Stakes turned into an entertaining race without a great deal of consequence. Instead of American Pharoah’s historic stretch drive with a capacity crowd on hand to witness, about half as many people cheered on three gray horses, all of them long shots, as they raced home in a photo finish. Creator had a nose ahead of Destin, and Lani finished third behind them.Those who had the three on their betting tickets left Belmont Park with more money than they came with and a smile on their faces. Congratulations to them. It is one of the most rewarding parts of a good day at the racetrack.Last year, though, while American Pharoah sent some people home with less dough, he pushed all of us out of the racetrack with a priceless feeling of elation.Great horses do that, and they are rare. So appreciate what American Pharoah accomplished, and be patient until another comes along.slide showAdvertisement