AdvertisementSupported byBy Billy WitzWhen the Yankees announced that they were overhauling their ticketing system this season — introducing mobile ticketing and no longer accepting print-at-home tickets — they said it was to enhance the fan experience.But that has hardly been the case for the fans camped out at the Yankee Stadium customer service window before each game, having been unable to get into the ballpark because of a problem with the tickets on their phones or turned away at the gate with tickets they printed at home or at work.Ultimately, most of the fans have their problems resolved, but not before standing in lines while the game goes on without them.“It’s a nightmare,” said Michael Goodrich, who missed the first inning of a game against Kansas City last month before he could meet his friend at their seats. “This whole nonsense is ridiculous.”The problems fans have experienced are myriad. Among them: not being able to open mobile tickets, experiencing glitches while trying to transfer tickets to friends, and having bar codes register as invalid. Some foreign phones do not accept mobile ticketing, and other obstacles include remembering the password for the ticketing account and downloading the right app to begin with.Some fans, acknowledging that they are not tech savvy, wonder why the Yankees did not consider this and give them the option of print-at-home tickets — at least until bugs in the mobile-ticketing system were ironed out.The Yankees are not alone as they try to figure out how to best use new ticketing technology; the airline industry, for instance, is widely making use of mobile ticketing, but it also still offers print-at-home options.“I’m a little irritated,” Ashley Castle said while she waited in line as last Monday night’s game against the Los Angeles Angels began without her, her two daughters and a friend. Castle, from Jackson, Miss., had bought mobile tickets months before their visit to New York.“I can get on Delta with this,” she said, referring to the airline, as she held up her phone. “But I can’t get in here.”The Yankees’ chief operating officer, Lonn Trost, who has overseen the new ticket policies, and the team president, Randy Levine, declined interview requests. However, the Yankees said in response to emailed questions that mobile ticketing had caused few problems among the 6,000 to 12,000 fans who they say use that option each game.“To date, the overwhelming majority of real-time feedback has been positive,” the Yankees spokesman Jason Zillo said in a statement. “We have been pleased to see how quickly fans are familiarizing themselves with mobile-ticket technology. The vast majority of our fans picked things up quickly, and we have done everything in our power to create a support system for fans who may need help navigating its interface.”At the start of the season, the Yankees sent an email to fans who had bought tickets through the team and mentioned the new mobile-ticketing policy, the team said. A follow-up email focused solely on mobile ticketing. The Yankees also said they had added staff members trained in mobile ticketing to each stadium gate for the first several homestands.Still, the Yankees seem to have created a hurdle for at least some people at a time when the team is facing new challenges in drawing fans.The Mets, for one thing, are a formidable team again, with the extra attention that brings. The Yankees, meanwhile, no longer have iconic players like Derek Jeter and Mariano Rivera to attract fans, and their only playoff appearance since 2012 has been brief — a wild-card-game loss last season.And while they have recently played much better, they have spent much of this season with a losing record, which is hardly a selling point.Entering Sunday, the average attendance at Yankee Stadium had dropped by nearly 20 percent compared with 2010 and by more than 2,000 fans per game compared with this point last season, although the Yankees were still sixth in average attendance among all teams.When the Yankees announced their new ticket policies in mid-February, just before pitchers and catchers reported to spring training, they insisted they were fighting back against fraud. Print-at-home tickets could more easily be altered or sold multiple times, they contended.Still, the move to ban print-at-home tickets was widely viewed as a broadside at StubHub, a major resale-market competitor of the Yankees’ ticket exchange, which Ticketmaster runs for the team. The Yankees have long been bothered that exchanges like StubHub, SeatGeek and Vivid Seats have declined to set a floor on ticket prices, which the Yankees contend diminishes the tickets’ value.Mobile tickets can essentially be locked to allow resale only through the Yankees’ ticket exchange, freezing out StubHub. And eliminating the print-at-home option makes it more cumbersome for StubHub and others to disseminate tickets to their customers.Yankees fans who use StubHub must now rely on old-fashioned hard-stock tickets that can either be delivered to them if bought far enough in advance or be picked up on the day of a game at a service center 10 blocks south of Yankee Stadium. The office is tucked away off the street in the Bronx Terminal Market parking garage and is not exactly a trek that fans want to make before heading inside the stadium.Levine, the team president, suggested before the season that a deal to allow StubHub to deliver mobile tickets to its customers was imminent. As of late last week, however, no agreement had been reached; the team and StubHub said talks were continuing.“I wish StubHub and the Yankees would get along, just like I wish Comcast and the Yankees would get along,” Jon Sterling of Iselin, N.J., said as he picked up two tickets to last Monday’s game at the StubHub outlet. (Comcast and the Yankees-owned YES Network are in a dispute over subscriber fees, leaving about 900,000 people unable to watch games.)Sterling said that he usually bought tickets through the Yankees’ exchange but that these tickets on StubHub were too cheap to pass up — $6 for a bleacher ticket that has a face value of about $25.StubHub maintained that its inventory was close to what it was last year but said that its customers were buying tickets earlier so they could avoid the hassle of picking them up at the Bronx office.Outside the Stadium, there is a steady murmur of discontent.Emily Hart stood near Gate 4 at Yankee Stadium recently, waiting to distribute the last of 35 tickets for a University of Rochester alumni outing. She had felt uneasy walking 20 blocks from her job to the Stadium while carrying $1,500 worth of tickets, and she felt inconvenienced as she waited to hand over the final few tickets after the game had already begun.Hart said she had the email address of everyone in her group, so she would have been able to send each person a PDF for a print-at-home ticket. But she did not have everyone’s phone number and did not think she could distribute mobile tickets.So she did it the old way, handing out hard-stock tickets.“It feels like we’re back in the ’90s,” her friend Stephen Keeley said.Some fans said the Yankees’ customer service representatives were helpful, but there are only two windows available, so on many days, as the start of the game draws near, the line grows to around 25 deep.“What happened to punch it, rip it?” Chuck Thomas said after he needed to go through the customer service line because his mobile ticket, which had opened on his computer, did not do so on his phone. “All this technology is doomed to fail.”His friend Nolan Fleming, who had been waiting somewhat impatiently, told Thomas, “I need a Blue Moon for my inconvenience.”Al Flade had to wait far longer than Thomas and Fleming, about 25 minutes, after his wife and his son went through the gates with mobile tickets. Flade’s bar code could not be read, so he had to go to customer service to have it regenerated.“It was a distraction, an inconvenience,” said Flade, who was using mobile ticketing for the first time. “Hopefully it doesn’t happen again.”Tom O’Malley, wearing a Yankees cap and a Rivera jersey, said his mobile-ticketing problem was exacerbated because the tickets had been bought with his wife’s credit card; he had to call her from the ticket window.“They need to make it more user-friendly,” O’Malley said. “Every other major pro team in New York — the Nets, Knicks, Jets — all I have to do is buy a ticket, print it out and walk into the stadium.”When Michael Koffman showed up with tickets he said he had bought through Ticketmaster and had mistakenly printed out at home, he and a friend were sent to the customer service window, where they were given two hard-stock tickets. His friend went into the stadium, but Koffman’s ticket was rejected by the scanner, so he had to go back to customer service.“It ultimately worked, but I was frustrated,” Koffman said. “I didn’t feel like I did anything wrong.”Goodrich, who had trouble getting into the Stadium for the game against the Royals last month, said a friend had invited him to the game and had forwarded him a mobile ticket via email. To open it, he said, he had to open a Ticketmaster account, which required him to supply credit card and contact information.This bothered him, Goodrich said in a phone interview, because the day after he attended the game, he received a call from a Yankees sales representative who wanted to sell him tickets.“I find it ridiculous that I can’t print tickets,” said Goodrich, an executive at an audiovisual company. “Let’s say I’ve got tickets and I can’t go. In the past, I’d say to one of the guys at work, ‘Here, Joe, take your girlfriend to the game.’ Now, I’ve got to transfer it. Some of my employees don’t have credit cards.”Dan Matwey had a little more patience than some of the Yankees fans. He was visiting last month from Toronto and had bought tickets to see his hometown Blue Jays play the Yankees. He stood in three lines and waited 45 minutes before the problem with his mobile ticket was resolved.“Other than that, I love New York,” said Matwey, who added with a wink that he at least had company as he stood in line. “It’s good to know I’m not discriminated against. It’s not just being from Canada.”Advertisement