By DAVID POLLAKJUNE 11, 2016
SAN JOSE, Calif. — The leading scorer in the N.H.L. playoffs offered a simple reason he was able to contribute with a goal and two assists when the San Jose Sharks staved off elimination Thursday in Game 5 of the Stanley Cup finals.“I just don’t want to go home, don’t want the season to end,” forward Logan Couture, who has a league-best 29 points in 23 postseason games, said Saturday as the Sharks prepared for Sunday’s Game 6 against the Pittsburgh Penguins. Couture, 27, is well aware that despite San Jose’s 4-2 victory in Game 5, the Penguins remain in control of the series and are one victory from making the Sharks’ first trip to the Stanley Cup finals a futile one. But the emergency medical situation Couture went through this season might help him keep even that in perspective.Couture had to leave a Dec. 9 game at Edmonton after absorbing a hit in the second period. But it was not until the plane ride back to San Jose that he realized how serious the injury was.Advertisement“We flew back home, and my leg just kept swelling bigger and bigger,” Couture said of what was later determined to be internal arterial bleeding. “My leg was just continuously filling with blood, and it could have gotten to the point where you don’t know what’s going to happen, if you’re going to lose your leg or die.”AdvertisementCouture, who left the plane in a wheelchair, said: “It was scary. You never know. I was in the hospital, and I got an M.R.I., and I came out, and there was eight or 10 doctors staring at my M.R.I., so I knew something was serious. The doctor came and talked to me, and it was tough. He assured me everything was going to be O.K., but you never know.”Only after he had had surgery did Couture stop worrying. “It was probably as bad as it’s been in my life thinking about something like that,” he said.Couture missed seven games, having already missed 30 because of a broken leg he sustained on Oct. 15 when his skate hit a rut during a morning practice in New Jersey. The injuries were unrelated, although both were to his right leg.Get the big sports news, highlights and analysis from Times journalists, with distinctive takes on games and some behind-the-scenes surprises, delivered to your inbox every week.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.Couture turned out to be the catalyst for San Jose’s turnaround. Without him in the lineup, the Sharks were 14-15-1 in the regular season. With him, they were 32-15-5.On Saturday, Coach Peter DeBoer found a silver lining to the loss of Couture for those 30 games.“I think it was a blessing in disguise, looking back at it now, because it forced me to get to know the organization top to bottom,” said DeBoer, who is in his first year with San Jose. “It was a quick learn for me on the depth of the organization. Got to know the young guys, know what they could do, what they couldn’t do.”When Couture did return, DeBoer added, he was fresh. The team had a better sense of itself, and the organization was better able to identify what deadline trades might help.Couture said he was not sure whether missing time this season was helping him now. But his 29 points in the playoffs — six more than his teammates Joe Pavelski and Brent Burns have collected, and seven more than Phil Kessel, the highest-scoring Penguin — indicate the time off has not hurt.AdvertisementCouture did not dispute the suggestion that he was playing his best hockey since San Jose took him ninth over all in the 2007 draft.“I feel pretty good,” said Couture, who finished the regular season with 15 goals and 21 assists in 52 games. “Things are going offensively, and we’re at this point.”In Game 5, he scored a deflection goal when he got the blade of his stick on a shot from defenseman Justin Braun, and he made a no-look, between-the-legs backhand pass to wing Melker Karlsson for what proved to be the game winner. Couture ended up with his fourth three-point performance of the postseason, with each coming in an elimination game.DeBoer recognized Couture’s importance at the beginning of the season, though, naming him an alternate captain.“I think he definitely has embraced it,” DeBoer said. “I think he’s earned it.”We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.