AdvertisementSupported byGlobal SoccerBy Rob HughesLONDON — With all of France on guard against terrorism as it hosts this year’s European Championships, the return of beer-fueled violence to the streets and the stadium of Marseille was the last thing the tournament needed.It happened, all the same, on Saturday.There was actually an engrossing soccer game between England and Russia in the Mediterranean port city. It ended 1-1 after a dramatic late goal by Russia’s captain, Vasili Berezutski, that came in stoppage time.The tie, combined with Wales’s 2-1 win over Slovakia in Bordeaux earlier in the day, leaves Group B too close to call.Wales, which is built around Gareth Bale, had a choir of 24,000 fans joyously singing “Land of My Fathers” as their team played and won a game in a major tournament for the first time since the 1958 World Cup. Contrast that with the scenes in Marseille, which were as sinister as they were predictable.UEFA, the ruling body of European soccer, and French security officials had marked the England-Russia game as high risk before the tournament even started. In England’s last visit to Marseille, during the 1998 World Cup, there were running battles in the Old Port section of the town involving the English, the French and the French riot police.Add Russia to the mix, and the risk and chaos seemed preordained. In the days leading up to the match, the police in Marseille used tear gas and eventually water cannons to deal with packs of unruly fans. While they were only a minority of England’s fans, the police don’t forget about the country’s history of hooliganism.On game night, with the Russians in town, the situation was exacerbated. Russia, which will host the World Cup in 2018, has a notorious hooligan faction that is not that different from what England suffered through three decades ago.UEFA said it is investigating what happened at the end of Saturday’s game inside Marseille’s wonderfully modernized stadium, but images on television said enough: Bare-chested Russian fans, some wearing masks, broke through to kick and punch fleeing English fans. On Sunday, the French police said that scores of people had been hurt in the violence, though most injuries were considered minor, according to The Associated Press.The inquest goes on, and so must the soccer.In sporting terms, Stade Vélodrome was the scene of a great escape Saturday by Russia’s team.It had been a contest between England, which aside from its captain Wayne Rooney has its youngest lineup at a major tournament, against Russia, whose roster is among the oldest at the Euro.Both national teams bore a strong resemblance to a club in their domestic leagues. England fielded five players from Tottenham Hotspur, and the team even played in the style of Spurs. The fullbacks on Saturday, Kyle Walker and Danny Rose, are sprinters in soccer shoes, dashing up and down the wings to create attacking opportunities.The anchor in midfield, protecting the defense and allowing Rooney to maraud forward, was Eric Dier, also of Tottenham. To the surprise of most followers of England, it was Dier who stepped forward in the 74th minute to score on a free kick from the edge of the penalty area.But England, with two more Tottenham players in Dele Alli and Harry Kane at the forward positions, missed more opportunities than it converted.Manager Roy Hodgson left out Jamie Vardy and Daniel Sturridge and the Manchester United teenager Marcus Rashford. England’s game plan was to hold what they had, to contain Russia and see out a victory.It didn’t happen, because in the second of three minutes of stoppage time, Russia summoned up a tying goal. It was made in Moscow — to be specific in C.S.K.A. Moscow — because the club supplied five of the 11 starters on Saturday. In addition, C.S.K.A.’s coach, Leonid Slutsky, does double duty as the manager of the national team.That tying goal played to Russia’s strength and preyed on England’s weakness. A corner kick had been cleared when Georgi Shchennikov, a C.S.K.A. player, launched the ball back into the goal mouth. It was met by Berezutski, who at 6-foot-3 was head and shoulders above the nearest English defender, the 5-foot-8 Rose. Berezutski, 33, knew exactly where to put the ball. He guided it off his forehead in a looping arc beyond the reach of goalkeeper Joe Hart and inside the far post.It was a sweet header on a bitter day. The tournament was only in its second day, and it already had been scarred by violence.For Slutsky, his job with the Russian national team is about love rather than money. He gets only his expenses covered for leading the national team, though he could get a bonus if he takes it beyond the group phase.He took over a team that had not had a Russian-speaking coach in almost a decade and is led by a federation that almost went bankrupt after it had to pay off its former coach, Fabio Capello of Italy.England will meet its neighbor, Wales, in the old mining town of Lens on Thursday, well aware that Bale, the Real Madrid superstar, is a threat in the air and on the ground to everyone. Russia moves to Lille, where it meets Slovakia, another team built around a superstar, Marek Hamsik. The 28-year-old Hamsik is closing fast on the Italian club Napoli’s goal record, set by Diego Maradona.Both are intriguing encounters that will keep this group on a knife’s edge. If only we had have the luxury of concentrating just on the athletes at this tournament.Advertisement