By JOE DRAPEAUG. 3, 2016
Daily fantasy sports returned to New York on Wednesday when Gov. Andrew M. Cuomo signed into law a bill that said it did not matter that the popular pastime walks, talks and smells like good old-fashioned sports betting: It really is a game of skill (wink) and merely a form of entertainment, to boot (wink, wink).It was hardly an upset that the governor and the State Legislature found a way around the opinion of the state attorney general, Eric T. Schneiderman, that creating imaginary teams using real players and their statistics was a game of chance and illegal under New York law. Instead, they opted for a piece of the action from a bloc of voters who love nothing better than living and dying from one football play to another in the hopes of making a few dollars.Governor Cuomo, who signed off on the bill in plenty of time before the lucrative N.F.L. season opens in September, acknowledged as much.“Daily fantasy sports have proven to be popular in New York but until now have operated with no supervision and no protections for players,” he said in a statement. “This legislation strikes the right balance that allows this activity to continue with oversight from state regulators, new consumer protections and more funding for education.”AdvertisementAssemblyman J. Gary Pretlow was even more to the point. “Fantasy sports are more than online games — they have the potential to generate millions of dollars in revenue for New York State,” he said.AdvertisementSo New York scored, and so did daily fantasy players, who, in a matter of days, will be able to fill out their lineups for the first time since March. DraftKings and FanDuel — the two companies that dominate the business and got a lifeline that by their own admission they desperately needed — will return to one of the industry’s largest and most lucrative markets.“With the future of fantasy sports affirmed in New York, we expect our legislative momentum will only accelerate as more states address the issue,” FanDuel’s chief executive, Nigel Eccles, said. “Fantasy sports fans: Take comfort; FanDuel’s future is bright.”The biggest winner, however, is anyone who has ever bet on sports games in office pools or with offshore sites or neighborhood bookies and wants to do it legally. That is now a step closer.Get daily updates during the Olympics as well as a weekly roundup of sports news.The fight over daily fantasy sports put betting on games into the national conversation. With Americans betting $150 billion annually, illegally, legalization offers new revenue for states facing huge budget deficits.“D.F.S. is the gift that keeps on giving — it’s mainstreamed our business,” Sara Rayme, a vice president with the American Gaming Association, said at a recent gambling symposium.In fact, DraftKings and FanDuel are in danger of becoming roadkill as the momentum for legalized sports betting continues to build. Legislators in New Jersey, Pennsylvania and California have already pushed bills to legalize sports betting in order to increase revenue, and American professional sports leagues, once among the fiercest opponents, are bracing for an era in which betting is legal. N.B.A. Commissioner Adam Silver has said that it is time for legalized gambling and that the league is prepared for it. The N.H.L. just awarded its 31st franchise to Las Vegas, and the N.F.L. is considering allowing the Oakland Raiders to move there.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.Last year, at the beginning of the N.F.L. season, DraftKings and FanDuel blitzed sports broadcasts with hundreds of millions of dollars in advertising. Daily fantasy sports appeared to be a virtual cash machine. The companies were valued at more than $1 billion each. Their investors included Major League Baseball, the N.B.A., and the N.F.L.; the Dallas Cowboys owner Jerry Jones and the New England Patriots owner Robert K. Kraft; and major media companies like NBC.Lobbying and legal costs, however, have shredded their bottom lines and will continue to do so. New York is only the eighth state to declare daily fantasy sports legal, and the companies are facing expensive efforts to have their games legalized in the big markets of Illinois and Texas.AdvertisementIn addition, Schneiderman said Wednesday that his office would continue to pursue “false advertising and consumer fraud claims for past misconduct” against DraftKings and FanDuel, both of which are also facing scores of class-action lawsuits across the country.The auditors for the New York-based FanDuel have expressed “significant doubt” about the company’s future if more states do not decide fantasy sports betting is legal and find ways to tax and regulate it. DraftKings, which is based in Boston, may be in worse shape. This year, Rupert Murdoch’s 21st Century Fox revealed in a regulatory filing that it had marked down its $160 million investment in DraftKings by more than 60 percent.Do not expect to be bombarded with ads or seduced by the lure of easy money when the N.F.L season kicks off. Both DraftKings and FanDuel say they will significantly scale back their marketing.Instead of testimonies from young men wearing backward baseball caps and promises of winning “shiploads” of money, look for FanDuel to introduce the term “sports rich” and DraftKings to emphasize the good clean fun of hanging with your buddies.You know, because daily fantasy sports is not gambling.Wink. Wink.A version of this article appears in print on August 4, 2016, on Page B9 of the New York edition with the headline: A Win Not Just for Fantasy Sports.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.See More »