By ANDREW DASJUNE 11, 2016
PHILADELPHIA — The United States knew the Copa América math days before it took the field against Paraguay on Saturday. A win or a tie would mean advancement to the quarterfinals. A loss would mean elimination.It was the solution to that problem that was surprising: 10 men and one goal equaled a second life.Riding a first-half goal by Clint Dempsey and overcoming the second-half ejection of defender DeAndre Yedlin, the United States held off Paraguay, 1-0, to seal its place in the quarterfinals later this week. Instead of the Americans’ facing the ignominy of a first-round exit, it was the Paraguayans heading home.The United States, which won Group A because of Colombia’s loss to Costa Rica on Saturday night, will next play in Seattle on June 16 against the runner-up of Group B, who will be determined on Sunday after Ecuador faces Haiti and Brazil plays Peru. But the Americans were not worried about their next opponent as they basked in a warm ovation after a gritty, sometimes-nasty effort at Lincoln Financial Field.“It wasn’t pretty, but we knew it wasn’t going to be pretty,” goalkeeper Brad Guzan said. “But to come away with the result that we did feels great.”AdvertisementIt had all started so well. A warm night. A festive crowd. An early lead. And then it all nearly went off the rails.AdvertisementEmerging from halftime buoyed by Dempsey’s second goal of the tournament, the Americans needed only to see out the final 45 minutes to finish their job. But Yedlin picked up a yellow card in the 47th minute for a foul at midfield on Miguel Almirón, and then a minute later needlessly slashed down another Paraguayan player, Miguel Samudio, only steps away from Coach Jurgen Klinsmann.The referee, Julio Bascuñan of Chile, reached back into his pocket and flashed a second yellow at Yedlin, and just like that he was suddenly, stunningly gone.Klinsmann put up no objection — “It’s two yellows, it’s fine” — but he did lament that Yedlin, after arguing the first card, “just lost his head for a second.”Get the big sports news, highlights and analysis from Times journalists, with distinctive takes on games and some behind-the-scenes surprises, delivered to your inbox every week.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.Thrown back on their heels with nearly a full half to play, the Americans regrouped and hunkered down. Michael Orozco replaced Yedlin, and Dempsey came off. Then, the defending of the lead continued in earnest.Paraguay, however, could not take advantage. A dangerous free kick soared over the crossbar. Guzan made point-blank, bang-bang saves on Jorge Benítez and Darío Lezcano with 10 minutes left. A goal by Gustavo Gómez in the 89th minute was called back because he was offside. And a world-class performance by United States center back John Brooks took care of anything in between.Klinsmann did the cheerleading. When a timid chant of “U-S-A!” broke out midway through the half, he revved it into a roar by waving his arms. Whenever Guzan felt the crowd lag, he did the same. And then, with much Paraguayan possession but few real chances, it was over.The one goal had been enough to do the job, and it had come out of nothing.Collecting the ball near midfield in the 27th minute, Gyasi Zardes drove quickly down the left side, paused briefly as he reached the corner of the penalty area, and then drove hard past two defenders to the end line. Often criticized for his wayward passing, this time Zardes zipped a left-footed cross through a crowd, and it was met by Dempsey at the penalty spot, where he hammered it under the left arm of goalkeeper Justo Villar.Advertisement“When Clint scored that goal,” Zardes said, “it makes things much easier.”The United States had started in a 4-4-2 formation, the same setup it had shifted to during its 4-0 demolition of Costa Rica on Tuesday, and with the same lineup it has started in each game of the Copa. The continuity had two advantages: The two-man front allowed striker Bobby Wood and Dempsey more room to operate, and the four-man midfield was a bit of a hedge defensively.Caution had its advantages for Klinsmann. Earlier this week, hours before the Costa Rica victory, U.S. Soccer President Sunil Gulati told reporters that Klinsmann’s job status could be re-evaluated after the tournament. “No one has ironclad job security,” Gulati said.It was not so much a warning as a restatement of facts; Gulati had made almost identical comments about Klinsmann’s job security in November. But given a recent run of disappointments in major tournaments, the prospect of elimination from the Copa and mounting frustration among American fans and some players about Klinsmann’s methods and tactics, the timing was, if nothing else, curious. At worst, it was ominous.“Results are what matter, and everyone understands that,” Gulati added. “The last 18 months over all haven’t been what we would have hoped for, especially in official competition. We’re not where we’d like to be, and while I don’t get too high or too low based on one game, we’ll look at everything at the end of this competition.”For now, that review will have to wait. The United States is off to the quarterfinals.A version of this article appears in print on June 12, 2016, on Page SP8 of the New York edition with the headline: After Surviving Ejection, U.S. Advances to Copa América Quarterfinals.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.