By ANDREW DASNOV. 14, 2016
Frank Lampard announced Monday that he would leave New York City F.C. when his contract expires at the end of the year, ending his late-starting and sometimes exasperating two-year M.L.S. tenure.Lampard, 38, was among the first players signed by New York City F.C. before it joined the league for the 2015 season, and he was touted as an experienced midfield leader with a championship-winning résumé. But Lampard spent considerable time on the sideline nursing injuries — he appeared in only 31 of N.Y.C.F.C.’s 70 matches over two seasons — which made his battles with fitness, not his 15 goals, his M.L.S. legacy.It was not all nagging injuries and light jogging on the side, though. When Lampard played well, he could still dominate matches and find the net. At one point last summer, he scored eight goals in eight games, including a hat trick against Colorado on July 30.Unfortunately for Lampard, some fans never forgave him for delaying his arrival for N.Y.C.F.C.’s inaugural season to finish out the 2014-15 Premier League campaign at Manchester City. The decision was an embarrassment for all involved. It was shrouded in secrecy, belatedly leaked to the news media and accompanied by the surprising revelation that Lampard had not actually been under contract with M.L.S. when he was introduced as the league’s big new signing.AdvertisementNearly two weeks passed before Lampard released a statement reaffirming his intention to join M.L.S. by midsummer 2015, but the damage had been done. Regardless of how well he would play, the doubts about his commitment to his new team and its league had been baked in.AdvertisementOn Monday, in comments released by N.Y.C.F.C., Lampard thanked the team, his teammates and the fans.“I have very much enjoyed my time,” he said, “and I am very grateful to have had the opportunity to play for such a great club and in such an incredible city.”Lampard is probably not the only former England international walking toward M.L.S.’s exit door. Los Angeles Galaxy midfielder Steven Gerrard, a former England teammate of Lampard’s who joined the Galaxy from Liverpool in July 2015, posted a photo of himself above the Los Angeles skyline to his Instagram account on Sunday with the caption, “I will miss you LA.”
            Gerrard on Instagram last night. Could there be a future for Stevie at Liverpool? pic.twitter.com/FQPWTq8cla Like Lampard, Gerrard, 36, will be out of his contract at the end of the year. The Galaxy, who were eliminated from the playoffs in the conference semifinals a week ago, had made no official comment on Gerrard’s future with the team.A version of this article appears in print on November 15, 2016, on Page B12 of the New York edition with the headline: N.Y.C.F.C.’s Lampard Says He Is Departing.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.