By VICTOR MATHERNOV. 14, 2016
When the Dallas Cowboys took Ezekiel Elliott with the fourth pick of the N.F.L. draft in April, there were those who mocked the team.It was not that Elliott was considered a bad player: He was outstanding at Ohio State, and his draft report at NFL.com said he had “the ability to excel in every facet of the game.” The problem was that he was a running back, and these days, running backs are not the hottest of commodities in the N.F.L.Fundamentally, pro offenses move the ball by passing, not running, and in recent years, a consensus has built that most running backs are interchangeable, easily replaced by a free agent or a draft pick.Before Elliott, no running back had been selected so high in the draft for four years, and that player, Trent Richardson, is now out of the league.AdvertisementBut it turns out that the Cowboys were right.On Sunday, with 114 rushing yards in a thrilling 35-30 win over the Pittsburgh Steelers, Elliott became the first runner this season to pass the 1,000-yard barrier, accomplishing the feat in nine games. Last year, only seven players hit that mark for the entire season. Elliott reached the milestone during a huge game in which he scored three touchdowns, including the winner with nine seconds left.AdvertisementBesides leading the league in rushing, Elliott ranks second in carries (198) and in rushing touchdowns (nine). He is on pace to finish the season with 1,787 rushing yards, which would be the second-best total for a rookie, behind Eric Dickerson’s 1,808 in 1983.Elliott is a throwback to the glory days of running backs in another way as well: He is clearly a rusher first and a receiver second. On Sunday, he caught a short pass and broke free for an 83-yard touchdown. But even with that monster catch, he has only 250 receiving yards on the season, leaving him 13th among running backs. Take away that catch, and he would rank 23rd.The Cowboys have the N.F.L.’s best record at 8-1, which, along with Elliott’s performances, has prompted talk of Elliott as the league’s most valuable player.A running back has won the Associated Press M.V.P. Award only once in the last nine seasons: Adrian Peterson for the 2012 season. The other winners have all been quarterbacks.And one of Elliott’s chief competitors is the quarterback of his own team, Dak Prescott, who has had a sensational rookie year filling in for the injured Tony Romo.Prescott has undoubtedly been a leader, and his passer rating (106.2) is among the best in the N.F.L. He has thrown 14 touchdown passes and only two interceptions.But more than most teams in the modern era, the Cowboys have leaned on the running game. Prescott has 280 pass attempts this year, ranking him 24th in the league. The Cowboys have run the ball 303 times, more than any other team. About two-thirds of those carries have gone to Elliott.AdvertisementLast season, the Cowboys ranked only 18th in rushing attempts. One reason was that during a 4-12 season, they frequently had to pass to try to catch up in games. Another reason was that they did not have Elliott.Get the big sports news, highlights and analysis from Times journalists, with distinctive takes on games and some behind-the-scenes surprises, delivered to your inbox every week.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.Those who argue that running backs can be easily replaced often cite the statistic yards per attempt. DeMarco Murray was the Cowboys’ elite rusher in 2014, running for 1,845 yards for a 12-4 team. He left as a free agent, and his replacement, Darren McFadden, rushed for 1,089 yards in a terrible Cowboys season. But their yards-per-attempt figures were more or less the same, 4.7 and 4.6.Even running-back skeptics have to acknowledge that Elliott is outshining them both: He is averaging 5.1 yards this season.There are pitfalls in Elliott’s road to M.V.P., though. The Cowboys may cool off. Romo is ready to play again, and although he will be on the bench for now, a quarterback controversy is hardly impossible. An ex-girlfriend of Elliott’s accused him of domestic violence over the summer, and although Elliott denied the accusations and the Columbus City Attorney’s Office in Ohio declined to prosecute, the N.F.L. may still act against him. And Tom Brady’s and Matt Ryan’s numbers might wind up too good for M.V.P. voters to ignore.There are still several games to play, but for now, Elliott looks to have a strong chance of winning the M.V.P. Award as a rookie. The last player to do that? A guy named Jim Brown.A version of this article appears in print on November 15, 2016, on Page B9 of the New York edition with the headline: Cowboy Runs Against Grain, Toward Award.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.