
On Soccer By                     
RORY SMITH

NOV. 13, 2016
HADERSLEV, Denmark — Neither parallel tells quite the whole story, in truth, but both seem to have stuck.Last season, a club of modest means and limited expectations — its roster put together on a shoestring budget, its home located in an unremarkable provincial town — emerged as a genuine contender, overthrowing its country’s traditional giants as it sought the first league title in its history. It was hardly surprising, then, when the team, SonderjyskE, became known as the Danish Leicester City.The club’s coach also picked up a nickname. Jakob Michelsen had never managed in the Superliga, Denmark’s top league, before taking charge at SonderjyskE in 2015. He was only 34 when he took the job and had no playing experience to speak of. He was, though, an astute tactician, able to defy the odds and conjure miracles. People saw the similarities to a much more famous coach, now in charge of Manchester United; Michelsen, in his homeland, became “mini Mourinho.”Each analogy is imperfect. Unlike Leicester in the English Premier League, SonderjyskE fell short of a title, ultimately finishing 9 points behind F.C. Copenhagen. But that still represented, by some distance, the best finish in the club’s history, a remarkable achievement for a team with a small fraction of its top opponents’ financial muscle. Copenhagen, a regular in European competition, has an annual budget of around $25 million. SonderjyskE’s is about a tenth of that.AdvertisementNor is Michelsen an exact match with José Mourinho. Although the fact that Mourinho never made it as a professional player is a key part of his legend and the psychology that has allowed him to build it, he had enough talent to play in Portugal’s second division.AdvertisementMichelsen, on the other hand, never had any illusions about whether he could forge a career as a player.“I realized I could never make my dreams out of football that way,” he said at SonderjyskE’s training base in Haderslev, a picturesque town about 30 miles from the German border. “I was not good enough.”Instead, Michelsen set out to become a coach. In that sense, he is more akin to André Villas-Boas, the former Mourinho protégé who was just 17 when he embarked on a coaching career that eventually took him to F.C. Porto, Tottenham and, now, Shanghai International Port Group F.C. in China. But Michelsen is, if anything, an even more extreme example. His management career started when he was just 14.“I always knew I wanted to be a teacher and I wanted to be a coach,” he said. “I love tactics, I love the fact you can influence games, and I love to compete. But what I am really interested in is working with people, finding the person behind the player. More than anything, I wanted to work with people.”While he was still in high school, Michelsen took charge of his first team — one in his hometown, Tonder, that was made up of players just four years younger than he was. He coached an under-18 women’s team in Aarhus, Denmark’s second-largest city, while studying for a teaching degree. His success there earned him a shot at the senior women’s team at his club, IK Skovbakken. After he won the Danish Women’s Cup, Michelsen, not yet 29, was handed control of the men’s team.His appointment, he acknowledged, was greeted with skepticism: His age and his background — or rather, his lack of one — were held against him.“Some of the men were resistant,” Michelsen said. “I was only 28. Some of them were older than me, and they were thinking, ‘Who is this?’ ”AdvertisementThat is a question, you sense, that Michelsen is used to answering. He flicks through every stage of his career — from Skovbakken on through Denmark’s lower leagues, via a brief detour as a coach in Tanzania, and on to SonderjyskE and success — with the help of a slide show on his MacBook.It encompasses not just where he has been but also what he has learned and what he believes. He recites his story with confidence, at speed. He has been through it many times before.That, of course, is the lot of the career coach, as opposed to the ex-player turning his hand to management: to be greeted with initial suspicion, as an outsider and an interloper, someone deprived of the specialist knowledge that can come only from spending 20 years amid the liniment and bravado of the locker room.Michelsen acknowledged that each stage of his journey had presented new challenges — “coaching women, coaching men older than me, coaching players on contracts, coaching abroad” — but looking back, he said, the hardest, by far, was the first.“If you have not played yourself, or had 40 years of coaching experience, it is hard to get the chances,” Michelsen said. “It is hard to get that experience when you need experience to get it. One time has to be the first.”He is convinced, though, that once that opportunity arises, the playing field is leveled.“I always say that whether you are a big name or a small name, that only gets you five minutes,” he said. “On the pitch, if you don’t know football, the players see through you. Once you have a chance, you have the same opportunity as everyone else: five or 10 minutes, then people can see if you have the quality.“Having a famous name gives you opportunities. You can be the biggest name and be a lousy coach, and the players will lose respect for you in 10 minutes. If you haven’t played, you have to build up your name. But if the things you are doing are good, in 10 minutes, you will get respect.”That Michelsen can afford to look back at all of the obstacles he has faced with such equanimity reflects, in part, the fact that he has earned that respect. By taking SonderjyskE to a runner-up finish in the Superliga, and by picking up creditable wins during a fleeting run in qualifiers for the Europa League, the second-tier European club competition, he has built his reputation sufficiently that he has already received offers from teams in Sweden and Poland.AdvertisementMore than that, though, Michelsen’s career is testament to a growing open-mindedness in Danish soccer. As in Germany — where someone like Julian Nagelsmann, the 29-year-old coach of Hoffenheim, can experience success despite a limited playing career — the concept of what a manager’s background should look like is changing in Denmark.Get the big sports news, highlights and analysis from Times journalists, with distinctive takes on games and some behind-the-scenes surprises, delivered to your inbox every week.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.In the country’s 14-team Superliga alone, AGF Aarhus’s Glen Riddersholm; Kasper Hjulmand of F.C. Nordsjaelland; and Thomas Frank, who was coach of Brondby, the country’s biggest club, until March, were hardly noteworthy players. A famous name is no longer a requirement for landing a job.“Maybe part of it is that Danish football is struggling,” Michelsen offered as an explanation. That is true; FIFA has the country’s men’s team ranked  50th  in the world, the lowest it has ever been, and Denmark’s UEFA coefficient, a measure of the success of its clubs in the Champions League and the Europa League, rates the Superliga as only the 18th-strongest league in Europe.As Michelsen observed, “things change when results are bad.” F.C. Midtjylland, for example, is now owned by Matthew Benham, a Briton who made his fortune from gambling and has introduced a more analytical, data-driven approach at the club. F.C. Nordsjaelland has established a link with Right to Dream, an academy in Ghana, opening a pipeline for players from West Africa.Even the structure of the league has been altered, with the addition of two teams and the introduction of end-of-season playoffs in an attempt to increase not only revenue but also competitive standards. Michelsen is working, thriving, in an environment ready to try new things.“If Danish soccer had been going like this, up and up, there would have been no room for new coaches,” he said. “As it is, there are empty seats, and the coaches have to come from somewhere.”There is no room to pick and choose. Denmark’s answer to Mourinho could have come from anywhere; in fact, he came from nowhere.A version of this article appears in print on November 14, 2016, on Page B10 of the New York edition with the headline: A Coach Is Forging A New Path In Denmark.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.See More »