By MIKE VORKUNOVNOV. 14, 2016
In the off-season, as the budding star Kristaps Porzingis prepared for his second season with the Knicks, his new coach, Jeff Hornacek, called his Dallas Mavericks counterpart. He wanted to arrange a meeting between Porzingis and Dirk Nowitzki.It was to be a quick apprenticeship but nonetheless represented a chance for Porzingis to learn at the feet of Nowitzki, the most successful European-born player the N.B.A. has seen.A breakdown in scheduling prevented the workouts from happening. Still, the attempt underlined the caliber of player that Porzingis can now aim to model himself after. The 38-year-old Nowitzki — 7 feet tall, with a jump shot that barely moves nets — is the godfather of today’s sweet-shooting frontcourt players. Porzingis, who is 7-3 and just 21, appears to be one of the best in the next generation of talented big men.On Monday night at Madison Square Garden, Porzingis exhibited his vast skill set once again, scoring 24 points, grabbing 11 rebounds and leading the Knicks to a 93-77 win over the Mavericks. Nowitzki sat on the bench with a sore right Achilles’ tendon and could only watch as the Knicks’ normally porous defense suppressed Dallas without him.“He’s an idol of mine,” Porzingis said of Nowitzki. “I love his game. He’s the type of player I want to be when I grow up.”AdvertisementEven as the Knicks have scuffled to a 4-6 start, Porzingis has remained a bright spot, and Monday night’s game provided another reminder of the potential he holds, and of what that potential means for the team. Although the Knicks scored just 36 points in a languid first half, they were down by only 3 at the break with Porzingis serving as an offensive buoy.AdvertisementThe team awoke in the third quarter with a lineup that had Porzingis at center and left Joakim Noah on the bench — where he sat for the entirety of the second half as Hornacek elected to use a smaller group. Carmelo Anthony scored 17 of his 24 points in the third quarter, and Justin Holiday proved a capable wingman, scoring 16 points off the bench for the game, as the Knicks ran away from Dallas.The Knicks outscored the Mavericks, 31-12, in the third quarter and did not look back as Dallas, missing three of its top players because of injuries, sputtered. The victory was badly needed for the Knicks, who had been dealt back-to-back losses last week at Boston and Toronto. Before the Knicks held the Mavericks to 38.6 percent shooting from the field, their defense looked more of a mess than ever.“It was a weird and ugly game there in the first half,” Hornacek said. “Sometimes you’ve got to gut some of these out.”Get the big sports news, highlights and analysis from Times journalists, with distinctive takes on games and some behind-the-scenes surprises, delivered to your inbox every week.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.Porzingis, who turned in a dynamic performance, has improved on a strong rookie year by increasing his scoring average and his efficiency. He entered Monday averaging 18.8 points per game, hitting 39.6 percent of his 3-point attempts and blocking more than a shot a game — figures matched in a season by only 22 players in N.B.A. history.Porzingis woke up Monday morning with an achy back but did not let that bother him much, even as he marveled at how the team’s training staff was able to get him ready to play at all. He scored in a variety of ways against the Mavericks, crossing over Salah Mejri on the perimeter and hitting a pull-up jumper, draining two 3-pointers and making all six of his free throws.In the fourth quarter, Porzingis posted up Dorian Finney-Smith and, leveraging his 7-inch height advantage, turned and shot a fadeaway jumper off one leg, mimicking the move that has become Nowitzki’s trademark.It looked like one of the very things Hornacek had hoped Porzingis could learn from Nowitzki.“He’s got that height, the knowledge of being able to just kind of get to your spot and shoot over people,” Hornacek said of what Nowitzki could share. “It might be a challenged spot, but you’ll be able to get it off.“We tell guys: ‘Don’t try to block Dirk’s shot; you’re not going to be able to block it. Just put your hand up and challenge it; he’s going to get it off no matter what.’ That’s where we think K.P. can get to.”A version of this article appears in print on November 15, 2016, on Page B11 of the New York edition with the headline: With Idol Looking On, Porzingis Shines.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.