By JONAH ENGEL BROMWICHNOV. 14, 2016
In the midst of an eventful week in American life, the N.B.A. never stopped. And we’re starting to understand some key differences between this season and last season.• No undefeated teams. At this point last year, the Warriors had won their first 11 games. They would win 13 more before losing. This season, no team is still perfect after the Cleveland Cavaliers lost Tuesday to the Atlanta Hawks.• Some parity. The Warriors’ dominance last season made the league look lopsided. But after each of the first four weeks this season, a different team has topped the standings, with the Clippers currently in that slot. Let’s hear it for a competitive league!• Ascendant offense leaguewide. According to the N.B.A. writer John Schuhmann, who pointed to a high point-per-possession total, there are signs “we may be in the midst of the best offensive season in a long time.”AdvertisementJust don’t tell Hassan Whiteside. He’s not interested in anyone’s piddling attempts to score the basketball.Let’s get into some games.Have a question or a suggestion for this column? Send an email to NBAweek@nytimes.com, or bother me on Twitter: @Jonesieman.AdvertisementToronto at Cleveland, Tuesday, 7 p.m. Eastern, NBATVAfter losing to Atlanta, should the Cavaliers be nervous? It’s not just the defeat. Some of their toughest competition from last season — notably the Toronto Raptors — is starting to look even tougher.DeMar DeRozan has continued to score at a furious pace for Toronto. He is leading the league with 34.0 points per game despite being a midrange shooter, which means he’s been almost absurdly efficient.Against the Charlotte Hornets on Friday, DeRozan poured in 34 points and helped erase a 10-point deficit in the fourth quarter. The Hornets had won their previous four games with ease, but the Raptors swallowed them whole. The victory vaulted Toronto, which mounted a serious attack on the Cavaliers in the Eastern Conference finals last season, into a second-place tie with the Hawks.DeRozan’s improved scoring is not the only thing that has changed in Toronto since the Raptors lost in six games to the Cavaliers. Center Jonas Valanciunas, who averaged just 7.5 points and 4 rebounds in two games that series after having sprained his ankle, looks pretty good, fulfilling the Raptors’ need for a reliable big man who can battle with forwards like the Cavaliers’ Tristan Thompson. Kyle Lowry continues to pour in points. Cory Joseph and Terrence Ross are useful contributors. And even the rookies — Jakob Poeltl and Pascal Siakam — have looked somewhat promising.Get the big sports news, highlights and analysis from Times journalists, with distinctive takes on games and some behind-the-scenes surprises, delivered to your inbox every week.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.So should Cavaliers fans be worried?Honestly, probably not — at least not about the Raptors. (The Hawks may be a different story.) Cleveland, the defending champion, has lost only one game and is stronger from 3-point range than ever before. Its point guard, Kyrie Irving, has been incredible in the early going, and it still has the best postseason player in the world in LeBron James.That said, Cleveland does have problems with depth and defense. If the Raptors want to spark any fear in a very self-satisfied fan base, they might look to run the Cavs out of their home arena Tuesday night. Until then, King James, his teammates and his many subjects have every reason to feel perfectly content.AdvertisementChicago at Portland, Tuesday, 10 p.m. Eastern, NBATVAfter a string of losses left them with a .500 record, the Chicago Bulls have regained their stride, winning three of their last four games, including a hard-fought victory in Miami. Portland has been solid but has lost to tougher teams like Golden State and the Los Angeles Clippers. The Blazers and the Bulls should test each other nicely.Golden State at Boston, Friday, 8 p.m. ESPNThe Warriors haven’t been pressed to perform since they lost to the Los Angeles Lakers earlier this month. The Celtics have looked strong in recent wins against the Pacers and the Bulls (as well as in a loss to the Cavaliers) and may be able to expose the Warriors’ weaknesses.League Pass Game of the Week: San Antonio at Los Angeles Lakers, 10:30 p.m. Now that the Lakers are free of the dead weight of Kobe Bean Bryant’s retirement tour, they have become one of the most fun teams in the league. They are 6-5 and have beaten good teams other than the Warriors, including the Hawks and the Houston Rockets. But the San Antonio Spurs, back on their feet after dropping two games, have an imposing frontcourt that will challenge the comparatively small Lakers.Of all the individual N.B.A. statistics, perhaps the most useful for understanding a player’s performance on offense is player efficiency rating. Here is the equation, for all you nerds out there.In addition to leading the league in scoring, DeRozan is second in P.E.R., an impressive feat because top scorers typically sacrifice some efficiency to shoot at a high volume.In first place? Chris Paul, who does not have eye-popping numbers at 19 points and 8.5 assists a game. But his Los Angeles Clippers are 9-1, the best record in the West, and Paul has been essential in two major wins, hitting an important 3 late in the fourth quarter against Oklahoma City, and guiding his team to a huge lead in the first quarter against San Antonio.P.E.R. is not particularly useful for evaluating defense, but Paul also remains one of the fiercest defenders around. He is averaging more steals than anyone else in the league.Russell Westbrook just turned 28 years old, which seems like a perfect occasion to watch 28 of his best dunks.See you all next week.We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.