By TYLER KEPNERNOV. 14, 2016
In Michael Fulmer’s first full professional season, with the Mets’ organization in 2012, he learned a changeup from the pitching coordinator Ron Romanick. Fulmer wrapped three fingers around the seams and started making his way up the Mets’ farm system, but it was not the changeup carrying him.“It kind of had some splashes here and there of being decent,” Fulmer said, “but I just never really trusted it.”When the Mets traded Fulmer to the Detroit Tigers in July 2015, they got Yoenis Cespedes in return. Like Cespedes, Fulmer thrived in his new surroundings. A coach, Rich Dubee, helped him loosen his changeup grip, and his catchers urged him to throw it low in the strike zone and take his chances. The pitch elevated Fulmer to the top of the American League rookie class this season.As the Mets try to re-sign Cespedes as a free agent, the pitcher they traded away looks as if he will be a centerpiece of the Tigers for years to come. Fulmer captured the A.L. Rookie of the Year Award on Monday, routing Yankees catcher Gary Sanchez with 26 first-place votes to Sanchez’s four.AdvertisementCorey Seager, a shortstop for the Los Angeles Dodgers, was the unanimous winner in the National League. He hit .308 with 26 home runs and led all qualifying major league shortstops in on-base plus slugging percentage, at .877.Sanchez had an even better O.P.S. for the Yankees (1.032), but he played in only 53 games. His production in that time (a .299 average with 20 home runs) helped the Yankees mount a playoff push even after they dealt away veterans, but Fulmer’s body of work made him the easy winner.AdvertisementIn 26 starts for the Tigers, Fulmer was 11-7 with a 3.06 E.R.A. He was already 9-2 by the time Sanchez got his first hit of the season, on Aug. 3.Fulmer remembered Sanchez well from facing him in the minors.“He looked intimidating in the box, big frame,” Fulmer said. “He’s got power, and he can hit the breaking ball. It’s tough to pitch to guys like that, that stay on the ball and drive it out to right-center and put it out of the park. You’ve got to be careful the way you pitch him.“I hope I get to face him quite a bit more. What he did this year was unbelievable.”Fulmer’s season was less flashy but no less impressive. Although he slumped a bit in the second half, Fulmer nearly won the league’s E.R.A. title, finishing three innings shy of qualifying and posting a mark just six points higher than that of the leader, Aaron Sanchez of Toronto. Fulmer helped the Tigers contend until the last day of the season, and his changeup was nearly invincible: He threw it more than 400 times, and batters hit .167 off it with no home runs.There was a precedent for a player’s winning the award despite appearing in few games. In 1959, the San Francisco Giants’ Willie McCovey was the unanimous N.L. winner after hitting .354 with 13 home runs in 52 games. But McCovey faced minimal competition that year, mainly from George Altman, a Chicago Cubs outfielder who hit .245 with 12 home runs in 135 games. The St. Louis Cardinals’ Bob Gibson — a future Hall of Famer, like McCovey — had a 3.33 E.R.A. as a rookie that season, but he made only nine starts.In the N.L. this year, Seager’s selection was all but guaranteed; he is also one of three finalists, with the Cubs’ Kris Bryant and the Washington Nationals’ Daniel Murphy, for the league’s Most Valuable Player Award.Get the big sports news, highlights and analysis from Times journalists, with distinctive takes on games and some behind-the-scenes surprises, delivered to your inbox every week.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.As rookie of the year, Seager takes a prize named for Jackie Robinson, who was the first to receive it, in 1947, when he integrated the major leagues for the Brooklyn Dodgers. The Dodgers now claim 17 rookie of the year winners, more than twice as many as any other franchise. Their last one had been Todd Hollandsworth in 1996, the final year of Tommy Lasorda’s long career as manager.Advertisement“It’s awesome to bring it back to L.A.,” Seager said. “It’s known as an organization for winning all those rookies of the year, with Tommy Lasorda and all them. It’s cool to be connected to all the guys that came before you.”Seager is the younger brother of Kyle Seager, a star third baseman for the Seattle Mariners. Another older brother, Justin, plays in Seattle’s farm system.“I’ve had conversations with Kyle on pretty much every aspect of the game,” Corey Seager said. “He’s just kind of been that angel on your shoulder that you can go to.”Seager was one of several rookie shortstops who made an impact in the N.L. Aledmys Diaz was an All-Star for the Cardinals, hitting .300 with 17 homers, and Trevor Story ripped 27 homers in just 97 games for the Colorado Rockies. The Atlanta Braves promoted their shortstop of the future, Dansby Swanson, who hit .302 in 38 games. And while Orlando Arcia hit just .219 in 55 games for the Milwaukee Brewers, he is critical to the team’s long-term plan.The runner-up to Seager, Trea Turner of the Nationals, is a former shortstop who found a home in center field. In 73 games, Turner hit .342, with 13 home runs, 40 R.B.I. and 33 steals. The San Diego Padres had chosen Turner in the first round of the 2014 draft but lost him in a blizzard of trades by their new general manager, A. J. Preller, after that season.Turner received 11 second-place votes and nine third-place votes, finishing just ahead of the Dodgers right-hander Kenta Maeda, who got 11 votes for second and four for third. Maeda, who pitched for eight seasons in Japan, went 16-11 and led the Dodgers in starts, innings and strikeouts.A version of this article appears in print on November 15, 2016, on Page B9 of the New York edition with the headline: A Tiger and a Dodger Are Named Rookies of the Year.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.