AdvertisementSupported byBy Adam ZagoriaWhen the news broke on April 5 that St. Anthony High School in Jersey City would shut down at the end of the 2016-17 school year, the school’s famed basketball coach, Bob Hurley, and his assistant Eric Harrield began fielding phone calls from coaches at other high schools. While the callers were ostensibly phoning to commiserate, and to offer their condolences on the shuttering of the school made famous by Hurley and his powerhouse teams, Hurley and Harrield knew they had another motive.The closing of St. Anthony meant that the members of Hurley’s team — a group that includes some of the most sought-after teenage basketball prospects in the region — were now free to switch high schools. And that has created an odd, two-pronged recruiting battle: As college coaches try to entice St. Anthony players to consider joining them in a few years, rival high schools are making a more immediate pitch.Of particular interest are the destinations of three standouts: the 6-foot-2 sophomore shooting guard Alexander Rice, the 6-2 junior guard Ithiel Horton and the junior center Ogheneyole Akuwovo, a 6-9 shot-blocking specialist known as Savior.“Initially, the first few days, everyone was kind of calling and giving their condolences about the school closing, and at the same time asking where kids were going and saying who they were interested in,” Harrield said in a phone interview this week.In the ever-shifting landscape of high school basketball, where some top players move around like N.B.A. free agents, the addition of one or more of the suddenly unattached St. Anthony players could be the difference in adding a new prize or two to a school’s trophy case.“Depending on where, especially, Ithiel, Savior and Alexander go, that could be the difference between a team being in contention for a state championship or not,” Harrield said.The situation is not a new one for Hurley. When Paterson Catholic High School, which was not far from St. Anthony and had established a healthy basketball rivalry with Hurley’s teams, closed its doors in 2010, St. Anthony was the biggest beneficiary. Two of Paterson Catholic’s best players — Kyle Anderson, a 6-9 forward who now plays for the San Antonio Spurs, and Myles Mack, a point guard who went on to Rutgers and now plays professionally in Europe — relocated to St. Anthony.With Anderson, a junior at the time of the switch, in the fold, Hurley’s teams were 65-0 across the next two seasons and won back-to-back New Jersey Tournament of Champions titles.This month, in addition to hearing from traditional basketball powers like Mater Dei Prep, Ranney School, Christian Brothers Academy and Immaculate Conception in New Jersey, and Cardinal Hayes, Bishop Loughlin and Iona Prep in New York, the St. Anthony coaches said they had also been contacted by elite New Jersey prep programs like Peddie School and the Lawrenceville School, where the Knicks center Joakim Noah finished his high school career.“We don’t hear from them often, but this time we heard from them because most of our kids are National Honor Society kids,” Harrield said. “So it’s a little different. They’re good basketball players, but they’re even better students.”That meant that when players like Rice, who is a son of King Rice, the Monmouth University basketball coach, played at an A.A.U. event over the weekend, he was not only being scouted by college coaches, but also by high school coaches looking to land a strong shooter and good student with two years of high school remaining.“I would think Alex and Savior are probably the two highest commodities — Savior because of his size and defensive ability and rebounding, and Alex because of his age and his ability to score the ball,” Harrield said.Hurley said: “We’ve talked to the Rice family. People held out that there was some hope; there wasn’t any hope. But families still held out and didn’t want to start the process, and they now have started it.”To help them survey their options, Hurley said St. Anthony invited representatives from a dozen high schools to meet with the players and their families about their coming transition.Akuwovo, a native of Nigeria who has been in the United States for about three years, said this week that he wanted to find a strong basketball program that resembled the family atmosphere he experienced under Hurley at St. Anthony.“Right now, I’m kind of looking for a school that is education-wise challenging and the education is good, and a school that basketball-wise plays a good, high-profile schedule,” he said. “And they’re close like family.”Akuwovo said he would visit various high schools before making a decision. Hurley and Terry Dehere, the former St. Anthony, Seton Hall and N.B.A. player who serves as Akuwovo’s guardian in the United States, are helping him with the process.“I can make a big impact in any school I go,” he said. “I’m looking for a team that is going to win a championship. I want to be a big impact on the team.”Hurley, 69, said he had broader concerns. St. Anthony has flirted with closing its doors before, but he noted that Marist High School in Bayonne, N.J., may also close this year, meaning two more Catholic high schools in North Jersey would follow Paterson Catholic into memory.“Athletes always manage; it works out,” Hurley said. “It’s the other kid that falls through the cracks, and they’re the ones that we’re most concerned about.”Advertisement