AdvertisementSupported byBy The Associated PressPutting Norm Powell in the starting lineup has changed the playoff fortunes of the Toronto Raptors.Powell scored 25 points, a career playoff high, Kyle Lowry had 16 points and 10 assists, and the host Raptors beat the Milwaukee Bucks, 118-93, in Game 5 of their first-round playoff series on Monday night.Raptors Coach Dwane Casey said Powell has been “a spark plug.”“In this series, he’s been the X-factor,” Casey added.Serge Ibaka scored 19 points and DeMar DeRozan 18 for Toronto, which can advance to face the Cleveland Cavaliers, the defending N.B.A. champions, in the second round with a victory in Game 6 on Thursday night in Milwaukee.“We’ve got to treat it like Game 7, period,” DeRozan said. “We can’t be happy with these last two games. We’ve just got to treat this next game like it’s Game 7.”Many in the sellout crowd announced at 20,251 rose to their feet and chanted “Raps in six!” during the final minute of the game.“If we want to continue to play, if we want to push it to a Game 7, we’ve got to win at home,” the Bucks rookie point guard Malcolm Brogdon said. “If we don’t come out and give the energy that we need to, then we’ll lose and we’ll be done.”Pressed into action after Milwaukee routed Toronto, 104-77, in Game 3, Powell delivered a much-needed jolt of energy and athleticism as the Raptors ground out a victory in Game 4.On Monday, Powell added scoring punch to his playoff résumé. He connected on all four of his 3-point attempts and brought the crowd to its feet with a baseline dunk over Giannis Antetokounmpo and Thon Maker in the fourth quarter.“Powell has come in with a lot of energy on both sides of the ball, and they’re feeding off of that,” Bucks Coach Jason Kidd said.“He’s playing extremely hard, and he’s knocking down shots. When you look at the stat sheet, he’s picked them up here the last couple of games just with his energy and his spirit.”Brogdon said Powell has given Toronto more versatility.“They move the ball better with him in the game,” Brogdon said. “They can spread the floor better, everybody can attack, everybody can make plays.”DeMarre Carroll scored 12 points as all five Raptors starters reached double figures. Cory Joseph had 10 points off the bench for Toronto.Antetokounmpo led the Bucks with 30 points, a career playoff high, while Brogdon scored 19 and Greg Monroe 11.Ibaka and Powell each scored 9 points in the first quarter, and the Raptors mounted a 17-0 run in building a 31-20 lead heading into the second. Milwaukee committed five turnovers in the first quarter, leading to 10 points for Toronto.“Our defense kind of got hit again in the first quarter,” Kidd said. “We knew they were going to come after us, we had to expect that, and we just couldn’t respond.”HAWKS 111, WIZARDS 101 Paul Millsap bounced back from a sluggish start to score 19 points, Dwight Howard had his best game of the postseason, and Atlanta pulled away from visiting Washington to even their opening-round playoff series at 2-2.Howard, who was not a factor in the first three games, had a double-double by halftime and finished with 16 points and 15 rebounds. The Hawks had seven players score in double figures, including big contributions off the bench from Kent Bazemore and Jose Calderon.Bradley Beal scored 32 points for the Wizards, bouncing back from a dismal performance in Game 3, and John Wall had another sterling performance, with 22 points and 10 assists. But Beal and Wall could not match Atlanta’s more balanced effort.Now a series marked by ill feelings that went so far as Markieff Morris calling Millsap “a crybaby” is down to a best-of-three. Game 5 is Wednesday night in Washington.Bazemore scored 16 points and doled out 7 assists, while the 35-year-old Calderon, picked up on waivers late in the regular season, had 10 points and 5 assists.Calderon came up with a huge play as the Hawks began to increase their lead. Leading a fast break after a Wizards turnover, he passed to Tim Hardaway Jr. on the wing for a drive to the basket.Hardaway’s shot spun out, but the 6-foot-3 Calderon tipped it in for an 89-81 lead. Calderon pumped his fist and screamed in delight.Millsap and Dennis Schroder padded Atlanta’s lead on back-to-back possessions.Millsap grabbed an offensive rebound and managed to get the shot off while falling. The ball dropped in, and he added a free throw for a 3-point play. Schroder followed with a 3-pointer, giving the Hawks a 103-93 lead with four and a half minutes left.Schroder finished with 18 points after going scoreless in the first half, spending most of it on the bench after picking up three quick fouls.The Wizards avoided the dismal start that dimmed their hopes in Game 3 before the first quarter was complete.With Beal finally knocking down jumpers, Washington shot nearly 58 percent from the field in the first quarter and built a 35-28 lead.Schroder’s foul troubles put the burden on Calderon, who responded — and it helped that Howard got rolling.Having taken only 15 shots and scored 18 points in the first three games, Howard carried the load, with Millsap struggling in the first half and Schroder watching from the bench. Howard, an enigmatic center, had thunderous dunks on back-to-back possessions that got the home crowd into the game.CLIPPERS GET A LIFT Los Angeles will get the reserve guard Austin Rivers back for Game 5 against the Utah Jazz.Clippers Coach Doc Rivers said the minutes of Austin Rivers, his son, would be restricted when the first-round series resumed on Tuesday night at Staples Center in Los Angeles. The best-of-seven series is tied, 2-2.Austin Rivers has been sidelined since March 30 with a strained left hamstring. He averaged career highs of 12.0 points, 2.2 rebounds and 2.8 assists during the regular season.“His dribble penetration has been huge for us this year, and I don’t even know if he can do that,” Doc Rivers said. “I don’t look at him returning being what he was right before he left, but at least we have another warm body, and that’s nice.”Los Angeles is without forward Blake Griffin for the rest of the playoffs after he injured his right big toe in Game 3.BULLS TWEAK LINEUP Chicago will start the seldom-used point guard Isaiah Canaan on Wednesday in Game 5 of their first-round playoff series against the Celtics in Boston.Bulls Coach Fred Hoiberg confirmed the switch.Chicago lost back-to-back games at home. The offense has struggled, with guard Rajon Rondo sidelined the past two games because of a broken right thumb, and the series is now tied, 2-2.Canaan scored 13 points in 34 minutes and did his best to stick with the Celtics star Isaiah Thomas in Sunday’s 104-95 loss.Advertisement