JULY 8, 2016
The best-selling sports books in June 2016, according to the New York Times best-seller list.1. THE BOYS IN THE BOAT by Daniel James Brown (Penguin). The American rowers who pursued gold at the 1936 Berlin Olympic Games.2. SHOE DOG by Phil Knight (Scribner). A memoir by the founder of Nike.3. THE EIGHTY-DOLLAR CHAMPION by Elizabeth Letts (Ballantine). The story of Snowman the horse, the extraordinary jumper and national celebrity.4. BARBARIAN DAYS by William Finnegan (Penguin). A Pulitzer Prize-winning surfing chronicle and memoir by a New Yorker writer celebrates a lifelong obsession.5. UNBROKEN by Laura Hillenbrand (Random House). An Olympic runner’s story of survival as a prisoner of the Japanese in World War II.Advertisement6. THE ARM by Jeff Passan (Harper). The intricate mechanics of the human arm and the epidemic of orthopedic injuries and operations in professional baseball and youth sports.Advertisement7. MUHAMMAD ALI 1942-2016: THE TRIBUTE by the editors of Sports Illustrated (Sports Illustrated). A commemorative volume that chronicles the life and legacy of the champion.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.8. ON THE ORIGINS OF SPORTS by Gary Belsky and Neil Fine (Artisan). The earliest history and original rules of 21 of the world’s most popular sports.9. 18 HOLES WITH BING by Nathaniel Crosby and John Strege (Dey Street). The former professional golfer shares life lessons he absorbed while playing golf with his famous father.10. BEN HOGAN’S FIVE LESSONS by Ben Hogan with Herbert Warren Wind; drawings by Anthony Ravielli (Simon & Schuster). The fundamentals of golf; originally published in 1957.16. TERROR IN THE CITY OF CHAMPIONS by Tom Stanton (Lyons Press). Detroit in the 1930s had the Tigers, the Lions and the Red Wings, but it also had the Black Legion, an association of racist murderers.Rankings reflect sales for June 2016. The sports titles ranked here are selected by the editors from among all adult nonfiction books in all print and electronic formats, as reported to the New York Times best-seller list for the previous month. The definition of sports is deliberately broad and inclusive, so as to reflect all manner of the outdoor sports world, varying from the professional leagues to personal athleticism.We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.