By WALLACE MATTHEWSAPRIL 22, 2017
As the Mets prepared to bat in the ninth inning of Saturday’s game against the Washington Nationals, trailing by two runs, the pitching coach Dan Warthen sidled up to Manager Terry Collins.Warthen was looking ahead four hitters, at Curtis Granderson, with optimism.The bullpen would be ready, Warthen said, “when Grandy ties this up.”It was not entirely wishful thinking. Granderson has averaged 25 home runs a season in his first three years as a Met.“That’s the thought process here,” Collins said after the game. “We know we got guys who can hit the ball over the fence.”AdvertisementThat thought process might make sense, but on Saturday it was more like wishful thinking. Not only did Granderson never get to the plate — the Mets went down in order in the ninth to lose, 3-1, and put themselves in position to be swept by their chief National League East competition in the series finale Sunday night — but the Mets had not hit much of anything against Nationals starter Gio Gonzalez and three relievers at Citi Field.In fact, the Mets were hitless for eight of the game’s nine innings and, if not for two sixth-inning singles, would have been no-hit for the ninth time. And the listless Mets can hardly be looking forward to Sunday night, when they will face Max Scherzer, the last pitcher to hold them hitless, on the second-to-last day of the 2015 season.“I don’t have any answers for you,” Collins said. “We’re just not hitting.”One reason is that the Mets, a team that lives by the home run despite playing in a not-so-hitter-friendly park, are injury-depleted and without two of their top home run threats: Lucas Duda, who is on the 10-day disabled list with an elbow injury, and Yoenis Cespedes, who missed his second straight game with what the club called a hamstring cramp. He is most likely to miss at least one more game on Sunday.Get the big sports news, highlights and analysis from Times journalists, with distinctive takes on games and some behind-the-scenes surprises, delivered to your inbox every week.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.“I would love to have him tomorrow, as much as I’d love to have Duda,” Collins said. “But I doubt I will. It’s just something we have to deal with.”Collins said Cespedes, who led the Mets with 31 home runs last season, spent most of the game either in the trainer’s room or getting a massage so that he might work out the pain in his left leg. And when Collins asked him for an at-bat in hope of sparking the Mets’ moribund offense, Cespedes said he could not give it to him.Advertisement“He said, ‘I just don’t think I can hit tonight,’” Collins said.Collins’s only real option on the bench was Jose Reyes, who has been futile at the plate so far this season (6 for 62, .097). Before the game, Collins decided it was better for Reyes not only not to play, but not to do anything — no batting practice, no swings in the cage and no infield practice — rather than risk falling deeper into his funk with another unsuccessful day at the plate.Reyes, pinch-hitting for the pitcher in the sixth inning, drew a walk that started the Mets’ only mini-rally of the day, as singles by Juan Lagares and Asdrubal Cabrera produced their lone run of the game. But after Cabrera drove in Reyes, the final 11 Mets went down in order, dropping the club’s record to 8-10 — its worst start since 2011 — and pushing it to four and a half games behind the Nationals in the division.“There’s no panic here,” Jay Bruce said. “It’s just one of those times. There’s going to be a lot of winning baseball to be played, and we’re going to play it.”The loss, the Mets’ seventh in their last eight games and the fourth of the five played so far in a nine-game homestand, was hardly the fault of starter Jacob deGrom, who had a strange outing. DeGrom (0-1) struck out 10, inducing the Nationals to swing and miss 27 times — the most in his career — but also issued a career-high six walks in five and two-thirds innings.It was a performance good enough to keep most any team in the game, especially one that had already hit 27 home runs, the second-most in Major League Baseball. But Nationals pitchers Gonzalez, Blake Treinen, Enny Romero and Koda Glover were better.The outcome was a loss that only magnified the importance of Sunday’s series finale in Collins’s eyes.“It’s huge, huge,” Collins said, in what might seem like a curious statement fewer than 20 games into a 162-game season.But as Bruce pointed out, the season will not be young much longer.“It’s only April,” he said, “But it’s not going to be April forever. We need to start playing well, and I’m confident that we will.”A version of this article appears in print on April 23, 2017, on Page SP3 of the New York edition with the headline: The Listless Mets Drop Another One.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.