
On Tennis By                     
 CHRISTOPHER CLAREY
 
JULY 11, 2017
WIMBLEDON, England — If you hunt for symbolism, as so many of us sportswriters do, it was there in abundance over the last few days at Wimbledon as Venus Williams faced down the generation gap.Naomi Osaka, 19, in the third round. Ana Konjuh, 19, in the fourth round. Jelena Ostapenko, 20, in the quarterfinals under a closed Centre Court roof on a rainy Tuesday.All three of Williams’s most recent opponents were born in 1997, the year she made her Wimbledon debut.Twenty years later, Williams is part of the landscape and lore at the All England Club, and while many of those who have watched her from the start are feeling nostalgic, Williams — even at age 37 — is much more concerned with her tennis future.AdvertisementOn Tuesday, after fending off Ostapenko, the newly crowned French Open champion, 6-3, 7-5, in Williams’ 100th singles match at Wimbledon, Williams was asked what age she feels inside. She looked at her questioner with one of her inscrutable looks and answered like this:“I don’t know; I don’t think about it,” she said. “I feel quite capable, to be honest, and powerful. So whatever age that is, as long as I feel like that, then I know that I can contend for titles every time.”AdvertisementWilliams, seeded 10th, is two victories from her sixth and most improbable Wimbledon singles title, which would be her first since 2008.But she is about to run into another in-form power player with a freight-train story line: Johanna Konta, the first British woman to reach this late stage of Wimbledon since Virginia Wade in 1978. Konta did it by rallying past Simona Halep, 6-7 (2), 7-6 (5), 6-4.“I definitely feel age is not a factor with her,” Konta said of Williams. “She’s just a tremendous champion, and I feel very, very humbled and very excited to share the court with her again.”Tennis remains both a challenge and a refuge for Williams. It has helped her through personal setbacks, family strife and tragedy, including the murder of her half sister Yetunde Price in 2003.It has been there for Williams again at Wimbledon as she copes with the aftermath of a  car accident that she was involved in on June 9 in Palm Beach Gardens, Fla., and that led to the death of a 78-year-old passenger in the other vehicle.Williams has not addressed the accident publicly since her first-round victory, after which she began to cry when answering a question about it. But her half sister Isha Price said the accident remained in Williams’s thoughts.“It’s obviously an upsetting thing; something that is never going to go away,” said Price, who is accompanying Williams at Wimbledon. “But at the same time, to come and have that weight even now on her and be able to play through it, it kind of speaks to where her passion is.Advertisement“This is where she goes. She goes to the tennis court when anything is wrong. That’s just where she goes.”Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.Although Williams has given no indication that this will be her final Wimbledon, it is a full-circle moment in at least one sense. When she made her debut in 1997, she did so without her younger sister Serena Williams, who grew up to become the most successful tennis player in the family. This year, she is again here without Serena, who is approaching her eighth month of pregnancy and is off the tour until at least next year.Their father and longtime coach, Richard Williams, is also absent.“Even if it’s not physically, they’re definitely here with me,” Venus Williams said. “That is one thing I do know. They’re fighting right alongside me.”Venus said she and Serena have been in regular contact, speaking after every match. Price said that Serena, a seven-time Wimbledon singles champion and six-time champion in doubles with Venus, has been having some trouble watching events unfold from a distance.“Serena’s had serious FOMO from Wimbledon, because she won here last year,” Price said, chuckling as she used the acronym for “Fear of Missing Out.” “Serena was like, ‘Man, I have FOMO.’ And she was like, ‘I’ve just been working out.’ She’ll say, ‘I promise I’m just standing still.’ And then she’ll send video for the family, and she’s like running a little, and I’m like: ‘You’re an idiot. You know, stop!’ So she’s going to be forced to stop in a minute because she’s just physically not going to be able to do it. So we’re all waiting.”Price expressed no doubt, however, that Serena will be back playing again after giving birth.“Oh, absolutely she will be back,” Price said. “She doesn’t want to end her tennis story like that. It’s not a bad ending, but she wants to do it on her terms.”For now, only one Williams sister has a chance to keep the Wimbledon singles trophy in the family, and it has been an inspiring sight over the last three rounds to watch Venus Williams fight off break points with aces and extend her long arms to chase down very big shots from much younger women in the corners.The power she is defending against is another Williams sister legacy. Venus and Serena were the ones who followed the lead of Monica Seles and took the game to a new, more relentlessly aggressive place from the baseline. High unforced error counts could be lived with as long as there were plenty of winners to compensate. As of Tuesday, they have each won 86 singles matches at Wimbledon (Serena is 86-10; Venus is 86-14).“They are the ones who changed the sport,” Sam Sumyk, the veteran French coach, said recently. “Everybody else is still catching up, in a way.”AdvertisementAt 26, Konta represents the new wave. She is tall, powerful and mobile, with a balanced all-court game and taste for the swing volley that Williams adopted long ago.If Konta can keep her nerve in her first Wimbledon semifinal, she will be a formidable opponent, all the more so with the Centre Court crowd behind her.But then Williams has been blocking out the noise and playing for her own reasons for a long time.A version of this article appears in print on July 12, 2017, on Page B9 of the New York edition with the headline: An Ageless Wonder  Continues to Thrill.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.See More »