By KAREN CROUSEJULY 12, 2017
BEDMINSTER, N.J. — Danielle Kang’s first L.P.G.A. victory was long overdue, coming in her 144th start, at the Women’s P.G.A. Championship early this month. In the two weeks since, she has been racing to keep her life running on time.On Wednesday at Trump National Golf Club, she sprinted to the 10th tee with her arms spread like wings and flung herself into the embrace of Michelle Wie, who had stood patiently waiting for more than five minutes. Still out of breath, the 24-year-old Kang proceeded to tee up her ball and hit an errant drive. “Oh, my gosh,” she said. “That’s terrible.”Wie, one of Kang’s best friends, chided her in mock exasperation.“You can’t just run up to the tee and hit,” Wie said.After hitting a second drive that found the fairway, Kang hit two approach shots. The second, from deep rough, grazed Wie’s mother. She had barely noticed that she had been hit by the time she was swallowed in a hug from Kang, who had rushed over to apologize.AdvertisementKang’s smile seems to magnetically attract the cameras, but on the eve of the United States Women’s Open here, her usual effervescence fell a little flat as she finished tuning up for what she hopes will be her second major championship in two starts.Advertisement“I’m so overwhelmed,” Kang said.Since she birdied the final hole for a one-stroke victory over the defending champion Brooke Henderson at Olympia Fields to win the second major of the year, Kang has been receiving about 700 messages a day on her phone and via social media platforms, she said. At first, she tried to reply to every message, but she quickly fell into keystroke quicksand.In desperation, she handed her phone to her mother at the beginning of this week so she would have several hundred fewer distractions.Annika Sorenstam, a retired 10-time major winner, reached out to Kang the old-fashioned way — by tracking her down in the clubhouse — to offer her congratulations. She threw in some advice on how to handle the attention that can engulf a first-time major winner.Kang said Sorenstam had told her to carve out time for news media obligations but also to make time for herself. Kang, a California native, tried to do exactly that last week; she canceled a news media tour in New York so she could fly with her caddie, Cole Pensanti, to Los Angeles to visit the grave of her father, K. S. Kang, who died of brain and lung cancer in 2013.“I had to see him,” Kang said of her father, who caddied for her when she won back-to-back United States Women’s Amateur championships in 2010 and 2011. Her routine once included texting or talking to him before and after every competitive round.After he was told he had cancer, Kang said, she felt as if she were playing more for him than for herself. “It gave him joy to see me play,” she said.After his death, she felt as if she had lost her greatest champion. She took her grief out on the game they both loved.Get the big sports news, highlights and analysis from Times journalists, with distinctive takes on games and some behind-the-scenes surprises, delivered to your inbox every week.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.“I felt like golf took away the time I could have spent with him,” Kang said.But her attitude and practice habits started to improve after a night when she dreamed that her father had spoken to her.Advertisement“You’re not practicing hard,” she said that he told her.Kang carries Dunhill cigarettes, her father’s favorite brand, in her golf bag. She lights one before every tournament because the smell reminds her of her father and calms her. When she visits his grave site, she lights a few, and on her most recent visit she did so again. She also had Pensanti’s caddie bib from Olympia Fields with her — her way of telling her father that she had practiced hard and it had paid off.But then, Kang believes her father already knew that. She said she had felt his presence on the 72nd green at Olympia Fields before she sank the birdie putt. Since then, Kang has felt like a passenger looking at her life from the window of a speeding plane.“I’ve been on cloud nine, and I’ve been trying to come down from it just so I can focus on this week,” she said.The 27-year-old Wie, the 2014 Open champion, can relate.“I know what she’s going through,” Wie said. “The week after you win your first major is a blur, and then it all catches up with you, and you get tired and cranky.”As easy as the back nine felt to Kang on the Sunday she won the P.G.A., that is how hard the back nine at Trump National felt to her the day before the scheduled start of the Open. Wie threw Kang a laugh line that pulled her through one hole when she said, “I unfriended you when you when you wouldn’t watch ‘Beauty and the Beast’ with me.”A short while later, Kang’s mother, who had been walking several yards behind her, caught up to her and said, “You look way too stressed.” She calmed Kang down, and so did Wie, who told Kang: “Just breathe. You’re doing everything good.”A version of this article appears in print on July 13, 2017, on Page B12 of the New York edition with the headline: First Major Win Leads to Flurry of Distractions in a Bid for a Second.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.