By VICTOR MATHERJULY 12, 2017
The promoters of the fight between Conor McGregor and Floyd Mayweather Jr. have a potential blockbuster on their hands. But they also had a small problem. The arena they announced as their site, the T-Mobile Arena in Las Vegas, was taken. The championship game of the Big3, the new 3-on-3 basketball league featuring former N.B.A. players, was already booked for Aug. 26, the day they had chosen for the fight.After a few weeks of limbo, the situation has been resolved. Not surprisingly, the multimillion dollar fight won out over the first-year league. The Big3 final will move to the MGM Grand Garden Arena.On Tuesday, Jeff Kwatinetz and the rapper Ice Cube, the basketball league’s founders, spoke about the decision.“We weren’t excited by the way we were initially informed,” Kwatinetz said, “but we don’t think there was any real bad intent.”AdvertisementThough the news release announcing the move said the league had been given “a generous offer that we could not refuse,” the founders strongly rejected the notion that their little league had been leaned on, Godfather-style.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.“Nobody leaned on us,” said Ice Cube.“Nobody leans on Cube,” Kwatinetz said.Kwatinetz emphasized that for the Big3’s purposes, the new arena was just as good as the old one. “If we thought there was something about the T-Mobile that was uniquely important for the championship, we would not have moved it,” he said.AdvertisementThough they would not reveal the amount of money they received, Kwatinez pointed out that the new arena has 3,000 fewer seats. “As long as we were able to make up for those 3,000 seats. …” he said.Tickets for the Big3 event range from $35 to $1,000. The cost of losing 3,000 $35 tickets would be $105,000, so it would seem clear the league got at least that much. The league said it would also get a “promotional deal.”“We’re not supposed to say anything, but Charles Oakley is battling the winner of the fight,” Kwatinetz said with a laugh.A version of this article appears in print on July 13, 2017, on Page B13 of the New York edition with the headline: Big3 League Moves Title Game for a Blockbuster Bout.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.