AdvertisementSupported byBy Victor MatherBaseball’s best gathered for the All-Star Game on Tuesday night at Marlins Park in Miami. Here’s what happened.What was the score? 2-1 for the American League. It was its fifth win in a row.Who was the M.V.P.? Robinson Cano of the Mariners, who hit a home run in the top of the 10th inning. It was the first extra-inning homer in the game since Tony Perez in 1967.Who played well? Yadier Molina of the Cardinals hit a solo shot to give the National League its run.Who didn’t play well? Wade Davis, the Cubs’ only All-Star, gave up the winning homer and took the loss. It’s just one game, but Aaron Judge of the Yankees was 0-3.What was the most memorable incident? When he came out to bat in the sixth inning, Nelson Cruz of the Mariners asked the umpire Joe West for a photo. Catcher Molina obliged. Cruz then pocketed the cellphone and flew out.Anyone looking sharp? Bryce Harper of the Nationals wore cleats honoring the Marlins pitcher Jose Fernandez, who was killed last year in a boating accident.How was the TV coverage? Harper was miked, allowing the commentators the chance to chat with him as the game progressed. At one point, Harper, a Cowboys fan, asked the announcer Joe Buck what he thought of quarterback Dak Prescott. “He’s fun to watch,” Harper declared.And the ratings? The game drew 8.6 million viewers, according to the early ratings, up from 8 million last year. Like most sporting events, it is way down from, say, the 1980s, when the game would be seen by 25 million.So the American League will get home-field advantage in the World Series? No, they don’t do that anymore.Who won the Home Run Derby on Monday? Judge, of course.Was it close? Judge, the Yankees’ sensational rookie, caught a tough quarterfinal, defeating Justin Bour, 23-22 (the top two scores of the round). His scores in the next two rounds seemed close — 13-12 over Cody Bellinger in the semifinal and 11-10 over Miguel Sano in the final — but that is because Judge hit second and stopped when he beat their totals. He had a minute left in the semis and two left in the final.What was his biggest shot? 513 feet. Whew.Hey, was that Joel Embiid in the outfield? Yes. The 76ers center was sitting in the outfield during the Home Run Derby with the rapper Meek Mill. And he wound up with a home run ball.Advertisement