

 Michael Powell
 

SPORTS OF THE TIMES
SEPT. 21, 2016
Every few weeks during the baseball season, I receive an irrationally optimistic email from my buddy Peter Kurz, who is a lifelong and thoroughly demented Mets fan. “Demented” is the adjective that attaches like a lesion to those of us who belong to the Mets tribe.In August, however, I received a worried-sounding message from Kurz. He framed his dilemma this way:Should he root for Ty Kelly, a minor league infielder, to be called up by the Mets in their mad, not to mention highly improbable, dash for the playoffs? Or should he hope that Kelly would remain in Class AAA, in which case he would be available to play shortstop for Team Israel?Some explanation is needed here. Kelly’s mother is Jewish, which means he is eligible to apply for Israeli citizenship and therefore can play for the Israeli national baseball team in this week’s World Baseball Classic qualifiers at the Brooklyn Cyclones’ stadium in Coney Island. Four nations — Israel, Brazil, Britain and Pakistan — are competing. The winner of this tournament will be one of the 16 teams in the final round of the World Baseball Classic next spring.Kurz is president of the Israel Association of Baseball and is charged with assembling the best possible collection of baseball players for Team Israel. He is also an Israeli by way of 86th Street on the Upper West Side of Manhattan. Growing up, we were next-door neighbors, schoolmates and batterymates. My imaginary Tom Seaver would toss strikes to his imaginary Jerry Grote at the Soldiers’ and Sailors’ Monument.AdvertisementOur actual baseball career arc was prosaic. Our pinnacle came at SUNY Purchase College, where we assembled an intramural champion softball team. Our right fielder was often stoned; several gay dancers were our deeply ironic cheerleaders. I digress. Kurz several years later decamped to Tel Aviv.AdvertisementBaseball, it is fair to say, is not a dominant sport in the Holy Land. As pony-tailed David Leichman, a long-ago Queens kid and now a kibbutznik who helps run a baseball program for Jewish and Arab Israelis in Ramle, told Jewish fans the other day in New York, “despite appearances, the holy book really does not require us to just play soccer.”Major League Baseball, which runs the World Baseball Classic, permits national teams to act as yogis and take an elastic definition of nationality. Anyone who can qualify for a passport or citizenship can play. So the Italians recruited Mets catcher Mike Piazza as a hitting coach and many Italian-Americans as ballplayers. The British — who play the Israelis on Thursday night — added Americans with British parents, Canadians and even a Bahamian, the fleet-footed Mets prospect Champ Stuart.The Brazilians are rich in baseball players, some native-born and others born in the United States. The Israeli team features many Jewish former major leaguers and minor leaguers, from catcher Ryan Lavarnway to the former Mets Ike Davis and Josh Satin to the former All-Star pitcher Jason Marquis. The team features a few Israelis.How many Israelis? Two.To stay competitive, my friend Kurz and his baseball codependents pursue Jewish ballplayers with the determination of Ahab after that whale. Kurz has bona fide baseball scouts and bona fide experts of the Jewish diaspora, baseball division. The informal team includes Scott Barancik in Florida with the Jewish Baseball News and Ephraim Moxson and Shel Wallman of the Jewish Sports Review. They are the detectives of the Jewish and the athletic.Get the big sports news, highlights and analysis from Times journalists, with distinctive takes on games and some behind-the-scenes surprises, delivered to your inbox every week.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.They study rosters and photos — oy, is that possibly Jewish minor league second baseman wearing a cross? — and call parents and friends and cousins. Rule No. 1: No assumptions.“You quickly learn: Not every Cohen and Schwartz is Jewish,” Moxson, a retired parole officer, said.Barancik has a section in his newsletter called “Not a Jew.” These are players whose names sound Jewish but who are in fact not. Here we could find a troika of wish-they-were-Israeli-all-stars: the Giants’ Madison Bumgarner, the Mets’ Steven Matz and the Nationals’ Stephen Strasburg.Advertisement(The detectives emphasize that they are fairly secular fellows and have absolutely nothing against non-Jewish athletes.)Israeli baseball hews to the Israeli definition of citizenship, which is available to those with at least one Jewish grandparent or parent. From time to time, this causes tsuris for the Orthodox, who prefer religious law, which is that Judaism is traced only through the mother’s side.Some years back, Moxson attended a conference at the Baseball Hall of Fame in Cooperstown, N.Y. An Orthodox man, he recalled, rose and argued that Moxson’s definition of a Jew was irreparably flawed. Your definition is not in the holy book, he said.Moxson tapped his stack of Jewish Sports Reviews. “Eh, it’s the definition in our book,” he replied. “If you don’t like it, publish your own.”Team Israel appeared short of middle infielders this summer. Kurz confided to me that he had an interesting prospect in Panama, a young shortstop who said his grandparents were Jews. The who-is-a-Jewish-athlete investigative apparatus swung into gear.It turns out that the shortstop’s grandfather had emigrated from Portugal to Panama to work on the canal. Kurz’s sleuths found a list of Jewish-sounding names, and the shortstop’s family surname was in there. Yet there was no paperwork to prove the Jewish lineage.Reluctantly, not to mention longingly, my friend turned elsewhere.New York being New York, which is to say a cacophonous Tower of Babel, the Cyclones’ stadium should be bubbling over Thursday and through the weekend, and by no means just with Jewish fans. The multitudinous Little Pakistan neighborhood sits 20 blocks to the north, and Brazilians and Britons are easy enough to find.Alas, Ty Kelly will not be among the assembled Israeli baseball athletes. He will be found in Queens, sitting on the bench for the Mets’ improbable late-season playoff run. I’m guessing that my friend is enough of a lunatic fan to find that acceptable.Email: powellm@nytimes.comA version of this article appears in print on September 22, 2016, on Page B11 of the New York edition with the headline: Good Bat? Great. Jewish? Terrific.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.See More »