By DAVID WALDSTEINJULY 11, 2017
WIMBLEDON, England — Novak Djokovic, a three-time Wimbledon champion, sharply criticized tournament officials for forcing him to wait until Tuesday to play his fourth-round match.Djokovic, the No. 2 seed, was scheduled to play Adrian Mannarino on No. 1 Court on Monday afternoon, but the match was postponed until Tuesday because a lengthy five-set match between Gilles Müller and Rafael Nadal preceded it. Müller defeated Nadal in a match that lasted almost five hours and did not end until almost 8 p.m. local time.But Djokovic felt his match with Mannarino, which he won on Tuesday, 6-2, 7-6 (5), 6-4, should have been moved to Centre Court, which has lights.“We spoke with the referee, supervisors, trying to understand the thought process that they are having,” Djokovic said Tuesday after his win. “I just think it was a wrong decision not to play us last night, because we could have played.”AdvertisementOfficials told Djokovic and Mannarino that they were concerned about public safety of the fans — they estimated there were 30,000 still in the grounds — rushing to get an open seat at Centre Court. The tournament also issued a statement Monday night expressing the same concern.AdvertisementThe overnight delay could be costly for Djokovic, who will not get a day off before his quarterfinal match against No. 11 Tomas Berdych on Wednesday. All the other men, including Berdych, finished their fourth-round matches on Monday.Djokovic said he was particularly annoyed that he was not given a firm answer until the end of the day, and had to spend a good deal of Monday warming up, then cooling down and repeating the process.“Referee’s office was completely indecisive,” Djokovic said.He also said Wimbledon should abandon the win-by-two rule in the fifth set and just play a tiebreaker instead (Müller defeated Nadal, 15-13, in a fifth set that took 2 hours and 15 minutes).“I just don’t see any reason why not,” Djokovic said, and added, “If you are already getting to the 6-all, fifth set, you might as well just decide it in a tiebreaker.”Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.Djokovic was also critical of the court conditions, which have increasingly become an issue after a week of hot, dry weather. He said he found a large hole near the service line of Centre Court on Tuesday and showed it to the chair umpire.“The fact is that the court is not in a great condition,” he said. “But, you have to deal with it. I don’t think much can be done, and what can be done? That’s not in my area of understanding and competence.”Djokovic said the conditions were not dangerous, but the uneven surface could cause unpredictable bounces and affect the outcome of points and even matches.A few times during his match against Mannarino, Djokovic stumbled, and at other times, he stooped to clear away divots or clumps of grass.AdvertisementBut he did not appear to have much difficulty with Mannarino, except briefly in the second set, when Djokovic became frustrated with his play. When he finally won the set, he turned to his coaches, Andre Agassi and Mario Ancic, and yelled loudly, almost as if to exhort them as much as himself. They dutifully stood and cheered.With his scheduling problem now out of the way and a three-set match in the books, Djokovic can turn his focus to Berdych.“It was frustrating last night, I must admit,” he said. “But I quickly just turned the next page and just focused on what I need to do today. I’ve done it in straight sets. That’s all that matters.”A version of this article appears in print on July 12, 2017, on Page B13 of the New York edition with the headline: Djokovic Criticizes Decision to Postpone Match, but Wins Easily.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.