By BEN ROTHENBERGJULY 10, 2017
WIMBLEDON, England — As the women’s field at Wimbledon was halved to eight from 16, a No. 1 lost her spot atop the WTA rankings, and the No. 4 and No. 5 seeds also fell.Just another Manic Monday at the All England Club, though havoc has been a fixed menu item throughout this season of women’s tennis, with top stars often absent, or present-but-struggling.The rankings of the fading and brightening stars are realigning, though the outcome remains unclear.In a match between the two most recent Wimbledon runners-up, 14th-seeded Garbiñe Muguruza beat top-seeded Angelique Kerber, 4-6, 6-4, 6-4, unseating Kerber from her perch as No. 1 in the WTA rankings. Kerber, last year’s finalist, will have spent 34 weeks in the top spot, hanging on even as her results this season have consistently fallen short of her sterling results last year.The loss to Muguruza dropped Kerber’s record against top-20 opponents this year to 0-9.“All the questions on the ranking, they’re hopefully gone,” Kerber said. “I don’t know if that’s good or bad, but I had gotten used to those questions.”AdvertisementSecond-seeded Simona Halep, who beat Victoria Azarenka, 7-6 (3), 6-2, on Monday, will rise to the top of the ladder if she wins her quarterfinal against sixth-seeded Johanna Konta on Tuesday.“I want to win more, not just one match,” Halep said, smiling. “So I’m not thinking about that.”AdvertisementKonta defeated 21st-seeded Caroline Garcia, 7-6 (3), 4-6, 6-4. With Andy Murray also advancing Monday on the men’s side, it is the first time that Britain has representatives in both the men’s and women’s quarterfinals at Wimbledon since 1973.If Konta beats Halep, the No. 1 spot will fall to third-ranked Karolina Pliskova, who lost in the second round to Magdalena Rybarikova last week. But Pliskova reached the final of last year’s United States Open and has won titles in Cincinnati, Brisbane, Doha and Eastbourne in the last 12 months.”Whatever happens, happens,” Pliskova said after her second-round loss. “I’m not going to pray somebody’s losing or winning.”The shuffling at the top of the rankings will take a back seat to the race for the Wimbledon title, with many strong contenders still in the running.Muguruza, a finalist two years ago, struggled with her emotions as she tried to defend her French Open title last month, but she has shown an increasingly steeled resolve at Wimbledon. Against Kerber, she twice rallied from a break down in the final set to pull the match in her favor.“I have learned to get better and better,” Muguruza said of her mentality. “When you are younger, everything is more dramatic: ‘Oh, I’ve won! Oh, I’ve lost! Oh, I’ve failed!’ Now, a lot of things that filled my head are cast aside, and I put my energy only where I need to put it.”AdvertisementIn the quarterfinals, Muguruza will face seventh-seeded Svetlana Kuznetsova, who was a 6-2, 6-4 winner over ninth-seeded Agnieszka Radwanska.The other quarterfinal in the top half of the draw will be between 24th-seeded CoCo Vandeweghe and the 87th-ranked Rybarikova. Vandeweghe beat No. 5 Caroline Wozniacki, 7-6 (4), 6-4, to earn the rematch with Rybarikova, who beat Vandeweghe, 6-1, 6-4, in the first round of the French Open in May.Rybarikova, who won, 6-4, 2-6, 6-3, Monday over the qualifier Petra Martic, said she expected a much tougher test this time on grass, Vandeweghe’s favorite surface.”On grass, she serves amazing and she plays so fast,” Rybarikova said of Vandeweghe, a 25-year-old American. “She doesn’t give you much time to decide anything. So, I mean, I think she’s also one of the favorites to win this title with her game. She has, totally, a game for grass.”The grass-court credentials of the other remaining American woman are even stronger. Venus Williams, who beat the 27th-seeded Ana Konjuh, 6-3, 6-2, is a five-time Wimbledon champion.Get the big sports news, highlights and analysis from Times journalists, with distinctive takes on games and some behind-the-scenes surprises, delivered to your inbox every week.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.Williams, 37, has not won a Grand Slam singles title since her Wimbledon triumph nine years ago, though she reached the final of this year’s Australian Open, where she lost in the final to her sister Serena.“Winning never gets old at any stage in your career — ever, ever,” said Williams, the No. 10 seed.Williams will next face a player to whom winning on a big stage is still relatively new: the French Open champion, Jelena Ostapenko, who beat fourth-seeded Elina Svitolina, 6-3, 7-6 (6).AdvertisementOstapenko, the No. 13 seed, is the first woman to back up her first Grand Slam title by reaching the quarterfinals or better at the next major tournament since Kim Clijsters followed her 2005 U.S. Open win with a semifinal run at the Australian Open the next year.“I think I play better with every match, also like at the French,” Ostapenko, 20, said. “So I hope I can keep it up.”Ranked 47th when she won the French Open with a high-risk, high-reward style, Ostapenko is perhaps an unlikely candidate to have sustained her winning ways. Against Svitolina, she continued to swing away, hitting 42 winners to her opponent’s 14.“It’s normal, because she has lots of confidence now; she won lots of matches,” Svitolina said of Ostapenko’s momentum. “It will be interesting to see, when she will struggle a bit later in the year and stuff, how she’s going to play.”A version of this article appears in print on July 11, 2017, on Page B11 of the New York edition with the headline: Top-Seeded Kerber Tumbles Out of Fourth Round Amid the Usual Havoc.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.