AdvertisementSupported byBy The Associated PressENGLEWOOD, Colo. — Not even a year ago, members of the Broncos’ coaching staff were riding fire trucks through downtown Denver with the players to celebrate their victory in Super Bowl 50. Now, the staff is undergoing a major overhaul.Vance Joseph, the new head coach, hired Mike McCoy as his offensive coordinator on Friday, and the Broncos will also be getting new defensive and special-teams coordinators. McCoy, the former Chargers head coach, is everything Joseph said he wanted in the play-caller for his offense: creative, energetic, seasoned.“Mike is an experienced play-caller who can build a system around our players,” Joseph said. “It was our goal to find an offensive coordinator who has flexibility with his scheme, and Mike has done that as both a head coach and coordinator. He’s had a lot of success in this league with many different styles of offense, including here with the Broncos.”McCoy, who was Denver’s offensive coordinator from 2009 to 2012, replaces Rick Dennison, whose offense struggled over the last two years under four quarterbacks.During his first stint in Denver, McCoy molded an offense around quarterback Tim Tebow in 2011 that led to an improbable victory over Pittsburgh in the playoffs. The following season, he helped Peyton Manning become comeback player of the year, an honor that as Chargers head coach he helped Philip Rivers win in 2013.Now he will get the chance to mold young quarterbacks — Trevor Siemian and Paxton Lynch.The Broncos, who missed the playoffs after slipping to 9-7 in 2016, find themselves in the unusual position of remaking their staff less than a year after winning it all.General Manager John Elway hired Joseph after Gary Kubiak’s abrupt resignation two weeks ago over health concerns.The defensive coordinator Wade Phillips is finalizing a deal to join the Los Angeles Rams, and the special-teams coordinator Joe DeCamillis was hired by the Jacksonville Jaguars on Friday.Phillips said goodbye to Denver on Twitter, writing: “Thanks to John for bringing me, the greatest staff, to Gary our leader, to the best players ever and to the greatest fans. I will miss you.”His successor is Joe Woods, who spent the last two seasons coaching Denver’s “No Fly Zone” secondary, which produced the No. 1 pass defense each year.Unlike Elway’s first two coaches, John Fox and Kubiak, Joseph, 44, is a first-time head coach. He has just one year of experience as defensive coordinator, last year in Miami, and Elway said he would have to “grow on the run.”So Elway is giving more advice this time around as his head coach hires his staff, and will most likely stay more involved.“I hope I can help him,” Elway said. “With the experience that I’ve had, not only as a player but now in this role I’ve been in as G.M., I’m hoping to help him tremendously.“Vance knows what he wants on offense on his staff and as well as offensively. I can give input. Ultimately, it is Vance’s staff.”Joseph inherits a defense that features the All-Pros Von Miller, Aqib Talib and Chris Harris Jr. but struggled against the run after losing Malik Jackson to free agency and Vance Walker to a knee injury.The Broncos finished 27th in the N.F.L. on offense in 2016. An inability to solve slow starts, leaky line play and poor production in the receiving game outside Demaryius Thomas and Emmanuel Sanders combined to neutralize the team’s strength on defense.Advertisement