By DAVID SEGALJAN. 13, 2017
At professional squash tournaments, players get tips and advice from a trusted source during two-minute breaks between games. That source is typically a coach or another pro, someone who has competed at the highest levels.There are exceptions. The best player in the world today is a rangy 25-year-old Egyptian named Mohamed El Shorbagy, a.k.a. the Beast of Alexandria. Between games his counsel of choice is a woman of a certain age, wearing an expression of deep concern and a hijab.That is Mohamed’s mother, Basma El Shorbagy — and she has never played squash.To fans, the midmatch mother-son powwows have become one of the game’s most reliable and endearing spectacles. There is Ms. Shorbagy, leaning over her child as he sweats in a chair, catching his breath. She lectures and gesticulates. He hydrates and listens.“I’m not the easiest person to talk to between games,” Mohamed El Shorbagy said in an interview last week. “But she understands me better than anyone else in the world. She knows how to motivate me. She knows how to say the exact right words at the exact right moment.”The El Shorbagys arrived in Manhattan last week for the Tournament of Champions, a celebrated stop on the professional tour, held annually in a glass court erected in Vanderbilt Hall at Grand Central Terminal. Other tournaments may have more prestige, but the ToC is arguably the highest-profile and most raucous event of the year, attracting a stream of commuters who gape at the action, free, from the front wall. Tickets to seats on the other three sides of the court start at $10 for early rounds and rise to $450 by the finals.AdvertisementEl Shorbagy, who won his first-round match on Thursday night, is the defending champion, having won here in both 2015 and 2016. But this year, the very large group of contenders includes Karim Abdel Gawad, a fellow Egyptian who twice beat El Shorbagy in tournaments late in 2016, including a definitive three-games-to-nil thumping at the Qatar Classic.AdvertisementTo other players on the tour, there is something faintly amusing about El Shorbagy’s not-so-secret weapon. Daryl Selby, an Englishman ranked 15th in the world, remembers a group of players cracking up at one of Mohamed’s matches as mother hectored son.“He’d lost a game, and she marched straight over to him, and you could see that she was getting really animated,” Selby said.He added: “There’s this guy in his 20s, the best player in the world, getting told off by his mom, and he looks like he’s about to cry. But whatever she said, it worked. Because he got back on the court and won.”Ms. El Shorbagy volunteered years ago for her critical role. She was with her son at the squash club in Alexandria the day Mohamed, then just 9, was spotted by the onetime Egyptian national champion Gamal Awad.“He told me: ‘Your son is going to be the best player in the world. I want to coach your son, for free,’” she recalled in a phone call last week. “He convinced me. I had to believe him.”Ms. El Shorbagy can appear a bit dour at tournaments, in part because the cameras of SquashTV, which broadcast over the internet, are often trained on her when her son is in a pickle. But she has a levity about her that you would not predict watching her fidget in the bleachers. Asked what she tells her son between games, she initially demurred with a giggle.“It’s my secret!” she said.Getting serious, she explained that her training as a civil engineer gave her the idea that any problem can be solved if it is studied enough — including the matter of how to play great squash. In addition, she has an immense base of knowledge, having listened to countless hours of strategizing by world-class coaches. One of them is Jonah Barrington, a six-time British Open champion, who coached at Millfield, an elite boarding school in England, which Mohamed attended on scholarship.AdvertisementAfter Mohamed’s first year there, Ms. El Shorbagy and her husband, who works as an engineer, decided it would ease their son’s entry into a new culture if she moved to England and rented a house near Millfield. Mohamed lived with her, becoming a sort of day student at the boarding school. She attended Mohamed’s practices and learned the Barrington catechism.“My parents would see each other only two months out of the year while I was at school,” Mohamed said. “It wasn’t easy for them to live this kind of life. They sacrificed a lot.”When El Shorbagy played in the junior ranks, much of his mother’s instructions concerned focus. These days, she might offer tactical pointers — pick up the pace, lob more, work this guy’s backhand — but her most valuable contributions seem to be big picture and psychological.“Here’s an example,” said Mohamed, who speaks nearly as quickly as he moves on the court. “I was playing the finals of the El Gouna in April, against Gregory Gaultier, the world No. 2. I found myself down, two games to none. My mother came to me. I told her: ‘I don’t think I can come back. I’m feeling too much pressure. My legs feel heavy.’“And she just told me: ‘Don’t think about winning or losing. Just, every time you finish a point, think about fighting for the next point. The way you’re playing now, you are going to regret it. You don’t want to go out with regrets. Fight.”El Shorbagy won the next three games in a row, and the title.Aside from the occasional mental lapse, there are not a lot of flaws in his game. At 6 feet 1 inch, he has the wingspan and speed to make him one of the game’s best retrievers. His forehand is so crushing it forces a “ping” from the ball that sounds like a cry for mercy. The SquashTV commentator Joey Barrington — Jonah’s son and a former professional himself — has described El Shorbagy as one of the few players who can “bully” an opponent with raw power, though his touch is deceptively supple when he needs a drop shot.El Shorbagy said that losses to Gawad, a friend and rival since childhood, had inspired a newfound dedication, but he knows that the Baby-Faced Assassin, as Gawad is now reverently known, is hardly the only player standing between him and a third ToC trophy. Another potential obstacle is El Shorbagy’s lithe and savvy younger brother, Marwan, who has rocketed up the rankings in the past two years, and is currently No. 6 in the world.(Topic for further inquiry: What on earth is going on with squash in Egypt? Seven of the top 10 male players, and four of the top female players, are Egyptian — a level of domination that exceeds even what the Chinese have achieved in table tennis.)AdvertisementBasma El Shorbagy has been an eager between-game counsel to Marwan, too. But there is a problem when her sons face each other in tournaments, which has happened five or six times. (Mohamed has won each match.) Often a nervous observer, Ms. El Shorbagy says it is pure agony to see her only children compete against each other.“You can’t imagine my situation in these moments, really,” she said. “Because Mohamed is No. 1, I can’t want anyone to beat him. But at the same time, I want Marwan to be No. 1.”If both El Shorbagys win their early rounds, they will meet in the quarterfinals. Mohamed sounds ready for his brother and everyone else he may encounter at Grand Central. In December, after his second loss to Gawad, he retreated to his training base in Bristol and called his mother.“I told her, ‘You need to come to England now,’” he said. “‘We have a month to get ready for the second half of the season. I don’t like what’s happened in the first half. I can’t do this as an individual. We have to do it as a team.’ And a couple days later, she got a plane and flew over.”A version of this article appears in print on January 16, 2017, on Page D1 of the New York edition with the headline: When Mom Is Calling the Shots.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.