By MIKE VORKUNOVJAN. 13, 2017
Kristaps Porzingis sent Knicks officials a text message Thursday afternoon: His left Achilles’ tendon was sore and stiff again, he told them. The sun had not even set, and the Knicks already had another problem.Like many of the problems plaguing the team, this was a recurring one. Porzingis had already missed three games this month because of the injury. Now it was back, adding to the list of obstacles for the Knicks as they try to pull themselves out of a midseason tailspin.“It’s not great,” Knicks Coach Jeff Hornacek said. “But what can we do? This is the N.B.A., and games come at you fast. If you’re winning, it’s great. You just show up and play a game the next day. If you’re losing, there’s no time to try to fix things.”Porzingis did not play Thursday night against the Bulls, although his absence did not have immediate negative consequences for the Knicks. They defeated Chicago, 104-89, at Madison Square Garden, for a welcome bit of relief amid their recent troubles. It was just their second win in their last 11 games, and a loss would have further tested their resolve.AdvertisementThe Bulls presented another seemingly easy mark, with the All-Star swingman Jimmy Butler out of action because of illness. But the Knicks were coming off a loss to the lowly 76ers on Wednesday.This time, at least, the Knicks did not falter. It did not qualify as easy, because nothing is simple for them right now, but it was a victory nonetheless. The Bulls hung around, but Carmelo Anthony delivered 23 points, and the Knicks received 19 from Mindaugas Kuzminskas and 12 points and 15 rebounds from Joakim Noah, facing his old team.“It was a lot of pressure on us tonight,” Kuzminskas said. “Not only from the outside.”While it was not a blowout, it did provide some encouragement. The Knicks’ usually leaky defense gave up its second-lowest total of the season, and the Bulls shot a woeful 39.8 percent.Get the big sports news, highlights and analysis from Times journalists, with distinctive takes on games and some behind-the-scenes surprises, delivered to your inbox every week.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.It was something of a response to the challenge the Knicks had set for themselves Wednesday night, which Hornacek laid out before the game. Even against weakened opposition, he saw the Bulls game as a test of his players’ fortitude.“After last night it’s going to be interesting to see how they come back tonight,” he said. “They can drop their heads and we can show up and lose by 40. Or we can come out and fight and battle, scratch, claw, and do whatever we have to do to win. It should say something about our team tonight.”AdvertisementPerhaps all it said was that the Knicks were able to avoid reaching a new low point. Yet Porzingis’s injury presents another worry. Despite earlier rest, it has not dissipated.He missed seven of 10 shots on Wednesday and air-balled a 3-point attempt on the Knicks’ final possession, setting up T. J. McConnell’s buzzer-beating jumper. Hornacek saw the performance and the lack of lift on Porzingis’s shot as an indication that something might have been wrong.While Porzingis does not have a tear in his Achilles’, Hornacek said, the injury may be a lingering issue the rest of the season. The Knicks do not play until Sunday, and Porzingis may not practice before then, leaving his status up in the air.“The trainers will continue to look at it,” Hornacek said. “Somehow, if it turns out to be off and on, that’s not great for us but if he comes out there and says I’d like to play tonight, we’re not going to say necessarily. We’ve got to trust the player because we can’t have that feeling of what it’s like in his Achilles’. He’s got to be honest with his assessment.”That leaves the Knicks’ starting lineup further hampered. Noah is playing through a shoulder injury that prevented him from jumping for the tip-off Wednesday because of the trouble it causes him. Anthony has been battling a shoulder injury, too. Courtney Lee has missed time because of a wrist injury.Only the notoriously injury-prone Derrick Rose is healthy at the moment. He has returned to the Knicks without any apparent issue after skipping Monday’s game without notifying the team. He scored 17 points on Thursday and received a warm welcome before the game. He said he hoped that the brief absence on Monday would not affect his long-term relationship with the organization.“When I was in the room I felt like they understood where I was coming from,” he said. “I hope one incident didn’t change their minds. Who knows? This is a business, and if it was to happen I’m still going to play the way I normally know how to play, no matter where I’m at.”Those are far-off worries for the Knicks right now. They will need more than one win to stabilize themselves during this rut. Porzingis’s Achilles’ remains a problem, too. But at least for one night, the Knicks’ list of troubles did not extend to the final score.A version of this article appears in print on January 13, 2017, on Page B10 of the New York edition with the headline: Hobbled Knicks Get an Elusive Win.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.