By BILL PENNINGTONDEC. 7, 2016
Giants defensive end Jason Pierre-Paul had surgery for a sports hernia and what the team called a core muscle injury on Wednesday morning and will probably be sidelined for about six weeks, according to people with knowledge of Pierre-Paul’s condition who were not authorized to speak publicly about it.The injury is expected to keep Pierre-Paul, a two-time Pro Bowler and the Giants’ most disruptive defender, out for the remainder of the regular season and probably through the first two weeks of the N.F.L. playoffs, should the 8-4 Giants qualify for the postseason.The Giants, however, did not announce a timetable for Pierre-Paul’s return.“We’re just going to support J. P. P. any way we can,” Giants Coach Ben McAdoo said. “The sooner he gets back and whenever he can make it back, the better. Whenever he gets back, we’ll be ready for him.”Pierre-Paul collapsed to the turf in the second quarter of the Giants’ loss at Pittsburgh on Sunday and did not return to the game. The team announced at the time that he had a groin injury. On Tuesday, he was examined by Dr. William Meyers, a Philadelphia sports hernia specialist who performed the operation on Wednesday.Get the big sports news, highlights and analysis from Times journalists, with distinctive takes on games and some behind-the-scenes surprises, delivered to your inbox every week.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.On Wednesday, Pierre-Paul posted a picture on Instagram of himself in a hospital bed and wrote on his Twitter account, “Surgery went well and feeling way better already.”AdvertisementPierre-Paul, 27, was having a sterling season after coming back from a Fourth of July fireworks accident in 2015 that resulted in the amputation of his right index finger and damaged another finger and his thumb. In 12 games this season, he had seven sacks — five and a half of them in two consecutive games in late November — and 53 tackles. He also forced three fumbles, returning one for a touchdown, and deflected eight passes at the line of scrimmage.AdvertisementPierre-Paul will be a free agent at the end of the 2016 season.The Giants are preparing for a game on Sunday against the Dallas Cowboys, whose 11-1 record is the best in the N.F.L. After practice Tuesday, several Giants said it would be difficult to replace Pierre-Paul.“His presence is going to be missed,” linebacker Jonathan Casillas said.Casillas added: “We have guys who are going to step up, but no one is J. P. P. No one can truly do all the things he can. He defends the run so well, and he’s a premier pass rusher.”Filling in for Pierre-Paul will be two defensive ends who have seen limited time this season: Kerry Wynn and Romeo Okwara.“It sets us back,” Giants safety Landon Collins said of Pierre-Paul’s absence. “But we look at it as an opportunity for other guys to get their names out.”
            Surgery went well and feeling way better already. God is good. #90PowerCircle A version of this article appears in print on December 8, 2016, on Page B15 of the New York edition with the headline: Pierre-Paul Is Sidelined After a Hernia Operation.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.