AdvertisementSupported byBy Ben RothenbergMELBOURNE, Australia — Jennifer Elie had worked a long time to earn a spot at a Grand Slam event, so when there was even a glimmer of hope, she didn’t hesitate.When the entry list for this week’s Australian Open qualifying tournament was released in December, Elie, 30, was ranked 239th, which left her 25 spots out. The Brooklyn-born Elie got into the 2015 United States Open as a wild card but had never earned direct entry into qualifying at a Grand Slam event because of her ranking, which had lingered outside the top 300 for her entire career. While many in her position would not take the gamble of a flight across the ocean, Elie decided this chance was too good to pass up.“I mean, you have to make the trip,” Elie said. “You work hard for this, so you have to try. And you never know; sometimes people don’t show up, because it’s kind of far to come here, too, for a lot of the girls for just one tournament where they’re in qualies.”Elie was only 10 spots out when she, as well as her mother and sister, left for Australia, and she was only eight spots out when she landed. That number then fell to six, then four, and then two, before Elie’s faith was rewarded with a spot in the hours before the draw came out on Wednesday.Elie won her first match in qualifying on Thursday, her first win at any Grand Slam level, but lost in the second on Friday. Still, the result yielded the equivalent of $9,375, by far the biggest prize money check of her career. Grand Slams, particularly the Australian Open, have shifted more prize money to the earlier rounds of the tournaments, so even a first-round loss in qualifying can be one of a player’s biggest paydays.Craig Tiley, tournament director of the Australian Open, said his goal was “quite simple: more players making more money,” which includes offsetting the costs of travel and lodging.“We want to improve the overall appeal of being a professional tennis player and ensure the best athletes in world sport are attracted to the game,” Tiley said.Elie might have achieved her windfall with much less stress if she were a man: The Australian Open women’s qualifying draw is made up of 96 players, compared with 128 for the men. The numbers are the same at the French Open and Wimbledon.The United States Open equalized the size of its qualifying fields in 1998, but few players are aware of the differences at the other tournaments. Elie said she noticed it only when she realized that the field was smaller in Melbourne than in New York.”I thought it was the same, because U.S. Open is 128, so I thought everything was the same — but it wasn’t,” she said. “But it should be 128, because a lot of the girls work hard all year to try to play the Slams. They should give everybody the opportunity.”Laura Robson, a British player ranked 222nd, also said she had not realized there was a difference until coaches more familiar with the men’s system pointed it out. “They asked me my ranking, and then they said, ‘I don’t understand how you’re not in,’ just numbers-wise,” Robson said.Even with his role at the Australian Open, Tiley was at a loss to explain the disparity in the size of the draws.“It has been this way as long as I can remember, and I am not sure as to how it even came about,” he said. He added, “It’s interesting, because the WTA has never raised it with us as a problem.”Steve Simon, the WTA’s chief executive, said “it hasn’t been an issue for us,” adding that he did not “know the history behind it.”Still, the inequality has financial consequences. With 32 fewer prize checks handed out to the women in Melbourne, their overall purse is the equivalent of $225,000 smaller, a contributing factor in the persistent gap between men’s and women’s pay in tennis. A 2014 study commissioned by the International Tennis Federation determined that a man could expect to break even from minimal expenses at a ranking of 336, while a woman would have to reach No. 253.The importance of the Grand Slam events can lead to farcical events like the one this week at the WTA tournament in Hobart, Australia, in a second-round match between 127th-ranked Elise Mertens and 135th-ranked Sachia Vickery. Both players were entered in Australian Open qualifying, but I.T.F. rules meant that whoever won the match would be withdrawn from Melbourne because qualifying was beginning while the Hobart tournament continued.The Hobart tournament, already beleaguered by withdrawals, reached a surreal moment when Mertens called for the trainer after just one game, possibly preparing to withdraw. But Vickery beat her to it, ending the match after just five minutes and keeping her spot in Melbourne.“It was the most panic I’ve ever felt in my whole life,” Vickery said, laughing. “I was like: Oh my God, this is it. It’s over. I don’t know what I’m going to do for the next three weeks in Australia.”Although Vickery “won the race,” as she put it, Mertens won the week, winning her next three matches in Hobart to win her first WTA title and debut in the top 100 — despite losing her chance to play in Melbourne.Vickery lost in the first round of qualifying.Advertisement