AdvertisementSupported byBy Allan KredaSome Rangers players lounged on Florida beaches. Others stayed in Manhattan. Another went on a family getaway to a ranch resort upstate.After playing a grueling 43 of 82 games in just over 12 weeks, the Rangers welcomed their bye week, an addition to the schedule this season because of the preseason World Cup and the tighter schedule that followed. From Jan. 1 to March 2, each N.H.L. team will get a bye, which is actually a five-day break rather than a full week.The hiatus also gave several key Rangers players more healing time as the team inched closer to restoring its full lineup.Forwards Rick Nash, out since Dec. 18 because of a groin injury, and Pavel Buchnevich, who had not played since Nov. 12 because of a bad back, returned Friday night.But the Toronto Maple Leafs received first-period goals from William Nylander and James Van Riemsdyk and went on to defeat the Rangers, 4-2. Connor Brown and defenseman Connor Carrick also scored for Toronto, which was likewise playing for the first time after its break.Chris Krieder and J. T. Miller scored for the Rangers.For Rangers defenseman Nick Holden, the timing of a break in January — tucked between the Christmas break and the All-Star break later this month — proved perfect.“The season is a grind. I was feeling it before Christmas,” said Holden, who has played every game this season. “The schedule is so condensed.”Holden and his family visited a resort about 90 miles north of Manhattan, where his two young sons had a chance to try skiing and horseback riding.“It was nice for me and really nice for the kids,” he said. “After this break, I am feeling really energized.”The Toronto players Matt Martin, Mitch Marner and Carrick spent the time in the Cayman Islands.Martin, 27, is an elder statesmen of sorts on the young Maple Leafs roster, and he said that traveling with the 19-year-old Marner and the 22-year-old Carrick had given him a different perspective. In addition, the sojourn in turquoise waters was not nearly as arduous as battling for pucks in the corner, or standing in front of the opposing net, as Martin often does with his 6-foot-3, 220-pound frame.“Snorkeling was the highlight,” Martin said. “We saw a few stingrays. It was great having a few days to relax.”The Maple Leafs are vying for a playoff spot behind the teenage sensation Auston Matthews, who leads the team with 21 goals and 36 points after Friday’s win at Madison Square Garden. Matthews assisted on Brown’s goal at 14 minutes 27 seconds of the second period. Carrick made it 4-1 for the visitors at 13:20 of the third.Goaltender Frederik Andersen made 34 saves for Toronto, which improved to 19-13-8.“We have a lot of good young players, but we’re already a mature group,” said Martin, a career Islander before joining Toronto as a free agent last summer. “We’re playing important games now and feeling good about ourselves.”The Rangers were leading the N.H.L. in goals and were happy to welcome back Nash, who had 13 goals, and Buchnevich, a Russian rookie who had four goals in 10 games before he was sidelined.Rangers Coach Alain Vigneault has not had his full complement of forwards since mid-November.“I’m keeping my fingers crossed,” he said after the Rangers practiced late Thursday afternoon, when the team resumed activities after the break.Goaltender Henrik Lundqvist, 34, spent several days on a Florida beach, while his backup, Antti Raanta, enjoyed Manhattan in the snow with his wife, Anna, who is expecting their first child soon, and their Shetland sheepdog. “It was nice to be in the city, walk around, do some shopping and just hang at home,” Raanta said.Asked if three breaks in succession, including five days off for the All-Star weekend, were almost an embarrassment of riches, Lundqvist smiled.“I don’t want to complain or say anything negative,” he said. “But I think it would be better if the All-Star break was just longer for everybody.”Following the rest this week and the loss to the Maple Leafs, the Rangers (28-14-1) have six games before the All-Star break from Jan. 26 to 30 as they battle with Columbus, Washington and Pittsburgh in an especially tight race at the top of the Metropolitan Division.“Not a lot of people in the hockey world had us where we are now,” Vigneault said Friday after his team’s morning practice at the Garden. “What we are trying to do is to get better and keep improving. That’s how you’re able to get into the playoffs. That’s what we’re trying to do.”SLAP SHOTSThe Rangers honored Steven McDonald before Friday’s game. McDonald, a New York City police officer who was paralyzed in a 1986 shooting, was a constant presence at Rangers games over the past three decades. He died this week at 59, and his funeral was Friday morning at St. Patrick’s Cathedral in Manhattan. His wife, Patricia Ann Norris-McDonald, and their son, Conor McDonald, a police sergeant, received an ovation at center ice.Advertisement