By DAVE CALDWELLMARCH 28, 2016
ALBANY — When Tim and Connor Clifton, brothers from Matawan, N.J., decided to attend Quinnipiac University to major in mechanical engineering and play hockey together, they took one more bold step.After spending most of their childhoods in separate bedrooms, they shared a dormitory room, and the arrangement has lasted for three years. Connor figures he is saving another teammate, or any other student for that matter, from his brother.“I can tell him: ‘Hey. Pick your stuff up,’ and yell at him,” Connor said. “It’s easy for me.”On Sunday night, the Cliftons helped the Quinnipiac Bobcats, the No. 1-ranked team in Division I, advance to their second Frozen Four in four years by beating Massachusetts-Lowell, 4-1.AdvertisementTim is a 6-foot-1, 180-pound forward, Connor a 5-foot-11, 180-pound defenseman. They committed to Quinnipiac on the same day in November 2011 and entered the university at the same time, though Tim is nearly three years older than Connor.Advertisement“They decided whatever they were going to do, it was going to be together, whether it was Division I or Division III,” said their father, also named Tim, who owns an insurance agency in Matawan and coached the boys as youngsters. Their mother, Joan, is a financial analyst in Manhattan.Quinnipiac (31-3-7), which will play Boston College in a national semifinal on April 7 in Tampa, Fla., has never won an N.C.A.A. hockey title, though the Bobcats came close in 2013, losing to Yale, their Connecticut neighbor, in the final game in Pittsburgh, 4-0.At the time, Tim was playing for the Jersey Hitmen, a junior team based in Wayne, N.J. (with a logo that includes a tough guy in a fedora and pinstriped suit, and bullet holes in the word “Hitmen”), and Connor was living and studying in Michigan with the United States National Development team.Two months later, Connor was selected in the fifth round by the Coyotes in the N.H.L. draft in Newark. But the brothers had a plan to go together to Quinnipiac.“I don’t want to say I waited for him,” said Tim, 23, “but I kind of did.”Tim had played for the Hitmen for three years, while Connor, 20, played less than one.“I think I really needed those three years, whether we were going to school together or not,” Tim said.Spurred in part by James van Riemsdyk, a forward from Middletown who was the second overall pick in the 2007 N.H.L. draft, New Jersey has become more prominent recently for producing elite hockey players.AdvertisementTim and Connor Clifton were teammates at the perennially powerful Christian Brothers Academy in Lincroft, N.J., before Tim graduated and joined the Hitmen. As a high school sophomore, Connor played for the Hitmen for most of one season before joining the development team.“There are times on the ice where somebody will go after Connor and Tim will get fired up — and vice versa,” said Soren Jonzzon, a senior forward who is the Bobcats’ captain. “They both play with an edge, and there’s no doubt they play for each other, and they play for the team. They’ve been instrumental to our success all year.”The Quinnipiac team that went to the 2013 Frozen Four was hit hard by graduation, so Connor immediately figured to be included in Coach Rand Pecknold’s plans. Although Tim had scored 69 goals with the Hitmen, Pecknold envisioned him more as a grinder, a checker.“He called me up and said, ‘Hey, Dad, I don’t need to score any goals,’ ” the elder Clifton said. “We always knew his best days were ahead of him.”Tim played in all 40 games as a freshman as what Pecknold called “just a role guy.”“But this year, he’s taken it up a notch,” Pecknold said. “I give him a lot of credit.”As a member of the checking line that includes Jonzzon and Scott Davidson, Tim won 17 of 23 face-offs Sunday against UMass-Lowell and helped hold the River Hawks to 14 shots on goal. Lowell scored on its first shot, by Dylan Zink three minutes into the game, but not after that.Connor had a dazzling assist in a 4-0 victory Saturday over Rochester Institute of Technology in the East Regional semifinal, darting up the ice, weaving through traffic, spinning and then lobbing a backhand pass across the slot to Jonzzon, who slapped the puck into an open net. Cut twice from the United States under-20 team, Connor has shown resilience, his father said.Get the big sports news, highlights and analysis from Times journalists, with distinctive takes on games and some behind-the-scenes surprises, delivered to your inbox every week.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.Quinnipiac has been ranked No. 1 for most of the season, and Pecknold said the Bobcats responded well to the acclaim, saying, “I think it toughened us up mentally.”AdvertisementBut the Bobcats have not yet won it all. After winning the East Regional title Sunday, the Quinnipiac players accepted the trophy and gathered on the ice for a team photo, but it was far from a jubilant dog pile.“We can imagine what the next one feels like,” Tim said of an N.C.A.A. trophy. “We can all feel it.”As a result, Connor and Tim said they have not spent a lot of time thinking about what might happen after this season. “This is exactly the position we wanted to be in,” Connor said.Another Clifton brother, Corey, 17, also has played hockey for Christian Brothers Academy and the Hitmen. His father said he was likely to go to Quinnipiac, too, adding, “Corey may end up being the best of all three.”A version of this article appears in print on March 29, 2016, on Page B15 of the New York edition with the headline: At Quinnipiac, Brothers May Add an N.C.A.A. Title to Their Bond .  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.