AdvertisementSupported byUConn 86, Texas 65By Seth BerkmanBRIDGEPORT, Conn. — Late in the first quarter, Breanna Stewart’s face was red, her forehead glistening with sweat. So were her arms and shoulders. Long gone was the smile she had carried throughout warm-ups for Connecticut’s game against Texas on Monday in the Bridgeport Regional final.Texas’ Brooke McCarty had hit a 3-pointer — the Longhorns’ third straight — and No. 1-seeded UConn, which had led by 32-4 after one quarter in its previous N.C.A.A. tournament game, was clinging to a 2-point lead.Stewart was not scowling, but as she yelled directives and motioned to her teammates as the 50 or so Longhorns fans behind the Texas bench drowned out thousands of silent UConn supporters, the Huskies knew they were entrenched in a level of competition they had not seen in weeks.Stewart followed that Texas 3-pointer by connecting on a jumper. It was one of several buffers the Huskies created throughout the night, answering every spurt by second-seeded Texas to secure an 86-65 win and earn a ninth consecutive trip to the Final Four.“You’re playing against a really good team that really tested us on both ends of the floor, and it forced our best players to play great,” Connecticut Coach Geno Auriemma said. “That’s exactly what you need at this time in the tournament. You don’t want to be going to the Final Four thinking that games are easy. In spite of the score today, this was by no means easy at all.”The Huskies (36-0) earned their 22nd straight N.C.A.A. tournament victory, a record. Since a loss in the Big East tournament on March 12, 2013, the Huskies are 120-1 over all, with each victory in double digits. Morgan Tuck scored a game-high 22 points against Texas, and Stewart, who was named the most outstanding player of the regional, added 21 points with 13 rebounds.About 15 minutes before tipoff, the Texas pep band began playing Daft Punk’s 2013 hit “Get Lucky.” UConn had won its first three games of the tournament by a combined 158 points — including a 98-38 domination of fifth-seeded Mississippi State in the round of 16 — so it seemed that luck would have to play an integral role in any upset bid.Ariel Atkins scored 10 points in the first quarter, and Texas, having fallen behind by as many as 11, entered the second quarter trailing by only 22-17.“We said what happened Saturday, that’s not real life, that’s not realistic, that’s not the way the N.C.A.A. tournament goes at this time of year,” Auriemma said. “Today is more realistic. Today it was a struggle.”Matching Connecticut’s intensity, the Longhorns (31-5) hushed the pro-Connecticut crowd early in the second. After a jumper by Lashann Higgs cut Texas’ deficit to 30-25, Tuck committed a turnover. Then Atkins poked the ball from UConn’s Katie Lou Samuelson and slid headfirst on the floor, clenching her teeth as she wrapped her arms around the loose ball.A steal by Higgs capped a stretch of three UConn turnovers in three possessions, but the Longhorns’ own lackadaisical play proved costly. On the ensuing possession, Texas was called for a shot-clock violation. After Higgs made a jumper, Texas missed 10 straight field-goal attempts, and UConn built a 46-31 halftime advantage, having shot over 60 percent from the field.Connecticut opened the second half by increasing its lead to 21, but Texas responded with three straight 3-pointers, pulling to 54-42.The Longhorns, however, mustered only 5 points over the final 5 minutes 33 seconds of the third quarter as the Huskies began to pull away.During UConn’s defensive stand, Stewart gathered with two other veterans, Tuck and Moriah Jefferson, and relayed a message: “We have to do this, we have to take over, we have to take control.”After top-seeded Notre Dame and South Carolina lost last week, UConn’s path to a fourth straight championship appeared to have few remaining obstacles.Two wins from his 11th national title, Auriemma dismissed critics who claimed that his team’s accomplishments were stunting the growth of women’s basketball.“All those people that called into talk shows — you know the sad part about it?” Auriemma asked.“I guarantee none of them have been half as successful at what they do as Stewie’s been,” he said, referring to Stewart. “Because the guys that are really good, the guys that are great, they don’t have time to call stupid radio stations. They’re busy being great. You should see when our guys are around the N.B.A. players, how much those guys appreciate what these kids do. I’ve never, ever met someone who’s great at what they do criticize what these kids do. Because they understand how hard it is to be great.”UCONN TO FACE OREGON STATE Sydney Wiese scored 18 points, including three free throws in the final minute, and second-seeded Oregon State defeated top-seeded Baylor, 60-57, in Dallas to advance to the Final Four for the first time.The Lady Bears (36-2) finished with a loss in a regional final for the third consecutive season. Oregon State (32-4) will head to Indianapolis to face UConn.Jamie Weisner scored 16 points for the Beavers, and Ruth Hamblin had 10 points and 12 rebounds. Alexis Jones finished with 19 points for Baylor. (AP)Advertisement