By MARC TRACYMARCH 26, 2016
LOUISVILLE, Ky. —  Early in the second half, the Villanova freshman Jalen Brunson made the poor decision to drive and try a tough layup, which he missed, prompting a Kansas fast break — three words that should strike fear into the heart of any Kansas opponent.Guard Frank Mason III passed up a 3-pointer in order to feed the team’s starving star, Perry Ellis, having perhaps his worst game of the season. Ellis’s post move was typically crafty, but the shot hit the back of the rim and bounced out.With its leading scorer all but unable to score — in no small part because of a wisely planned and executed defensive game plan — No. 1-seeded Kansas, the team ranked first over all by the selection committee, lost its first game in more than two months, 64-59, to Villanova on Saturday in the South Regional final of the N.C.A.A. men’s basketball tournament. The No. 2-seeded Wildcats advanced to their first Final Four since 2009. They will play Oklahoma on Saturday in Houston.It is the first Final Four appearance for the Big East since that storied conference took on a new, slimmer roster three seasons ago amid the latest bout of realignment. Villanova Coach Jay Wright became the second coach to lead two Big East teams to the Final Four, according to a conference spokesman, joining the likes of Jim Calhoun, Jim Boeheim, Rick Pitino and John Thompson.AdvertisementKansas’s fierce perimeter defense limited one of college basketball’s best 3-point-shooting teams to a 4-for-18 performance beyond the arc.AdvertisementRyan Arcidiacono, Kris Jenkins and Josh Hart had 13 points apiece for Villanova. Daniel Ochefu added 10 points and 8 rebounds.Even so, Villanova missed its final five field-goal attempts, and eight of its final 10 attempts. At one point, the Wildcats went more than four minutes without any points, and they scored just 8 points in the final 4 minutes 28 seconds, all on free throws. With around three minutes left and a 4-point lead, Villanova appeared rattled and failed to take a good shot before the shot clock expired.But as the clock bled away and both teams tightened up, Villanova held on. Kansas’ Wayne Selden Jr. had an open 3-point attempt from the corner with 1:10 left that bounced out.“I think that the basket shrunk a little bit for us,” Kansas Coach Bill Self said.With 34 seconds left, Kansas guard Devonte’ Graham, who had a game-high 17 points, had the ball stolen and was called for a foul, his fifth.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.Selden and Mason added 16 points each. Ellis finished with 4, going 1 for 5 from the field, which, given his season, looks like a typo.After the game, Kansas credited Villanova’s ferocious defense.“They do a great job being everywhere — it’s pretty hard to simulate that,” said forward Landen Lucas, a junior, adding of a Big 12 rival known for its swarming schemes, “I guess the closest would be West Virginia.”With only a day’s preparation, both teams seemed to come out at the tip-off with precise understandings of what made their opponents tick and had plans for stopping it, resulting in a 32-25 halftime lead for Villanova — a low-scoring first half by the standards of both squads.Villanova’s unusual zone defense denied Ellis, a senior, many touches in the post, and Ellis, who was the Jayhawks’ leading scorer this season — and who had scored at least 20 in every N.C.A.A. tournament game before Saturday’s — entered halftime with no points. He seemed demoralized, committing four turnovers.Advertisement“They did a great job of just trying to swarm me,” Ellis said, adding, “Somebody was always there.”The Wildcats also engaged a light press that seemed designed less to force turnovers than to slow the ball and give Kansas’ offense less time to work in the halfcourt. Mason and Graham, nonetheless, managed a solid first half, combining for 18 points on 7-for-14 shooting.If Villanova would not let the ball be passed inside, the antidote was clearly a dribble-drive penetration and a kick-out for an open 3.Villanova did a better job adjusting to Kansas’ defensive obstacles.These consisted of playing very close to Villanova’s four shooters to slow the 3-point attack that made 10 of 15 in Thursday’s win over No. 3-seeded Miami. It worked to an extent, but it left holes that the Wildcats probed.A version of this article appears in print on March 27, 2016, on Page SP1 of the New York edition with the headline: Crafty Villanova Outsmarts Kansas.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.