By THE ASSOCIATED PRESSMARCH 26, 2016
Chris Kreider and Derick Brassard were all over the Montreal Canadiens on Saturday night.Kreider and Brassard each had three points, and the visiting Rangers downed the Canadiens, 5-2, eliminating Montreal from playoff contention.Kreider had two goals and an assist for the Rangers, who beat Montreal for the first time since Nov. 23, 2014, and Brassard had one goal and two assists, all in the second period.“We’re trying to find chemistry between lines right now,” said Brassard, who extended his point streak to four games. “Chris is a big part of our team. To see him score two goals like that and be involved in the game, that’s something our team is pretty excited about.“Hopefully it’s going to give him some confidence. I really like our line.”With the score tied at 1-1 going into the second period, Brassard capitalized on a big bounce off the end boards after a missed shot by Kreider at 1 minute 32 seconds.AdvertisementKreider then took a clever no-look feed by Brassard and made the score 3-1 on a power play at 8:19. Kreider added his second goal of the game two minutes later on a great individual effort for his first three-point game of the season.AdvertisementThe Rangers scored four goals on their first 15 shots on Canadiens goalie Mike Condon, who was pulled after two periods.“We controlled the puck in their end,” Brassard said of the second period. “We just capitalized on our chances. We had the puck pretty much the whole time.”J. T. Miller and Derek Stepan also scored for the Rangers, who are in second place in the Eastern Conference.Rangers goaltender Antti Raanta, playing in his first game at the Bell Centre, made 24 saves for his 10th win of the season.Lars Eller and Phillip Danault had goals for Montreal. Ben Scrivens made four saves in the third period in relief of Condon.“We’re in games — it’s just these N.H.L. teams are too good to not take advantage of turnovers,” Max Pacioretty, the Canadiens’ captain, said. “A guy like Kreider, he’s going to win every footrace that you give him.“Part of that is also knowing the league and who you’re out against. We just have to be a bit smarter.”AdvertisementThe Rangers took advantage of a young Canadiens team ravaged by injuries.Miller made Andrei Markov look silly on the game’s first goal, at 3:04 of the opening period. Miller dangled past Markov with a nifty toe drag and then beat Condon with a backhand for his 21st goal of the season.Montreal answered back midway through the period, with Eller firing a loose puck past Raanta at 12:26 to make the score 1-1 and give him his first point in eight games.After Brassard’s and Kreider’s goals, Danault got one back for the Canadiens at 15:38 of the second, but Stepan scored for the Rangers in the final minute of the period to leave the score 5-2.The Rangers took three consecutive tripping penalties to start the third period, but Montreal failed to capitalize on any of them.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.The Canadiens finished 0 for 6 with the man advantage.“For pretty much all those power plays, we had a lot of good looks,” Pacioretty said. “You have to want to be the guy who wants to put it in. We moved the puck nicely for most of them; we just have to put the puck in the net.”PITTSBURGH 7, DETROIT 2 Pittsburgh pounced on Detroit with four goals in the second period and added three more in the third, dealing the host Red Wings a loss that put them a step closer to potentially missing the playoffs for the first time since 1990.Phil Kessel had a goal and four assists, and Nick Bonino had a career-high five points for the Penguins. Penguins goalie Marc-Andre Fleury faced just four shots in the third period.Pittsburgh has won seven of eight, staying ahead of the Islanders for the third guaranteed playoff spot from the Metropolitan Division.BRUINS 3, MAPLE LEAFS 1 Zdeno Chara snapped a 20-game goal drought, and Boston ended a season-long five-game losing streak with a victory at Toronto.AdvertisementThe win created some much-needed space in the Eastern Conference playoff race for Boston, which is third in the Atlantic Division with 88 points and now 3 points ahead of Detroit.WILD 4, AVALANCHE 0 Zach Parise scored twice, Devan Dubnyk made 29 saves for his 19th N.H.L. shutout, and surging Minnesota beat Colorado in a pivotal game between two teams contending for the final Western Conference playoff spot. The visiting Wild won their fifth straight and moved to 5 points ahead of Colorado for eighth place in the playoff race.BLUES 4, CAPITALS 0 St. Louis picked up its fourth consecutive shutout, beating N.H.L.-leading Washington even though its starting goaltender was resting at home.Jake Allen, starting in place of Brian Elliott, made 32 saves as the visiting Blues won for the 10th time in 12 games to keep pace with the Dallas Stars atop the Central Division.The loss prevented Washington from clinching the Presidents’ Trophy, given to the team with the league’s best regular-season record.STARS 4, SHARKS 2 Mattias Janmark returned to the lineup from injury and posted his first career two-goal game, and Antti Niemi made 34 saves against his former team as Dallas beat host San Jose and remained in first place in the Central Division. Niemi, traded to Dallas in the off-season after five seasons with San Jose, got the win in his first start in two weeks.DUCKS 4, SENATORS 3 Rickard Rakell scored a power-play goal in overtime, and Anaheim, which trailed by 3-0 after two periods, rallied past host Ottawa.The Senators’ Mike Hoffman was awarded a penalty shot early in the third period but lost the puck and never challenged goaltender Craig Andersen. From that point on, it was all Anaheim.IN OTHER GAMES Jaromir Jagr had a goal and an assist, and the Florida Panthers took over first place in the Atlantic Division by beating the host Tampa Bay Lightning, 5-2. ... Shea Weber and James Neal each had a goal and an assist as the Nashville Predators beat the visiting Columbus Blue Jackets, 5-1.A version of this article appears in print on March 27, 2016, on Page SP10 of the New York edition with the headline: After Long Wait, Rangers Beat Canadiens.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.