By DAVID WALDSTEINMARCH 26, 2016
CHICAGO —  When Syracuse was slotted into the N.C.A.A. tournament as the No. 10 seed in the Midwest Region, there were many complaints that the Orange should never have been invited at all.The Orange had 13 losses, including five in their last six games, the final one a first-round knockout by Pittsburgh in the Atlantic Coast Conference tournament. The Orange also had a poor stretch early in the season, going 4-5 during Coach Jim Boeheim’s nine-game suspension for infractions related to the program.Yet, here is Syracuse (22-13), in another regional final, just one win from a fifth Final Four under Boeheim, and its second in four years.After a closely contested 63-60 win over 11th-seeded Gonzaga on Friday, Syracuse will face top-seeded Virginia in the regional final on Sunday. This will be Syracuse’s most difficult opponent since it lost to North Carolina during the A.C.C. regular season on Feb. 29.AdvertisementVirginia (29-7) is one of the country’s most balanced teams, and the Cavaliers beat Syracuse by 8 points in January. But even with such a formidable foe ahead, and even if many college basketball fans and analysts roll their eyes at the prospect of this Syracuse team’s advancing to the Final Four, the Orange players and coaches feel they are right where they should be.Advertisement“This team, we thought we could beat anyone on a given night, no matter who it was,” said Tyler Lydon, a freshman forward. “If we go out and give it our best shot, I think this team can beat anyone in the country.”Lydon, who was playing at New Hampton Prep in New Hampshire last season, is averaging 10.2 points per game, 6.3 rebounds and 1.7 blocks for the Orange.He had six blocks in 29 minutes against Gonzaga, including a clean, game-deciding redirect of Josh Perkins’s shot with two seconds left and Syracuse leading by a point. Lydon then caught the loose ball and hit both free throws after he was fouled.Lydon also did a creditable job defending the more experienced Domantas Sabonis, Gonzaga’s talented center.Some of the Syracuse players maintain that they came together as a cohesive unit at just the right time because of the adversity of losing their coach to suspension and dealing with all those late-season losses.“We’ve definitely been through a lot as a team,” Lydon said. “At the same time, it’s brought us all together as a family.”Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.Lydon is one of several gifted, if headstrong, players on a Syracuse team that is fighting for respect. Another is its leading scorer, Michael Gbinije, a 6-foot-7 swingman.Gbinije averages 17.8 points per game and has scored in double figures in all 35 games, endearing him to Boeheim, who said the Orange could not overcome a bad game from Gbinije on Sunday.Advertisement“Of all the players I’ve ever coached, he’s the most underrated player that I’ve ever coached,” Boeheim said.Perhaps the most interesting matchup on Sunday will feature Gbinije against Malcolm Brogdon, Virginia’s 6-5 senior guard. Brogdon was the A.C.C. player of the year and for a second time the A.C.C. defensive player of the year. One of those votes came from Boeheim, who worked with Brogdon with USA Basketball.“He’s just a really good basketball player who doesn’t say a lot,” Boeheim said. “I like those guys.”Boeheim sometimes says a lot. On Saturday he spoke for about 40 minutes about a wide range of issues, including his tryout with the Chicago Bulls in the 1960s. He said it was best he did not make the team because “I would have been a very below-average N.B.A. player.”Had Boeheim made that team, he might never have coached Syracuse. This is his 40th season, and a unique one. The nine games he missed because of the suspension — he was held responsible by the N.C.A.A. for the program’s infractions, although he was ruled not to have been aware of them — were the first games he missed since sitting out three games in 2001 after undergoing surgery.Boeheim, 71, returned to the Carrier Dome on Jan. 9 against North Carolina, receiving a standing ovation from the crowd and a hug from Roy Williams, the Tar Heels’ coach.Boeheim does not apologize for Syracuse’s recent success. Despite criticism of the 13 losses, Boeheim noted that Syracuse had still gone out in the tournament and beaten Dayton, a No. 7 seed, Middle Tennessee, which upset Michigan State in the first round before facing Syracuse, and Gonzaga.“We thought Dayton was good, and Dayton was good until we beat them; then they weren’t good anymore,” Boeheim said. “Then everybody thought Middle Tennessee was good until we beat them, and then they weren’t good anymore. And I guess that’s what everyone is saying today about Gonzaga, that they weren’t that good.”A version of this article appears in print on March 27, 2016, on Page SP3 of the New York edition with the headline: Syracuse Strikes, Making No Apologies .  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.