By THE ASSOCIATED PRESSMARCH 27, 2016
Alexis Peterson scored a season-high 29 points, Brianna Butler hit three consecutive 3-pointers early in the fourth quarter to break open the game, and Syracuse advanced to its first women’s Final Four with an 89-67 victory over Tennessee on Sunday in the Sioux Falls Regional final in South Dakota.The fourth-seeded Orange (29-7) will play No. 7 seed Washington in a national semifinal next Sunday in Indianapolis.Cornelia Fondren made all six of her shots and finished with 13 points to help Syracuse follow its Friday upset of top-seeded South Carolina with the Orange’s 15th victory in 16 games.“We did what we had to do,” Syracuse Coach Quentin Hillsman said. “We knew we had to control the paint, and we did a good job of that. We knew we had to make 3s, and to be 14 for 30 behind the arc is really knocking down shots. That was the key to the game.”AdvertisementDiamond DeShields scored 20 points and had 10 rebounds to lead the Lady Vols (22-14) in a loss that finished their surprise N.C.A.A. run after a 13-loss regular season that was the worst in the program’s history.AdvertisementPeterson, who had a season-high 26 points against the Gamecocks, has scored 20 or more in each of the Orange’s four tournament games. She collapsed at midcourt in tears of joy after the final buzzer as teammates swarmed her, and she flashed a No. 1 sign as she embraced Brittney Sykes.Butler, the N.C.A.A. active leader in career field goals, made six 3-pointers for the third time this season and scored 18 points.Butler’s back-to-back 3-pointers gave the Orange a double-digit lead after the Lady Vols pulled to a 63-59 deficit early in the fourth quarter. Syracuse was up by 12 points after a jumper by Peterson that followed DeShields’s offensive foul, and the lead grew to 23.Syracuse attacked Tennessee’s two-three zone however it pleased. With Butler’s 3-point touch always a threat, Peterson and Fondren sliced through for layups on three straight possessions in the third quarter, and Peterson hit a jumper from the corner on the next for a 51-41 lead.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.DeShields temporarily kept the Lady Vols in range, scoring 11 points during the first 6 minutes 42 seconds of the third quarter and forcing Syracuse to call a timeout after hitting two straight 3-pointers to pull her team to 54-51 behind. Maggie Morrison’s 3-pointer and another snaking layup by Fondren pushed Syracuse’s lead back to 63-53.Mercedes Russell was limited to five shots and finished with 7 points. The Lady Vols’ other post, Bashaara Graves, was 3 for 8 for 11 points.Tennessee was trying to reach its 19th Final Four and its first under its fourth-year coach, Holly Warlick. The Lady Vols have not made it to the national semifinals since 2008.WASHINGTON 85, STANFORD 76 Kelsey Plum scored 26 points, and Chantel Osahor had 24 points and 18 rebounds as Washington defeated Stanford in the Lexington Regional final to earn its first women’s basketball Final Four appearance. The seventh-seeded Huskies (26-10) scored the game’s first 12 points and stayed ahead the rest of the way.Advertisement“We’re not done yet,” Washington Coach Mike Neighbors said. “ ‘What’s Next?’ has been our motto. It’s going to continue to be all the way through Indy.”Stanford, the No. 4 seed, was seeking its 13th Final Four appearance over all, and seventh in the last nine years.Lili Thompson scored 19 points for Stanford (27-8). Erica McCall added 17 points — all in the second half — and 15 rebounds. Thompson shot 5 of 10 and scored 13 points in the first half, but her Stanford teammates were a combined 5 of 24 for 13 points.A version of this article appears in print on March 28, 2016, on Page D3 of the New York edition with the headline: Orange Halt Lady Vols’ Run to Reach Final Four.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.