AdvertisementSupported byTigers 6, Yankees 1By Zach SchonbrunFor all his accomplishments, including the 2011 Most Valuable Player Award, Detroit Tigers pitcher Justin Verlander had never won a start at the new Yankee Stadium. In seven previous attempts, Verlander had compiled a 4.84 E.R.A., more than a full run above his 12-year career average.But Verlander was dominant on Saturday night, reviving the form that had once made him one of the most fearsome pitchers in the game, Bronx doldrums notwithstanding. Although no longer testing triple digits on the radar gun, Verlander, like the Yankees’ C. C. Sabathia a night earlier, used more deception and guile than overpowering stuff to flummox the Yankees in a 6-1 win at the Stadium.Verlander has not exactly devolved into a soft-tosser (he still touched 95 miles per hour with regularity), but he mixed his pitches well to stifle the Yankees’ offense, which had come in averaging 5.7 runs over the past nine games and had hit .316 since June 3. The loss ended a five-game winning streak that had moved the Yankees over .500 for the first time since April 13, when they were 4-3.“What makes the difference is being able to execute pitches,” outfielder Carlos Beltran said of Verlander. “He still has 96 in the tank, but right now, he feels he can save it for certain opportunities.”Yankees Manager Joe Girardi said he was not surprised that Verlander, a former Cy Young Award winner, had found new ways to win.“He mixes his pitches extremely well,” Girardi said. “He’s got four pitches to work with. He changes eye level with his fastball, he goes in and out with his fastball.“Yeah, he’s lost a few miles off his fastball, but he’s still really got good stuff.”Verlander (6-5) said he had struggled with the humidity but was pleased with the effectiveness of his curveball late in the game.“Once you start getting second, third, fourth time through the lineup, if you’re attacking guys the exact same way every time, they’ll make adjustments in a hurry,” he said.The Tigers (31-30) scored first with a solo home run by Nick Castellanos in the second inning. It was the first home run allowed by Masahiro Tanaka on an 0-2 pitch in his career.In the fifth inning, Tanaka was ambushed on a first-pitch fastball that Ian Kinsler (2 for 4 with five R.B.I.) hooked around the foul pole in left for his 12th homer of the season. The three-run blast put the Tigers ahead, 4-1, and ended Tanaka’s streak of holding opponents to under two runs at four straight starts.Tanaka was pitching on regular four-day rest for the third consecutive start, something he had never done in the majors. Historically, Tanaka’s E.R.A. was 3.24 on four days’ rest compared with 2.92 on five.Tanaka (3-2) disregarded the notion that rest was a factor in his second loss in three outings.“Location with some of my pitches went where it should not have gone,” he said through an interpreter. “And I got hurt by that.”The Yankees’ lone run arrived with some controversy in the third inning. With one out, Chase Headley poked a fly ball toward the left-field corner, and it ricocheted off the wall for a triple. A lengthy review appeared to show the ball glancing off the foul pole, but instead of calling it a home run, the umpires upheld the call on the field, prompting Girardi to storm out of the dugout in protest.Headley appeared dumbfounded by the decision, but he would not linger on the base for long. The next batter, Rob Refsnyder, singled up the middle on the first pitch to tie the game, 1-1.That was Verlander’s only blemish. He went six and two-thirds innings and allowed five hits. He has a 2.47 E.R.A. in his last five starts with four wins — including one, finally, at this stadium.“I know that there were a few starts that I had here and I did pitch well and didn’t get the win,” Verlander said. “I also had a few clunkers. So it was nice to pitch well today.”Advertisement