By PAT BORZIJUNE 11, 2016
MILWAUKEE — Expectations often drop when a team dips into its bullpen for a spot starter, as the Mets did with Logan Verrett on Saturday. Expectations fall further on a steamy afternoon when the ball is jumping, as it did at Miller Park, where the Mets and the Milwaukee Brewers combined for five home runs in the first five innings and seven in all.Verrett surrendered three homers in four innings, the last by Wily Peralta, the opposing pitcher, whose homer was his first in the major leagues. Verrett turned over a three-run deficit to reliever Hansel Robles, and the run-starved Mets never caught up, wasting Curtis Granderson’s three hits while losing to the Brewers for the first time in six games this season, 7-4.“All three of those home runs were right down the middle,” Verrett said. “It’s tough for them not to barrel them up.”The Mets also lost second baseman Neil Walker with what the club described as lower-back tightness. Walker, making his first start since he took a one-hop grounder off his chest Thursday, said he felt something when he checked his swing in the first inning. Two innings later, he came off the field, threw his glove onto the bench and headed for the clubhouse. Kelly Johnson replaced him in the fourth.AdvertisementWalker played down the injury.“I’ve had similar issues in the past,” he said. “From my experience, it takes a couple of days.”AdvertisementBut Manager Terry Collins said any lower-back trouble worried him, especially after seeing David Wright and Lucas Duda deal with significant back problems.“We didn’t have any concerns about Lucas Duda, and he ended up with a broken back,” Collins said. “Any time you talk about the lower back, I think it’s a concern to me.”Granderson singled, tripled and homered in his first three times up before grounding out in the eighth. His homer, in the fifth, trimmed the Brewers’ lead to 5-3, but the Mets did not score again until the ninth. Ryan Braun hit two of Milwaukee’s five home runs.At Miller Park, the ball generally carries well when the retractable roof is open in hot weather. The conditions were perfect for it Saturday — 88 degrees at first pitch.Get the big sports news, highlights and analysis from Times journalists, with distinctive takes on games and some behind-the-scenes surprises, delivered to your inbox every week.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.Mets shortstop Asdrubal Cabrera started the barrage in the second with a two-run homer on the first pitch after he fouled a ball off his right leg. Cabrera batted the rest of the game with a protective guard on the leg.Verrett, making his fourth spot start of the season, struggled to find the plate. He walked four, a season high, and threw 87 pitches over four innings, with 49 strikes.“I wasn’t commanding the zone as well as I thought I normally do, or as well as I can,” Verrett said. “The four walks, I don’t feel that’s like me, either.”AdvertisementChris Carter homered to left leading off the bottom of the second, into a section filled with orange-clad members of the 7 Line Army, a Mets fan group in town on an organized trip. The ball landed back on the field, and Braun tossed it to a fan in a Mets road jersey.The former Met Kirk Nieuwenhuis, a .350 career hitter at Miller Park entering the day, followed with a double, stole third and scored the tying run on a double play.Braun made it 3-2 Milwaukee with a home run to dead center in the third. An inning later, Peralta drove his first career homer to left-center with a runner on. Verrett twisted in disgust at the moment of contact, and Peralta leisurely circled the bases.“Eighty pitches in four innings? That’s a lot,” Collins said. “If you give up homers, you give up homers. But he’s too much of a strike thrower.”Collins said the Mets’ pitching coach, Dan Warthen, had talked to Verrett “about issues that have to get corrected because he has to throw all his pitches for strikes.”Scooter Gennett and Braun hit back-to-back homers in the seventh off the left-hander Antonio Bastardo. The home run by Gennett, a second baseman, was just the second of his career against a left-hander; he has 24 against righties.“This is a team that can do it, especially in this ballpark,” Granderson said. “I watched their batting practice a couple of days ago. Carter and Braun definitely aren’t unfamiliar with the long ball. That’s definitely part of it, especially when you got guys who are strong and have the ability to put themselves in plus counts.”INSIDE PITCHJIM HENDERSON, who left Friday night’s game, had the torn nail on his right middle finger repaired at a nearby nail salon. Henderson had a similar problem while pitching for the Brewers from 2012 to 2014 and returned to the same salon that had fixed it the previous time. … JEURYS FAMILIA credited a slight change in the position of his front foot, suggested by DAN WARTHEN, for improving his control. Familia retired all six batters he faced Thursday and Friday, with four strikeouts.A version of this article appears in print on June 12, 2016, on Page SP2 of the New York edition with the headline: A Day for the Hitters, Even for a Pitcher, Leaves the Mets Feeling Scorched.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.