AdvertisementSupported byExtra BasesBy Tyler KepnerClint Hurdle keeps a jar of chocolate-covered almonds on his desk at PNC Park. He does not eat them anymore, he said, but visitors can help themselves. On the side of the jar is written one word: “Joy.”“I put it in here for people that want a little joy,” Hurdle said last week. “It’s amazing how quick they get crushed.”As manager of the Pittsburgh Pirates, Hurdle has presided over the kind of joy that had disappeared from his franchise for decades. From 2013 to 2015 — a stretch that followed a streak of 20 losing seasons — the Pirates won 280 games, behind only the St. Louis Cardinals.But they did not win a playoff series in that time, eliminated each October with a complete game by another team’s ace. The Cardinals’ Adam Wainwright won the decisive fifth game of a 2013 division series, the San Francisco Giants’ Madison Bumgarner fired a shutout in the 2014 National League wild-card game, and the Chicago Cubs’ Jake Arrieta did the same last October.Now the Cubs are threatening to run away with the N.L. Central. If they do, the best the Pirates can hope for is another wild-card date to start the postseason. Hurdle, who has a saying for every occasion, has told his players not to worry about the standings.“We’ve got a saying here: If you’ve got one foot in yesterday and one foot in tomorrow, you’re taking a you-know-what on today,” Hurdle said. “Today’s the only thing we have control over. We don’t have control of the Cubs, the Cardinals, the Reds, the Brewers, the Mets — and we’ve played enough together to understand that standings change, teams change, and the season’s going to challenge everybody at different times.”This season, the Pirates’ challenge has been pitching. Entering their game Saturday against St. Louis, they had a 4.22 earned run average, which ranked 19th in the majors. Last year, their 3.21 mark ranked second, trailing only the Cardinals.After their ace, Gerrit Cole — who left Friday’s start with right triceps tightness — the Pirates’ rotation has been mostly mediocre. They promoted their top prospect, Jameson Taillon, for a spot start against the Mets on Wednesday, but they quickly returned him to the minors. General Manager Neal Huntington probably needs to add a top starter in a trade this summer.The Pirates, who visit the Mets for a three-game series starting Tuesday, are always careful with finances. They have given modest contract extensions this season to outfielder Gregory Polanco (five years, $35 million) and catcher Francisco Cervelli (three years, $31 million), and their opening-day payroll (about $100 million) was the highest in team history. Would they add money at the deadline?“Neal has shown a great ability to be opportunistic,” said Bob Nutting, the principal owner. “Sometimes that’s been early, sometimes that’s been late. I don’t want to prejudge what opportunities might pop up, but we’ve always tried to be opportunistic to put the very best team that we can on the field.”Last winter, that meant acquiring experienced players mostly coming off down seasons. For about $15 million in 2016 salaries, they signed David Freese, John Jaso and Matt Joyce for the offense and Neftali Feliz and Juan Nicasio for the pitching staff. All have helped, and younger players like Polanco and Starling Marte have continued to improve.“Some of the other guys that were kind of raw before, they’ve learned the game and just become better baseball players,” said Chris Stewart, the veteran backup catcher, who is likely to see more playing time now that Cervelli is on the disabled list with a broken left hand. “Polanco’s having an incredible year so far, our bench guys are huge, and then we’ve got Kang back and he’s doing what he’s capable of doing. I just think we’re really deep.”Third baseman Jung Ho Kang, who missed the wild-card game last season with a broken leg, embodies the offense: He reaches base a lot and has decent, but not standout, power. The Pirates have a whole team of such players, entering play on Saturday with a .351 on-base percentage, which ranked second in the majors to the Boston Red Sox, and 4.85 runs per game, which ranked sixth.“Especially the last couple of years I was a Cardinal, playing these guys when they had this core coming up, you understood when they get in that box, it’s go time,” said Freese, who played in St. Louis from 2009 to 2013. “This group does not give at-bats away, and that’s huge.”It all amounted to a 32-29 record entering Saturday: squarely in the wild-card race, but far behind the rampaging Cubs. The hope in Pittsburgh is that the offense (and defense) will stay strong, the pitching will improve and the Pirates will get another chance at elusive October success. They are trying to prepare as they go.“These guys have found that model for winning baseball — for October baseball — and it starts with playing that baseball in April,” Hurdle said.“That’s one thing we joke about: There’s no such thing as October baseball. Why would you go to another level in October? If you’ve got that level, why wouldn’t you go to it in April? What we try to do is embrace that mind-set all the time.“We’ve got guys that have bought into it, because we haven’t gotten the ultimate goal. We’ve made progress; we’ve shared some good things. They want more.”Cal Quantrill has the same last name as his father, throws from the same side and competes with the same ferocity.“I wasn’t very good, but I was crazy enough to win and compete, and Cal has that,” said Paul Quantrill, a right-hander who pitched for seven teams. “He’s a ‘he’ll-break-your-ribs-to-win-if-he-has-to’ kind of guy. But stuff-wise, it’s not really close.”Paul pitched 14 years in the majors, from 1992 to 2005, with little besides a sinker. He could throw a changeup, but never with enough conviction for the pitch to be very useful. So when Paul played catch with Cal, starting around age 8 or 9, he insisted that every third or fourth throw be a changeup. If Cal could get the feel for a changeup — if he could really trust it and appreciate it — Paul believed that his son could go far.The lessons paid off Thursday when the San Diego Padres chose Cal Quantrill with the eighth overall pick in the draft. Cal was the freshman of the year in the Pacific-12 Conference for Stanford in 2014, but he had Tommy John surgery in March 2015 and did not pitch for the Cardinal this season.Even so, Paul said, he had never seen Cal look better than he did in his recent bullpen sessions. Other Tommy John patients have been first-round picks in recent years — like Jeff Hoffman, chosen ninth over all by the Toronto Blue Jays in 2014 and traded to the Colorado Rockies in the Troy Tulowitzki deal last summer — so Cal’s stock did not drop far.“If we want to ban all Tommy John guys, we’d have to cut the league in half,” Paul Quantrill said. “These guys are so strong and throw so hard, they’re going to blow up their arms. It certainly didn’t help Cal, but he worked as hard as I’ve ever seen him work to come back. He did it the right way.”Paul, now a special assistant with the Blue Jays, was a sixth-round draft choice by Boston in 1989. There was much more hype for Cal’s draft night, of course, but the family declined an invitation to be filmed when his name was called. They had a quiet night in a hotel, watching the draft together.“Everybody thinks they know what the deal is, who’s taking who, but when it’s your boy and it’s his future, you’re on the edge,” Paul Quantrill said. “I rarely admit to being stressed, because I don’t get stressed; I didn’t when I played ball. But I was pretty stressed.”It all worked out, though, and the Quantrills were looking forward to graduation ceremonies this weekend. Cal took a heavy course load while injured and is just an online course away from formally completing his degree in three years. Paul said he was prouder of that than anything else but could take no credit.“He gets that from his mom,” he said.The Chicago White Sox designated Jimmy Rollins for assignment Friday when they promoted Tim Anderson, their top shortstop prospect. Rollins, 37, hit .221 with two homers and five steals in 41 games with the White Sox.If Rollins’s career is over, he will make an interesting Hall of Fame case in a few years. He won a Most Valuable Player Award in 2007 and is the career hits leader for the Philadelphia Phillies, a franchise that started in 1883. He also won four Gold Gloves while playing a premium position and helped the Phillies win a championship.Rollins’s low ranking in advanced metrics (he has 46 career wins above replacement, the same as Javier Vazquez and Willie Wilson, according to Baseball-Reference.com) could hurt him with voters. But few players packaged hits and stolen bases as well as Rollins, especially for his position.Only 14 others have had as many hits (2,455) and steals (470) as Rollins, and 11 are in the Hall of Fame. The others are Tim Raines, who it seems very likely will be elected in January; Barry Bonds, whose ties to steroids have kept him out; and Ichiro Suzuki, who is still active with the Miami Marlins.Rollins, whose first full season in the majors was in 2001, said this spring that he might have had many more steals had baseball been played the way it was in the prime of Rickey Henderson, his role model growing up in Oakland. With the rise of analytics, Rollins said, front offices do not want to risk giving away outs.“When I came in, it was ‘You’re fast, get to second,’ ” Rollins said. “It isn’t necessarily that way anymore.”Advertisement