By GEORGE VECSEYJUNE 10, 2016
This article originally appeared in The New York Times on July 21, 1996.ATLANTA— Muhammad Ali floats above the Summer Games, no longer an elusive butterfly but a great glowing icon as large as a spaceship. He casts his light on every athlete, every spectator, every volunteer, all the people who walk these humid streets with just a little more zip in their step, now that they have seen Ali.The whole world gasped in shock early yesterday when Ali suddenly materialized on that platform at the far end of Olympic Stadium, the perfect choice to light the caldron.Who would have thought of Ali? Who would have predicted he could stand in front of the world, his body slowed by Parkinson’s syndrome, and hold a flaming torch and transfer searing fire to a contraption that would raise the fire to the caldron?Putting the old rascal-prophet on the official pedestal raised the tempo of these 17 days. Let the Games begin, indeed. Yesterday we had glorious events scattered all over this city. Energized by the vision of Ali — hey, if Ali can hold that flame without toasting himself to a crisp, I can get up on three hours’ sleep — I went to the first gold medal event, in shooting, and saw an amazing reversal, a Polish woman beating a German woman on the last shot.AdvertisementMy choice meant I missed the Hungarians beating the Russians in water polo, shades of 1956. A Belgian swimmer set a world record — and in a trial, no less. A hapless judo athlete from the other Georgia went to the wrong site and missed the official weigh-in and was disqualified. He should have blamed the horrendous transportation problems choking this Olympic city.The people from the Atlanta organizing committee can be flagellated for the clogged traffic and the rampant greed and tackiness of these Games, but Billy Payne and his colleagues must be praised for their innate understanding that Muhammad Ali, the former Cassius Clay, was the perfect symbol for the ceremony.Everybody knew the theme of these Games was “look how far we’ve come,” to justify this event being given to striving Atlanta. The ceremony’s creators paid careful, artistic attention to the safe black poets and singers and athletes and martyrs of the South.Reviving the Rev. Dr. Martin Luther King’s “I Have a Dream” speech was as predictable as it was proper. His image makes International Olympic Committee members feel good about choosing Atlanta. Who is to say that an elderly Dr. King would not have been outside the stadium with a bullhorn, goading the smug fat cats of Atlanta about housing and jobs?Ali was the shocker, the wild card. When people speculated who would be the final holder of the flame, few mentioned Ali because they knew he was not healthy.AdvertisementNobody wanted Ali to be remembered as the weakened legend who dropped the Olympic torch in front of billions of people around the world. Ali was 100 feet tall, even without his image on the message board. We could all see him with our naked eye, his mystical half smile lighting up the steamy night. Hang on to the torch, Ali. That’s what we said in my section.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.But Ali has always been full of surprises. He could float like a butterfly and sting like a bee, could charm the world as a beautiful youth when he won the gold at the Summer Games of 1960, he could spout doggerel and he could beat bad Sonny Liston, could be cruel to opponents, could defy the draft board, could come back and regain his heavyweight championship.Somewhere along the line, even to most of white America, Ali stopped being a frightening symbol of a “foreign” religion and a menacing black man and a threat to the welfare of his homeland, and he became a fragile legend, damaged by the punches of his brutal sport, unable to rouse the wit and flash of his youth.Putting him on that platform was a stroke of genius that transformed a very nice ceremony into a celebration, a block party. I was sitting with a black male colleague and a white female colleague, and when we saw Ali shining on that platform, we exchanged high-fives at the audacious perfection of it. Ali was at the Games. Ali was on the hill. Raise the flame. Float like a butterfly, sting like a bee, all of us.A version of this article appears in print on June 11, 2016, on Page F14 of the New York edition with the headline: Ambassador Ali.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.