By DAVE ANDERSONJUNE 10, 2016
This article originally appeared in The New York Times on Dec. 17, 1979.At the time, the Supreme Court’s decision appeared to be so unanimous, so harmonious, so decisive. That morning, Muhammad Ali, driving through the South Side of Chicago, parked his green-and-white Lincoln Mark III and went into a neighborhood store for a glass of freshly squeezed orange juice. A moment after Ali strolled out, flipping an orange in the air, the store owner hurried after him.“I just heard on the radio,” the store owner said, “the Supreme Court said you’re free, an 8-0 vote.”Two hours later, in a corner of a motel lobby, Ali quietly said, “I’m not going to celebrate. I’ve already said a long prayer to Allah, that’s my celebration.” And later he thanked the “Supreme Court for recognizing the sincerity of the religious teachings that I’ve accepted.” For recognizing it so unanimously, so harmoniously, so decisively, it appeared. But two months earlier, on April 23, 1971, according to “The Brethren,” a book by Bob Woodward and Scott Armstrong, the Supreme Court had decided by a vote of 5 to 3 that Ali was not a conscientious objector, that he should serve the five-year prison term to which he had been sentenced in 1967 for draft evasion. After the preliminary vote, Chief Justice Warren Burger assigned the esteemed Justice John M. Harlan to write the majority opinion. But according to the book, a Supreme Court clerk saved Ali from jail, and as it developed, enabled Ali to pursue his boxing career for the remainder of the decade.In the preliminary vote, the book reports, the five Justices who had voted to uphold Ali’s conviction were Burger, Harlan, Hugo Black, Byron White and Harry Blackmun. Those who disagreed were William O. Douglas, William J. Brennan and Potter Stewart. The ninth, Justice Thurgood Marshall, had disqualified himself because he had been the Justice Department’s Solicitor General when Ali’s case originated.AdvertisementThe five Justices had agreed with the new Solicitor General, Erwin Griswold, that Ali, who had been stripped of the title even before his conviction, was not really a conscientious objector. While the boxer had been quoted as saying he “had nothing against them Viet Congs,” he acknowledged that he would willingly participate in a “holy war” if Muslims were involved.As the authors tell it, one of Justice Harlan’s clerks began working on a draft of the majority opinion, and a second clerk persuaded him to reconsider Ali’s opposition to war. In the book, neither of the clerks is named. But the second clerk, according to the authors, had been influenced by Alex Haley’s “Autobiography of Malcolm X” and the Black Muslim text, “Message to the Black Man.” Soon the first clerk agreed that Ali was opposed to all wars, that his willingness to participate in a holy war was irrelevant to his conviction.At first, the book states, Justice Harlan, appointed to the Supreme Court by President Eisenhower in 1954, did not sympathize with the clerk’s view. But after studying the background material, he changed his mind. To the shock of the other Justices, Justice Harlan suggested that Ali’s conviction be reversed because the Justice Department had misrepresented the Black Muslim doctrine. But a 4-to-4 vote would still send Ali to prison.AdvertisementJustice Stewart, according to the book, was particularly disturbed. He knew that no opinion would accompany a 4-to-4 vote, that Ali would never know why his conviction had been upheld. Justice Stewart proposed to set Ali free, citing the Justice Department’s technical error. By not establishing a precedent, the decision would not make all Black Muslims eligible to be conscientious objectors. All except Chief Justice Burger accepted Justice Stewart’s alternative. Burger, according to the authors, relented because he feared accusations as a racist if he dissented.In an unsigned opinion announced on June 28, 1971, the Supreme Court cleared Ali by a vote of 8 to 0, with Justice Marshall abstaining.Two months later, Justice Harlan was hospitalized with cancer. Nearly blind, he resigned on Sept. 23 after 16 terms and died in December that year. Educated at Princeton and Oxford, he had law in his blood. His grandfather, named for the fourth Chief Justice of the United States, John Marshall, had been a Supreme Court Justice for 34 years. He wore his grandfather’s gold watch chain across the vests of the dark conservative suits that he ordered from a London tailor. From a wealthy family, he once had been a Wall Street lawyer. After his appointment to the Supreme Court when Earl Warren was the Chief Justice, he was known as its “conservative conscience,” but at the suggestion of a law clerk, Justice Harlan set in motion the liberation of Muhammad Ali, sport’s most celebrated liberal.After a three-and-a-half-year exile, Ali had been allowed to return to boxing in 1970 when he stopped both Jerry Quarry and Oscar Bonavena before losing a unanimous 15-round decision to Joe Frazier at Madison Square Garden in the memorable March 8, 1971, confrontation of two unbeaten heavyweights, each with a claim to the title.When the Supreme Court cleared him nearly four months later, Ali was able to continue as a boxer instead of serving the five-year prison term that would have jeopardized his career. In 1974 he dethroned George Foreman in Zaire with an eighth-round knockout. In 1978 he regained the title for an unprecedented third time from Leon Spinks in New Orleans with a unanimous 15-round decision.And all because a law clerk in the Supreme Court believed in Ali’s sincerity.A version of this article appears in print on June 11, 2016, on Page F7 of the New York edition with the headline: How a Clerk Spared Ali From Prison.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.