By ZACH SCHONBRUNNOV. 13, 2016
EAST RUTHERFORD, N.J. — The heels of the Jets’ linemen skimmed along their goal line. They had been pushed as far back as they could go.The offense had 99 gaping yards to go. There would be no busting through their opponent’s unbending defensive front; running back Matt Forte had tried that, with no luck. The only other option was throwing the ball over it.The Jets had to face reality: There was no going back, literally or figuratively.They had turned the offense over to a new quarterback, Bryce Petty, in a surprising move announced not long before kickoff. Now it was Petty, not Ryan Fitzpatrick, pinned against the goal line in the first quarter of Sunday’s game at MetLife Stadium against the Los Angeles Rams.It was Petty, not Geno Smith, whom the fans had wanted to see in action. It was Petty, not Christian Hackenberg, who was most ready to play now.AdvertisementAnd as a 52-yard spiral soared out of the end zone, miraculously settling into Robby Anderson’s arms down the sideline, Petty seemed to christen a new era for the Jets — one that, in that moment, appeared as sanguine as anything for the franchise.AdvertisementUltimately, though, as the defenses stiffened and the ground-and-pound game took over and deadlocked two woeful offenses, the Petty Era looked aesthetically much like so many eras that had come before it. The punters were busy. The game moved as fast as pond water. And the Jets lost, 9-6.At 3-7, the Jets are 99 yards and a Hail Mary from the playoffs. Though they entered their bye week without much outward defeatism, peppering their postgame remarks with platitudes involving words like “fight” and “pride” and “together,” it was easy to glimpse the frustration simmering beneath the surface.“Fourteen-hour days, to come out here and not make the playoffs?” Sheldon Richardson said. “Not my style. Not at all.”The reviews were positive for Petty, a second-year quarterback making his first career start, who completed 19 of 32 passes for 163 yards with a touchdown and an interception. He had been handed the opportunity after it was determined late Saturday that the sprained medial collateral ligament in Fitzpatrick’s left knee had not healed enough for him to play.As capable as Petty looked at times, displaying a strong arm and a gunslinger’s ease around the pocket, there was shakiness there, too. He is new at this. Wide receiver Brandon Marshall said he had not wanted to say anything in the huddle for fear of breaking Petty’s concentration.This was not the cool, droll Fitzpatrick, the 12-year veteran who still wants to start. Speaking to reporters after a game in which he did not play, Fitzpatrick said that he was healthy enough to have been the backup in an emergency if something had happened to Petty.“I’m a competitor,” Fitzpatrick said. “I always want to be out there.”Jets Coach Todd Bowles, who insisted last week that Fitzpatrick would remain the team’s starter if he were healthy enough to play, was not definitive after Sunday’s game.Advertisement“We will evaluate everything next week,” Bowles said. “I’m not naming anybody.”But on Petty, Bowles was complimentary.“He made some good throws,” Bowles said. “He’s got some growing pains. Just being out there for the first time, from a composure standpoint, he was fine. He just has to clean up a few things.”The highlight (and the list of candidates was not lengthy) was the 52-yard pass to Anderson from the end zone. That eventually set up one of the most exciting plays of the Jets’ season: a hook-and-lateral, with Petty firing the ball to Brandon Marshall, who tossed it back to Bilal Powell on his way around the left edge for a 4-yard score. (Nick Folk missed the extra-point attempt.)Get the big sports news, highlights and analysis from Times journalists, with distinctive takes on games and some behind-the-scenes surprises, delivered to your inbox every week.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.“When I got that number in my headphones and called it out, I started laughing,” Petty said. “We’ve practiced it a couple weeks now, but you have to have that guy to say, ‘All right, let’s do it.’”That score, the game’s lone touchdown, was uplifting for Jets fans, who had cheered loudly for Petty when he came onto the field. But they also booed other plays called by the offensive coordinator Chan Gailey, who ordered a run on a third-and-10 at the Jets’ 38-yard-line late in the second quarter, taking the ball out of the hands of the team’s new centerpiece.That Petty’s first scoring drive had to go 99 yards was fitting: He has been known for his patience. He had to wait three years to earn the starting job at Baylor, where he became a Heisman Trophy contender. He was taken by the Jets in the fourth round of last year’s draft but was considered a project — a talented athlete who benefited from a gimmicky collegiate system with about as many parallels to the N.F.L. as modern dance.So Petty grabbed a clipboard. He has waited two seasons for an opportunity to show the Jets what he could do.“This is hopefully the beginning of a long career for me,” Petty said. “I learned a lot, and I’m going to be able to pull a lot from this.”AdvertisementThe game was tied, 6-6, entering the fourth quarter, before the Rams’ Greg Zuerlein kicked his third field goal of the day, a 34-yarder. Petty and the Jets took over with 2 minutes 55 seconds left and a chance to win. Instead, one of his passes was intercepted by linebacker Alec Ogletree.“I think I forced it a little bit,” Petty said.Growing pains, as Bowles said. The Jets must decide if they are willing to put up with such discomfort.They have two weeks to determine which direction they are headed.A version of this article appears in print on November 14, 2016, on Page D3 of the New York edition with the headline: New Starter Leads 99-Yard Drive, but Jets Have a Ways to Go.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.