By THE ASSOCIATED PRESSNOV. 13, 2016
Dawn Coe-Jones, a Canadian Golf Hall of Famer who won three times on the L.P.G.A. Tour, died on Saturday in a hospice near her home in Tampa, Fla. She was 56.Her death was confirmed by Gail Graham, a fellow former Canadian L.P.G.A. Tour player. In March, Coe-Jones had been found to have bone cancer that required full knee and partial tibia replacement surgery.Coe-Jones played on the L.P.G.A. Tour from 1984 to 2008. She won more than $3.3 million and had 44 career top-10 finishes. She was the first Canadian woman to win more than $1 million as a pro golfer, the Canadian Broadcasting Corporation reported.She won the 1983 Canadian Women’s Amateur and starred at Lamar University in Beaumont, Tex. She won the L.P.G.A. Tour’s 1992 Women’s Kemper Open, the 1994 Palm Beach Classic and the 1995 Tournament of Champions.AdvertisementCoe-Jones was born on Oct. 19, 1960, in Campbell River, British Columbia. As a teenager she worked at a golf course as a groundskeeper.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.“I drove an old Ford tractor, cutting grass and raking bunkers by hand,” she recalled in an interview with Golf Canada magazine.She was an all-American golfer at Lamar, and she graduated with a degree in elementary education.Survivors include her husband, James Edward Jones; a son, Jimmy; and two brothers, Mark and John Coe.AdvertisementShe was inducted into the Canadian Golf Hall of Fame in 2003.“I was totally caught off guard,” Coe-Jones said at the time. “In fact, I had to make sure someone wasn’t playing a trick on me. I am just thrilled and proud to be included in such good company.”A version of this article appears in print on November 14, 2016, on Page B8 of the New York edition with the headline: Dawn Coe-Jones, Canadian Golf Hall of Famer, 56.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.