By HARVEY ARATONNOV. 13, 2016
STORRS, Conn. — Two of the most successful coaches in basketball history had admired each other only from afar, from across the amateur/professional and gender divides. They decided to do something about it.Geno Auriemma had long been intrigued by how Gregg Popovich turned unsexy San Antonio into an enduring N.B.A. power, as Auriemma had done with a once-downtrodden women’s college program in rural Storrs.And Popovich had kept an eye on the Connecticut dynasty, noting that Auriemma’s acerbic communication skills reminded him of his own, as did the Huskies’ “consistent demand of executing fundamentals.”“Obviously, Pop is a great coach, a great leader, an incredibly bright guy who challenges his guys in different ways,” Auriemma said.AdvertisementOf Auriemma’s program, Popovich said, “They’ve won so much, it’s like a fairy tale.”Auriemma, whose 2006 autobiography was titled “Geno: In Pursuit of Perfection,” has claimed six of a record 11 N.C.A.A. championships in undefeated seasons. His team has won the last four national titles and 122 of 123 games, including the last 75.AdvertisementPerfection, or near perfection, has become a virtual state of Connecticut grace. So what does a coach with such a remarkable record dare chase next?Auriemma opted recently for the pursuit of additional ideas.After meeting Popovich for the first time at a U.S.A. Basketball event in Las Vegas last year, and being invited to visit deep in the heart of Texas, Auriemma dropped in on the five-time champion Spurs last month during training camp.“I think the best time to go looking at the different ways people are successful are when you don’t have to change, when you’re most successful,” Auriemma said on the eve of his 32nd season in Storrs, where, much as in San Antonio, players have consistently put the maximizing of opportunity ahead of personal glory.Several weeks after completing a second blemish-free run to an Olympic gold medal, Auriemma spent three days with Popovich and returned to say, “As it turns out, I saw a bunch of things I think are going to help.”He referred mostly to organizational tweaks to a culture designed to withstand the graduation of any single player.But how about three? This season — which begins for UConn on Monday night at No. 12 Florida State — the Huskies must operate not only without Breanna Stewart, a once-in-a-generation talent, but also without Moriah Jefferson and Morgan Tuck, who went second and third behind Stewart in April’s W.N.B.A. draft.Logic would dictate a slide, perhaps a fairly steep one. But Connecticut, with four rotation players returning, placed third behind No. 1 Notre Dame and No. 2 Baylor in the Associated Press preseason poll. In the USA Today coaches poll, the Huskies were placed in their usual No. 1 penthouse.Advertisement“I was the most surprised person in America,” Auriemma said, without denying that he was flattered by such reputational respect.Popovich is also in a transitional season, his first in 20 years without Tim Duncan. Popovich, like Auriemma, is waiting to see which player will step into the leadership vacuum to “make demands of the others, day after day after day,” he said in a recent telephone interview.Comparing a college program with an N.B.A. franchise is an apples-and-oranges exercise, but Auriemma said that what struck him most in San Antonio was the atmosphere inside the gym — it did not seem all that different from the one he has cultivated in Storrs.During his visit, Auriemma told Popovich, “You guys run this like it’s a college program.”“You’re absolutely right,” Popovich said.In the telephone interview, Popovich added: “I’ve said this before — we’re running a Division III program with better players. I make the same demands I made at Pomona-Pitzer. I’m willing to fight the same battles year after year to establish that culture in everything we do.”That, he told Auriemma, is the reason the Spurs seldom take on a player just because he is talented and they have the money to pay him.Auriemma said he applied the same principle when doling out scholarships — although, admittedly, he can afford to, given the pedestal his program is on.“I get that question asked all the time, about recruiting and the type of players we bring in, about this rule and that rule,” he said. “I always say, we don’t have rules, just certain standards about people, and we’re not going to change them regardless of who the player is, no matter what the accolades are or your talent level.”AdvertisementReferring to the Spurs, he added, “You go down there, and you see they operate the same way.”Auriemma loved hearing Popovich extol the work ethic of Kawhi Leonard, who drives the same car he had in college and seemed destined to become a Spur.During one practice, when Tony Parker plopped down alongside him, Auriemma asked if he had ever contemplated leaving for a bigger market and stage.Shaking his head, Parker pointed to Manu Ginobili and mentioned another N.B.A. player of comparable ability who had made millions more across a peripatetic career.Ginobili would be going to the Hall of Fame someday, Parker told Auriemma, and the other player would not be.“That was a real important thing for me to see in that even at the top pro level, you can make it more about the team, more about us and our culture, and still accommodate great players,” Auriemma said.Over the years, Auriemma has often been peppered with questions about the possibility of coaching a men’s team. In the telephone interview, Popovich said he, too, was tempted to ask, but for one rare occasion did not speak his mind.Get the big sports news, highlights and analysis from Times journalists, with distinctive takes on games and some behind-the-scenes surprises, delivered to your inbox every week.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.“The question itself almost makes it sound like what he’s doing isn’t as valuable,” Popovich said. “So I hesitated to ask because it shouldn’t mean that. He’s doing the same damn thing that we all do, no different from what John Wooden did. So, who cares whether he coaches guys or not? Even if the answer is, of course he could.”How does he know?“I’ll give you one good reason — he’s got that wise guy in him, and by that I mean he can screw with you with a sense of humor and that helps you make demands of talented people.”AdvertisementAuriemma is 62, five years Popovich’s junior, and unlikely to coach elsewhere. He is comfortable with the culture. And, like Popovich, he still has a contender, if not the best team, in this transitional season.While a star-in-waiting — Azura Stevens, a 6-foot-6 transfer from Duke — sits it out, Katie Lou Samuelson, a 6-3 sophomore forward, leads the returnees, along with Kia Nurse, Napheesa Collier and Gabby Williams.The point guard position is unsettled, though, and a daunting nonconference schedule includes six of the top eight ranked teams, including Baylor at home on Thursday and a trip to Notre Dame on Dec. 7.Auriemma knows that ravenous sharks will circle at the first sign of blood. He prepared reporters for that likelihood after a recent practice. For the first time in four years, he said, they would no longer be able to write the same article — Huskies win by double digits — after every game.“Players on our team must know that it’s just completely different now,” he said. “They come to practice every day. They see the difference. They see that there’s a huge gap in what it was and what it is.”That said, Auriemma said he was heartened by what he witnessed in San Antonio, the affirmation of what he has long preached and practiced. With the proper approach, the culture can outlast the talent, even in the N.B.A. Provided, of course, the flow of talent does not dry up.“Nobody wins without great players, but you don’t win as consistently as they’ve won through the changes in the game unless you’ve got something special going on in the way you do things,” he said of the Spurs.Popovich argued that recruiting was only half of it for UConn.“Watch them play, what they do, how he makes them feel responsible for each other,” he said. “Then look at his stats, his record — you can’t make that stuff up.”A version of this article appears in print on November 14, 2016, on Page D1 of the New York edition with the headline: To Reinforce a Dynasty, Auriemma Visits a Replica.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.