
On Soccer By                     
RORY SMITH

NOV. 11, 2016
LONDON — As soon as the bugle picked out the first, plaintive note of the Last Post, Wembley Stadium seemed to freeze.England’s and Scotland’s players gathered, heads bowed, around the center circle. The 90,000 fans who had come to north London for this meeting of soccer’s oldest rivals, their first competitive match this century, were still. Even the noise of a television helicopter, blades beating overhead, momentarily disappeared.Not long before, the atmosphere had been anything but reverent, the air full of the hostility only an internecine conflict can bring.The strains of “Flower of Scotland,” the country’s unofficial hymn, had been drowned out by deafening jeers and whistles from the home crowd; the visiting supporters had responded in kind when that was followed by “God Save the Queen,” the anthem of England and, of course, Britain.AdvertisementAnd that derision did not take long to return, once focus had returned to the evening’s primary purpose. “Stand up if you hate Scotland” reverberated around Wembley, once Daniel Sturridge, the Liverpool striker, had set England on its way to a resounding 3-0 victory that leaves Scotland’s hopes of qualifying for the 2018 World Cup gossamer-thin.AdvertisementBut for that one minute, as Britain’s traditional elegiac to the fallen sounded, long-held enmities were forgotten. England and Scotland, their relationship now so frequently fractious, stood together.Nov. 11, Armistice Day, is the day Britain honors those of its sons and daughters who never came home from war. It is a day for remembering. In solemn silence, broken only by that forlorn bugle call, Wembley did just that.In doing so, it also exposed the folly of the controversy that had raged for the days in the buildup to this game. As soon as October turned into November, it was noted that the rules of FIFA, soccer’s governing body, would prevent England and Scotland — as well as Wales and Northern Ireland — from wearing the poppy, the symbol of remembrance, for their Armistice Day matches.Team shirts should, FIFA’s laws dictate, be unadorned with “political, religious or personal” iconography; the poppy, it had previously been decreed, fell into one or more of those categories, and was thus forbidden. It would not be permitted to be displayed on uniforms; nor would black armbands, branded with a poppy symbol, be allowed.Outrage, of course, ensued. Martin Glenn, chief executive of England’s Football Association, insisted that his organization’s “moral position was certainly right.” Theresa May, the prime minister, seized the chance to become involved, declaring it “outrageous” that FIFA might expect its members to follow its rules.England and Scotland duly confirmed that they would wear poppy-bearing armbands, in defiance of FIFA’s edict. The threat of punishment — ranging from a fine to a points deduction — would not dissuade them, as it eventually did Wales and Northern Ireland, who elected to wear a plain black armband in their Friday matches.Nor did the quiet — and rare — good sense behind FIFA’s rule. There cannot be a case-by-case basis for historical symbols that are not globally interpreted as they are locally intended, the organization feels, and thus a straightforward catchall rule is required.AdvertisementThe insistence that politics and soccer are best left apart may not ring entirely true — this was, after all, a qualifying match for a tournament that will be held in Russia for the explicitly political purposes of Vladimir Putin — but there is, at least, a sound rationale behind FIFA’s thinking.That both England and Scotland rebelled — against a rule their governing bodies, both members of soccer’s rule-making organization, the International Football Association Board, themselves had introduced — offered a powerful example of the extent to which soccer is now used as a vehicle for remembrance, a stage co-opted by the country on which to perform its national grief.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.Until 2009, it was rare for British club teams to display a poppy on their uniforms at this time of year. There would be a minute’s silence before fixtures on the weekend closest to Nov. 11, no more. A campaign led by The Daily Mail that year changed all that.Now, all club teams bear a poppy as standard; last weekend, there were elaborate ceremonies at a number of Premier League stadiums, with wreaths laid, silences observed and bugles sounded. At Leicester City, the grounds staff mowed poppies into the playing surface.The intention, of course, is an admirable and honorable one: to show that football, as the slogan goes, remembers. That is not, however, necessarily the effect. Wearing a poppy is designed as an individual act; when it becomes compulsory, it loses not just much of its impact, but some of its meaning.Chris Coleman, the Wales manager, acknowledged that his team would face “criticism” because it had decided not to wear a poppy on its armband, despite commemorating the country’s war dead in a number of ways. Enforced remembrance is not really the idea of the poppy appeal, run by the Royal British Legion and designed to provide funds for veterans.Nor is the unseemliness of the furor in the buildup to England’s appointment with Scotland. Indeed, it was hard to escape the suspicion that, on some level, it was less about remembrance than about the state of mind in both nations, where opposition to distant elites — the Westminster government reviled by the Scottish independence movement, the Brussels politicians loathed by those who voted for Brexit — is very much the spirit of the age.It did, at least, mean that there was no reason to place much focus on the teams themselves, neither of which is exactly a source of much enthusiasm among fans. England might be winning games, but it is doing so in stuttering, unconvincing style, every performance an unwelcome reminder that the national team has become the crumbling portrait in the attic, with the vibrant, attractive, multinational Premier League its Dorian Gray.Scotland’s situation is more desperate still: It has dropped points to Lithuania, Slovakia and now England in qualifying already. Its long wait for a first appearance at a major tournament since 1998 will now, barring a miracle, stretch on into a third decade.But all of the stamping of feet and screaming of dissent about the forbidden poppies did nothing to further what the poppy nominally represented: sincere, somber reflection. It became, all too quickly, a political issue.AdvertisementRemembrance, like soccer, is supposed to be above such things. It is heartfelt, personal, earnest, the things that bind together overpowering those that drive apart. That minute, as the bugle sounded and Wembley fell silent, described with wordless eloquence what it should be, just as all that had gone before painted what it should not.A version of this article appears in print on November 12, 2016, on Page D3 of the New York edition with the headline: Poppies and Politics Dominate a World Cup Qualifier.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.See More »