By BRAD SPURGEONNOV. 12, 2016
SÃO PAULO, Brazil — As Formula One prepares to stage its penultimate race of the season at the Brazilian Grand Prix on Sunday, Nico Rosberg holds a comfortable lead in the series but faces considerable obstacles — mostly off the track.Rosberg leads the series by 19 points, has won nine of 19 races this season and can claim the 2016 points title with another victory. He could even finish as low as seventh and still clinch the championship if his closest challenger fails to score points.Yet Rosberg is still seen as second best by some important figures in Formula One because that challenger is Lewis Hamilton, his teammate at Mercedes. Hamilton is a three-time world champion, the winner of the last two drivers’ titles and the series’ most dynamic media personality since James Hunt, the playboy British champion of 1976.Rosberg, by contrast, is a staid 31-year-old who has never won the Formula One title. In a series seeking a younger, more social-media-friendly audience, a Rosberg title victory would not make enough of a splash, according to Bernie Ecclestone, the longtime chief executive of Formula One.Advertisement“If Nico won the title, it would be good for him and good for Mercedes, but it wouldn’t necessarily help the sport because there is nothing to write about him,” Ecclestone said recently. “Even in Germany, it wouldn’t help.“You need someone like Lewis.”While Ecclestone later tried to clarify his comments, he could not unring the bell. Rosberg’s biggest problem, it seems, is that while he is a solid driver with a winning pedigree — his father, Keke, won the Formula One title with one victory in 1982 — he is not Hamilton.AdvertisementIn a world that increasingly prefers image over results, Hamilton has provided both. A flashy, free-speaking, frequently partying Briton, Hamilton was the first black driver in Formula One. Two weeks ago, at the Mexican Grand Prix, he equaled Alain Prost’s 51 victories to move into second on the career list. Only Michael Schumacher, with 91, has more.Rosberg, on the other hand, has won only 23 career races despite having started in the series in 2006 — a year before Hamilton did.Despite Ecclestone’s fears, it is not difficult to envision Rosberg becoming a marketable commodity and a counterpart to Hamilton. Rosberg speaks five languages, but Hamilton speaks only English. While Rosberg is a master at controlling his emotions, Hamilton has a reputation as being moody and prone to outbursts.Despite Rosberg’s success on the track, his discreet, disciplined manner does not drive headlines. Even the reason Rosberg gives for his better performance this year — he has won more races in a single year than ever before — is unlikely to turn heads.Get the big sports news, highlights and analysis from Times journalists, with distinctive takes on games and some behind-the-scenes surprises, delivered to your inbox every week.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.“The only thing that I can think of is that in my private life, I’m very, very happy,” he said. “Because I have a lovely family with a daughter who is a year and 2 months old, and that’s very, very special. And I think that carries over into the sport, because when you arrive with a smile on your face, it makes a difference.”While Rosberg has settled down, Hamilton has become increasingly enigmatic. He has suffered through technical problems and racing mistakes, costing himself several potential victories, and he has been known to occupy himself with his cellphone and his social media accounts during news conferences. At one event this season, he lost his temper and refused to speak to members of the media. Every incident has been duly noted by reporters covering the series.AdvertisementIn that sense, Ecclestone might be on to something. Liberty Media, the American company that is in the process of buying control of the series, is hoping to lead its new acquisition into new markets, where it hopes to reap new rewards. To Liberty, the brash Hamilton — an always-on-brand, media-savvy, image-conscious lover of pop music, fashion and partying — could be the perfect frontman.But his chances of overtaking Rosberg for the points lead look slim. While Rosberg enters this weekend’s race in Brazil as the two-time defending champion, Hamilton has never won here.“It’s a real challenge to come here and try to win for the first time,” Hamilton said Thursday. “That’s my goal, and I’ve nothing really to lose.”Except, perhaps, the drivers’ title. To Rosberg.A version of this article appears in print on November 13, 2016, on Page SP2 of the New York edition with the headline: As Formula One Seeks Flash, a Top Driver Chugs Along.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.