By FILIP BONDYAPRIL 23, 2017
Unwrap the ankle tape, zip up the team hoodie, face the cameras. Henrik Lundqvist has been at this sort of thing for a dozen years, and the Rangers goaltender applies an almost robotic rhythm to the postgame ritual.One series ends, another begins.But this time, Lundqvist took a few moments to enjoy the whole process on Saturday night after his remarkable, series-clinching performance during the Rangers’ 3-1 triumph in Game 6 at Madison Square Garden. Lundqvist managed a reactive glove save off a rifled slap shot from Shea Weber in the waning minutes of the second period. He made a clinching, lunging stop with his left pad off a backhander in the crease from Tomas Plekanec inside two minutes of the final horn, when the Rangers were clinging to a one-goal lead.In the end, the 35-year-old Lundqvist achieved what very few goalies have accomplished in recent seasons: In a taut first-round series decided by one or two turnabouts, he outplayed his Montreal counterpart, Carey Price, the 2015 winner of the Vezina and Hart Trophies.“It means a lot when we put a lot of effort into every game,” Lundqvist said. “Price was playing really well, and we didn’t get anything for free. It’s just exciting and a great feeling to do it in front of our fans. That excitement when the puck goes in, you’re moving on. It’s been pretty intense the last few days, but it’s all worth it.”AdvertisementIf the Canadiens were waiting for Price to dominate this series, they were sadly disappointed. Price was solid enough, but he was not Lundqvist. He whiffed, glove side, on Mats Zuccarello’s wrist shot from the right circle in the second period during a Rangers power play, without a screen to distract him. That goal evened the score at 1-1, reignited the Garden crowd and changed the complexion of the game.“It’s lucky,” Zuccarello said. “It’s not every day you beat Carey Price like that. It’s a power-play goal. About time — that was big for us.”AdvertisementA second goal by Zuccarello was tougher to stop, because it came at the end of a tick-tack-toe passing play. Price got his left leg pad on the puck. He just did not get enough, deflecting it back into the net.Lundqvist finished the series with striking statistics: a save percentage of .947 and a 1.70 goals against average. In Game 6, he held fast in the face of a full-out Montreal assault during the first period. He allowed the Rangers to hang around long enough to find their legs.As well as the Rangers played in front of Lundqvist in this series, Lundqvist played even better behind them.“We faced a goaltender that was without a doubt their best player,” said Claude Julien, the Canadiens’ coach. “We had more chances than the other team. In the end, we couldn’t put it past their goaltender.”What all this ultimately means is uncertain, because there is a significant caveat to the Rangers’ early postseason success. They have greatly benefited from the complex playoff system established by the N.H.L. and the players’ union. As a transplanted wild card, the Rangers are living a relatively comfortable existence in the Atlantic Division brackets, avoiding two clearly superior Metropolitan opponents — Washington and Pittsburgh — until at least the Eastern Conference finals.If the Rangers win a second-round series against Ottawa, yet another good-but-not-great Atlantic team, then fall to the Penguins or the Capitals, will they really have proved much?AdvertisementFor now, they can beat only the teams they are facing.“I’m going to have a glass of wine tonight, maybe two,” Coach Alain Vigneault said after the Game 6 victory. “We’ll start getting ready. What made our success during the year was we took a game at a time, never got ahead of ourselves.”Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.The Rangers have some things going right at the moment. Zuccarello, a perpetual motion machine, is in fine form. The team’s other top scorers, Rick Nash and Michael Grabner, have come around. The home fans have grown louder, more intense. Maybe the Garden is not quite Bell Centre, but on Saturday night, the place finally did not feel or sound like a family picnic.The real difference maker, however, remains No. 30 in blue. For more than a decade, the face of the franchise has resided, ironically, behind the most concealing mask. Lundqvist will tell you that a goalie must be focused and that he requires a predictable, defensive structure from his teammates. A clear sightline always helps. So does a bit of luck, which was evident on that save against Plekanec.“I knew I was in trouble because I wasn’t in good position,” Lundqvist said. “It was just a desperation save. Luckily, he didn’t put it in the far corner.”There is considerable good and bad fortune involved in this pinball game of hockey. The Rangers got luckiest back in 2000, when nobody drafted a certain young Swedish goaltender before the seventh round, pick No. 205. For the record, there were only two rounds left.A version of this article appears in print on April 24, 2017, on Page D6 of the New York edition with the headline: Rangers and Lundqvist Make Their Own Luck.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.