
On Baseball By                     
 TYLER KEPNER
 
APRIL 23, 2017
It is one of baseball’s fun little expressions, a dugout rallying cry that makes a breakthrough seem plausible, especially for a team like the Mets:Bloop and a blast.Any hitter can luck into a bloop single. Any slugger can drive a mistake to the seats. The Mets seem incapable of doing much offensively, but they do take big swings.“We’re a bloop and a blast away, in the last 10 games, of winning every game,” Manager Terry Collins said before batting practice Sunday. “We have the kind of team that can do that. When our guys get in the batter’s box, we’ve got a chance to hit a homer. Now, the weather has not been conducive; we’ve hit some balls that have gone nowhere. But you still feel like you can.”Even more chilling, on Sunday night, was the presence of the Washington Nationals’ Max Scherzer, who has won two Cy Young Awards. Scherzer has also thrown two no-hitters, including a singular masterpiece at Citi Field in 2015: the only no-hitter ever with no walks and at least 17 strikeouts.Those Mets shrugged and went to the World Series. These Mets, of course, want to get back. But after Scherzer throttled them, 6-3, they have sputtered to eight losses in nine games, and Washington looks fearsome.AdvertisementCollins says he is not overly concerned. He insisted, with odd specificity, that the Mets would have a nine-game winning streak at some point and jump right back in it.Yes, he has to say such things, but Collins also sees that unless the Mets hit homers, they are almost helpless. On Sunday they had a leadoff homer by Michael Conforto and a two-run homer by Neil Walker. Otherwise, they advanced no one on the bases against Scherzer. The nature of their offense limits what a manager can do.“The ideal team is to have seven guys who can run and hit homers, steal bases and play defense and throw everybody out,” Collins said with a laugh. “But you’ve got to look at the strengths of your team, and you’ve got to utilize your strengths. I hear a lot of comments about: ‘You got to bunt more.’ I’m asking guys to fail. They don’t bunt. We are not a bunting team.”He continued: “So my job is to put these guys in situations where their strengths play and not to have them go and use their weaknesses. So that’s how we’re built, and you’ve got to accept it.”Before Sunday, the Mets ranked second in the majors in homers, with 27, but only two teams had fewer doubles. Only three teams had a lower batting average than the Mets’ .211. The Mets ranked third in walks but were last in stolen bases.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.The Mets also had the oldest group of position players in the National League, with an average age of 30.3 years, and speed rarely ages well. The Mets do have Jose Reyes, the last major leaguer with 75 or more stolen bases in a season. But that was in 2007, and Reyes, now 33, has seven hits in 67 at-bats — a .104 average — through Sunday, when Collins put him back in the lineup after giving him a mental break on Saturday.Advertisement“When I’m on base, I can make a lot of stuff happen, and I’m not able to do that so far,” Reyes said after Collins benched him. “So that’s kind of frustrating for me, because the game that I play is getting on base, making stuff happen, stealing bases, scoring runs and stuff like that. That stuff is good for your ball club, and I feel I’m not able to do that so far.”It is asking too much to rely on this version of Reyes to be more than a role player. But the Mets are not teeming with options. Besides the injured corner infielders — Lucas Duda and David Wright — they are missing the versatile Wilmer Flores. Collins wanted Travis d’Arnaud to catch on Sunday, but d’Arnaud said his injured right wrist was still sore. (He pinch-hit in the eighth and struck out.)Then there is Yoenis Cespedes, who missed his third start in a row on Sunday with a left hamstring strain. Since trading for Cespedes in 2015, the Mets are 114-81 when he starts and 18-27 when he does not. He was available to pinch-hit Sunday, and he told Collins he expects to be ready for the Mets’ next game, Tuesday.Even when the Mets’ lineup is at full strength, however, its fundamental nature will not change. The Mets are unabashed power hitters, a leading example of the modern hitting ethos: Don’t worry about singles or subtlety, just work the count and do damage. Last season they were fifth in the majors in homers, 25th in batting average and 28th in steals. Yet even with a rash of pitching injuries, they won the top N.L. wild-card spot.Now the Mets’ top three starting pitchers are healthy, which means the team’s approach — as maddening as it can be — has a chance to work.“That’s the good thing about it,” outfielder Curtis Granderson said, “knowing that even if we don’t score a bunch of runs, if our pitching staff does what they’re capable of, just keep us in the ballgame, we can find ways to get it done without having to be a certain type of team.”Dominant pitching, with the hope of a bloop and a blast. That formula is not quite working yet, but for the Mets, it is their best — and only — choice.A version of this article appears in print on April 24, 2017, on Page D5 of the New York edition with the headline: A Shortage of Bloops Makes Blasts Insufficient.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.See More »