AdvertisementSupported byBy Dhiren MahibanTORONTO — Halifax Mooseheads General Manager Cam Russell was scouting hockey players at an under-18 tournament two years ago when he got an unusual tip. An agent told him to keep an eye on Nico Hischier, a forward. That the agent did not represent Hischier spoke volumes to Russell.So Halifax selected Hischier with the sixth overall pick of the 2016 Canadian Hockey League import draft.In his first season with the Mooseheads, of the Quebec Major Junior Hockey League, Hischier led all rookies with 38 goals and 86 points and was 10th in league scoring. He had three goals and four assists in six playoff games as Halifax lost in the first round.“He came here with such a concern on learning the defensive side of the game and being good defensively,” Russell said. “He’s just such a well-rounded kid.“When we spoke to him, before he came here, the questions were: ‘Explain to me the development, talk to me about practice, talk to me about after practice’ — these aren’t questions you’re normally expecting from 17-year-old kids.”Hischier is ranked second by the scouting service ISS Hockey, behind only Nolan Patrick of Canada, among prospects for the N.H.L. draft in June. He is poised to become the highest Swiss-born player selected at the draft, a distinction currently held by Nino Niederreiter, the No. 5 pick by the Islanders in 2010.It was not so long ago that Hischier, a 6-foot, 174-pound center, was hovering around 30th in the rankings. In October, ISS Hockey had Hischier 26th, and in November, before the under-20 world junior hockey championship, he was 21st.At the world juniors, though, Hischier had a team-leading four goals and three assists. In the quarterfinals, Switzerland nearly upset the American team, with Hischier scoring twice in a 3-2 loss. The United States went on to win the tournament. United States Coach Bob Motzko said Hischier was the best player the team saw at the tournament.“We tried all four lines against him, and I thought he was playing every shift, because every time he got out there, the ice was tilted,” Motzko said.Hischier’s solid showing at the tournament propelled him into the top three in ISS Hockey’s January rankings.“I’ve seen guys go from the 20s to the top 10, but I don’t really recall the last time we had a guy go from 20s to contending for No. 1,” said Dennis MacInnis, the ISS Hockey scouting director. “We still think that Patrick is the No. 1 guy out there, but he has certainly closed the gap.”Hischier was a thorn in the Americans’ side again last week at the under-18 world championship. The United States had to rally to beat the Swiss in a quarterfinal Thursday, when Hischier had a goal. He finished that tournament with 6 points in five games.If there is an area where Hischier could improve, it is his play in his own zone, said Tommy Albelin, a former Devils defenseman and a member of Switzerland’s coaching staff at the world juniors.“It’s just more the defensive things: stick positioning, battles around the net,” he said. “You’ve got to just have the effort and pay attention in practice as well, and it’s going to come in games.”On top of adjusting to the North American lifestyle and learning English, Hischier was also adapting to a style of play different from what he was used to in Switzerland.“I think I’ve improved my game a lot in the corners, in front of the net to be harder to play against,” he said. “I knew here in North America, where the ice rink is smaller, you have to be better in the corners and in front of the net, so that’s why it’s a good thing I came.”Hischier, 18, said he tried to model his game after the former Detroit Red Wings star Pavel Datsyuk.“His game inspires me because his defensive game is really good, so he’s one of the best defensive centers and offensively he’s so good, too,” Hischier said. “It’s just his two-way game that inspires me.”Last season, Hischier got a taste of the professional game, suiting up in 15 games for Bern HC in Switzerland. He scored one goal.Guy Boucher, the Bern coach at the time, searched game tape meticulously to find mistakes to point out to Hischier to help teach the young forward. Boucher was unable to find much footage of the teenager out of position or making a wrong play.“He manages the game like an adult, like a man,” said Boucher, now the coach of the Ottawa Senators. “Great vision, great poise, but he’s always in the right place defensively too, which puts him ahead of a lot of young guys — they rarely have both sides of the ice figured out, especially at that age.”Advertisement