

 Scott Cacciola
 

ON PRO BASKETBALL
APRIL 23, 2017
INDIANAPOLIS — Thaddeus Young, with the ball and an open court ahead of him, was focused on fending off the Cleveland Cavaliers’ J. R. Smith and extending to the rim for a layup. It seemed simple enough. But Young, the starting power forward for the Indiana Pacers, forgot. He forgot about the best player in the world.LeBron James, who was trailing the play, began to eat up ground as he crossed midcourt, and an expectant hush fell over Bankers Life Fieldhouse. It was just a matter of watching the inevitable play out: James soaring to block Young’s shot from behind, the ball landing among James’s teammates on the bench, and James’s momentum carrying him into the tunnel behind the basket.“I was actually going to go for my little ‘Forrest Gump’ thing and just keep it moving,” James said. “But there was more basketball that needed to be played.”The play was reminiscent of James’s chase-down block on the Golden State Warriors’ Andre Iguodala in Game 7 of last season’s N.B.A. finals, and another indication — as if anyone needed one — that Playoff LeBron is back. The Cavaliers may have had ups and downs during the regular season, but they began the playoffs with a four-game first-round sweep of the Pacers that they completed with a 106-102 victory on Sunday.AdvertisementPlayoff LeBron collected 33 points, 10 rebounds and 4 assists. Playoff LeBron shouldered the offense by attempting 25 shots, most of them layups. Playoff LeBron affixed himself to the Pacers star Paul George like a strip of Velcro, limiting him to 15 points. And Playoff LeBron made the big shot, a 3-pointer over Pacers center Myles Turner with just over a minute left.AdvertisementJames, trying to create space against Turner, waited — waited for Turner to give him an opening. Once Turner dropped his hands, James had it.“Trusted my mechanics, trusted what I’m doing,” said James, who, after the game, wore a sweatshirt with flames on the sleeves. “It went down.”The Cavaliers, the second seed in the Eastern Conference, bought themselves some time before they face either the Toronto Raptors or the Milwaukee Bucks in a conference semifinal. Those teams are tied at two games apiece in their first-round series — and it is worth emphasizing that this is typical. These series are generally grinds.The Boston Celtics, the top seed in the East, lost the first two games of their series against the Chicago Bulls. The San Antonio Spurs, who finished the regular season with the second-best record in the league, are knotted at two games apiece with the Memphis Grizzlies out West. Even the Warriors, who are one win from sweeping the Portland Trail Blazers, are coping with adversity — their coach, Steve Kerr, is dealing with chronic back problems. Kerr told reporters on Sunday that he could miss the rest of the playoffs.James, meanwhile, has developed a habit of treating the first round like an appetizer before he digs into a playoff buffet. His teams have not lost a first-round series in 12 career playoff appearances. And his teams have won 21 straight first-round games dating to 2012.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.“Great coaching,” Cavaliers Coach Tyronn Lue said, deadpan.James has been overlooked in the conversation about this season’s Most Valuable Player Award. It is, in many ways, understandable. Oklahoma City’s Russell Westbrook, Houston’s James Harden and San Antonio’s Kawhi Leonard have assembled spectacular seasons. Any of them would be deserving.All James did during the regular season was score 26.4 points a game while averaging career highs in assists (8.7) and rebounds (8.6). But the Cavaliers were uneven — their defense, for much of the season, had the consistency of yogurt — and perhaps James’s basketball genius feels too familiar. He has set an impossible bar for himself.Still, in the playoffs, there is no one with more command of the stage. The Pacers wilted when they had their opportunities. In Game 1, C. J. Miles misfired in the closing seconds, and the Cavaliers escaped with a 1-point win. In Game 3, the Pacers built a 26-point lead. The Cavaliers won by 5 as James had 41 points, 13 rebounds and 12 assists.AdvertisementOn Sunday, James punctuated his on-court warm-up by tossing up a series of turnaround, fadeaway jumpers from 22 feet. He wore in-ear headphones, a staple of his pregame ensemble, as Pacers fans who were courtside gawked and took photos and feared the worst.Sure enough, for the fourth time in his career, James helped eliminate the Pacers from the playoffs, even if the sweep masked what were otherwise competitive games. The Cavaliers outscored the Pacers by just 16 points over the course of the series.“It’s really frustrating to continue losing to the same team or the same person,” George said. “Real frustrating.”James reflected on his third-quarter block against Young — and more specifically, everything that had preceded it. James was trying to lob the ball to Kyrie Irving. But Young deflected the pass, and it caromed to Miles, who sent it back to Young, who streaked the other way. James said he could hear the voices of coaches from his childhood in his head: Don’t give up on the play.“The last thing I’m going to do after a turnover is just let it happen,” he said. “So I need to get back.”It is that motor which drives James and drives his team. On Sunday, it moved the Cavaliers one step closer to their preferred destination.A version of this article appears in print on April 24, 2017, on Page D3 of the New York edition with the headline: A Timely Reminder of Greatness Too Swiftly Forgotten.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.See More »