By THE ASSOCIATED PRESSAPRIL 23, 2017
PORTLAND, Ore. — Golden State Warriors Coach Steve Kerr said he would not be on the sidelines for Game 4 of his team’s playoff series on Monday against the Portland Trail Blazers.Kerr stayed behind at the team hotel for Saturday night’s Game 3 at Portland’s Moda Center. Mike Brown, an assistant coach, took Kerr’s place, and the Warriors overcame a 17-point first-half deficit to win, 119-113, and go up 3-0 in the first-round series.Golden State can sweep with a victory on Monday night.Kerr, the reigning N.B.A. coach of the year, still experiences lingering symptoms from two back operations he had after the franchise’s run to the 2015 championship. He missed the first 43 games last season dealing with symptoms such as headaches, nausea and an aching neck.Kerr, who clearly was not feeling well on Friday before the team departed for Portland, had not missed a game this season before Saturday, when he also missed the team’s shootaround.Advertisement“This is something I’ve been dealing with, but doing O.K.,” Kerr said Sunday. “Ups and downs but consistently coaching. This past week for whatever reason, things got worse. My symptoms got worse.”AdvertisementHe said that his status for the rest of the playoffs remained uncertain. He was in ongoing discussions with his doctors.Get the big sports news, highlights and analysis from Times journalists, with distinctive takes on games and some behind-the-scenes surprises, delivered to your inbox every week.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.“This is not going to be a case where I’m coaching one night and not coaching the next,” Kerr said. “I’m not going to do that to our team or our staff. We’re hoping that over the next week or two, whatever it is, I can sort of make a definitive realization or deduction, or just feel it that I’m going to do this or I’m not.”Stephen Curry, who scored 34 points in the Game 3 win, passed the game ball to Golden State General Manager Bob Myers to give to Kerr on Saturday night.“He’s obviously going through a lot physically and that’s first and foremost for him to take care of himself, make sure he’s on the road to recovery and feeling like himself,” Curry said. “We’ve got his back, we’ve had certain situations all year, previous years, where players are down and you’ve got the ‘next man up’ philosophy, same with Coach Kerr.”A first-year assistant for Golden State, Brown has plenty of experience as the former head coach of the Cleveland Cavaliers and the Los Angeles Lakers.In the first of two stints with Cleveland, Brown led the Cavs to their first N.B.A. finals appearance in 2007. He was named the league’s coach of the year in 2009 when Cleveland finished with 66 wins.Despite Kerr’s prolonged absence, the Warriors went 73-9 last season, a record, and played in the finals. Kerr was named Coach of the Year.Kerr works out daily and does yoga to help control the symptoms.“I’m not going to go into details on the symptoms,” Kerr said. “It’s just discomfort and pain and it’s no fun. And I can tell you if you’re listening out there, if you have a back problem, stay away from surgery. I can say that from the bottom of my heart. Rehab, rehab, rehab. Don’t let anybody get in there.”AdvertisementThe Warriors could also be without Kevin Durant in Game 4 because of a strained left calf.Durant has missed Golden State’s last two games against the Blazers because of the injury, which occurred in the third quarter of last Sunday’s Game 1 victory against the Trail Blazers. He had 32 points and 10 rebounds in the Game 1 win.We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.