AdvertisementSupported byPirates 2, Yankees 1By Billy WitzPITTSBURGH — The sun was out, the temperature began to warm and the views of downtown across the Allegheny River were sublime on Sunday here in the Steel City, which is building a case for a new nickname: the place where erstwhile Yankees go to thrive.It was a spectacular setting for baseball, and Ivan Nova made the most of the tableau, a former Yankee pitching another gem to lead Pittsburgh to a 2-1 victory over the Yankees.Nova, a right-hander with an easy delivery and a personality to match, struck out the side in the first inning and was rarely troubled. He allowed four scattered hits over seven innings, escaped his lone jam by dispatching Aaron Judge on a 6-4-3 double play, and allowed only a home run to Jacoby Ellsbury, in Nova’s final inning.Nova’s biggest concern was his friends in the visitors’ dugout who were trying to throw him off his game by getting him to laugh.“Castro tried once or twice,” Nova said, referring to Yankees second baseman Starlin Castro, who joked with Nova after a bloop single. “But it didn’t work.”The Pirates were playing in their 1979 uniforms — black pants, canary yellow tops and pillbox caps — and had opportunities to make their afternoon more comfortable. But they were 1 for 10 with runners in scoring position, manufacturing only one run from the two times they loaded the bases with no outs.The Yankees’ best chances came once Nova was lifted for a pinch-hitter. But reliever Daniel Hudson struck out Castro with a high fastball to end a tense nine-pitch at-bat with runners at the corners in the eighth. The usually reserved Castro slammed his bat down in anger.In the ninth, Pirates closer Tony Watson had to overcome his own defense after second baseman Josh Harrison booted a made-to-order double play, loading the bases instead of ending the game. Watson responded by striking out Aaron Hicks and retiring Pete Kozma on a ground ball.There was little such drama when Nova was on the mound.The way Nova pitched on Sunday and the way he has thrown for the Pirates since they acquired him at the trade deadline last summer make it fair to wonder if the Yankees gave up on him too soon. Nova, 30, signed a free-agent contract with Pittsburgh for three years and $26 million, which is looking like a bargain.Yankees Manager Joe Girardi dismissed the suggestion.“No, no, no,” said Girardi, whose team pursued closer Aroldis Chapman, but not Nova, in free agency after trading him in 2016. “You look at the numbers at our place. He had some good years; he had some tough years. We had to make a decision. Last year, at that time, we thought it was the right move to make, and we made the move and you don’t look back.”The Pirates have recently reconstructed themselves into playoff contenders with help from Yankees castoffs. Catcher Russell Martin, who the Yankees believed was in decline at age 29, left for Pittsburgh as a free agent. The Yankees paid the Pirates $13 million to take pitcher A. J. Burnett.The Pirates’ current catcher, Francisco Cervelli, was a spare part with the Yankees, as was Chris Stewart, Pittsburgh’s other catcher. Stewart was behind the plate Sunday, and he hit a triple for the first time in 1,047 major league at-bats.Another Pirate with Yankees ties is the current pitching ace Gerrit Cole, a first-round draft pick of the Yankees who instead chose to go to U.C.L.A., then went to the Pirates as the top overall pick in 2011.Nova has continued that trend, transforming from a maddeningly erratic pitcher with an earned run average that hovered around 5.00 to a strike-throwing automaton. He has a 2.75 E.R.A. and as many complete games as walks (four) since he arrived in Pittsburgh last summer. (Nova walked his first hitter of the season on Sunday — pitcher Jordan Montgomery, who was making his first at-bat since high school.)“We are the type of organization that needs to take guys maybe when they’re on the downslope and work to get them back on the up slope,” Pirates General Manager Neal Huntington said. “We don’t think we have some magic formula here, but we do like our coaches, we do like our performance team, we do like our advance guys. Our manager and our catchers all do a nice job.”For pitchers like Burnett and Nova, Huntington said, “there’s a natural breath of fresh air” after leaving the American League East, with its power-packed lineups and cozy ballparks, for a place where pitchers have to hit.Nova, who like many former Yankees has grown a beard since he left, said he was the same pitcher. But he acknowledged that the Pirates’ pitching coach, Ray Searage — who is revered for cultivating reclamation projects — has tinkered with his mechanics and persuaded him to use his changeup more often.The difference, Nova said, is that his mind is clear.“I always say it’s hard to pitch when you don’t know what’s going to happen after,” said Nova, who was in and out of the Yankees’ rotation the last two seasons. “If you have a bad game, are you going to be in the rotation or the bullpen? It’s not the way that you should be thinking.“In New York,” he continued, “they never told me if you pitched bad, you would be in the bullpen, but that was my thought process. That was my mistake, thinking that way. Here I just want to focus on pitching every five days.”Thus far, Nova has excelled at that, and on Sunday the Yankees were forced to admire the view.Advertisement