By BILLY WITZAPRIL 22, 2017
PITTSBURGH — As the swings and misses and empty trips to the plate accumulated, it became increasingly easy to wonder if Chris Carter — even with a modest, no-strings-attached, one-year, $3.5 million investment — was worth the trouble for the Yankees.But with one well-timed stroke on Saturday afternoon, Carter delivered his first dividend for the Yankees: a booming, pinch-hit, tiebreaking, three-run homer that sent them on their way to an 11-5 victory over the Pittsburgh Pirates.Carter, who carried a .148 batting average to the plate with two outs in the eighth, hit a first-pitch changeup from the left-handed reliever Felipe Rivero into the Yankees bullpen in left-center field — the deepest part of PNC Park.Pirates center fielder Andrew McCutchen took a few hopeful steps toward the ball, then stopped and watched it bounce on a bullpen mound as Yankees reliever Bryan Mitchell scurried out of the way.Advertisement“It makes you feel like you’re a big part of the team when you win a game like that,” Manager Joe Girardi said. “It was big for him, and it was big for us.”AdvertisementIt was the sixth time this season the Yankees have come from behind to win, and they did it in hard-earned fashion. Their highest offensive output of the year came after they had been no-hit by Jameson Taillon for four and two-thirds innings.Carter’s home run came after Dellin Betances replaced Tyler Clippard with one out in the seventh and kept the score even, 5-5. Betances stranded McCutchen at third by retiring David Freese on a shallow fly ball and John Jaso on a groundout.Starlin Castro had tied the score with a three-run homer off Taillon in the sixth, and Aaron Judge closed the win with a 457-foot homer to left-center in the ninth.The home run was Judge’s team-high sixth of the season — and his longest, according to the data-tracking Statcast cameras. It also caught the eye of Dave Winfield, the former Yankee and one of the few hitters in history of comparable size to the 6-foot-7, 275-pound Judge. Winfield wrote on Twitter that he could not help but share a video clip of the home run.While Judge is demure about his long blasts, preferring to let teammates admire them, he was incredulous when told of Winfield’s gesture.“Dave Winfield?” he asked a reporter.Then he smiled.“That’s pretty cool,” Judge said. “Never in my life would I have thought Winfield would be retweeting one of my swings.”Get the big sports news, highlights and analysis from Times journalists, with distinctive takes on games and some behind-the-scenes surprises, delivered to your inbox every week.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.While Judge’s home run was eye-catching, Carter’s was the most significant — and one that was long awaited.AdvertisementIt was the first home run of the season for Carter, who hit 41 home runs last year as a Milwaukee Brewer, tying for the National League lead, but also piled up a league-leading 206 strikeouts.His boom-and-bust campaign helps explain how Carter — who was not offered a deal by Milwaukee after last season, just as he had been set loose the year before by the Houston Astros — wound up with the Yankees.As demand for power hitters plummeted over the winter, Carter’s price dropped far enough that the Yankees figured he was a worthy insurance policy for Greg Bird at first base or for Matt Holliday as a designated hitter.Neither Bird nor Holliday has started the season strong, but Carter has struggled as well. He was hitting just .148 with nine strikeouts in 27 at-bats before Saturday’s deep shot.“You don’t really feel it,” said Carter, whose easy swing belies the power that rests in it. “It’s just one of those good swings you take, like in batting practice where you hit a ball and you just don’t feel it and everything is right.”The Yankees’ strong start has also allowed Girardi to lean on his bench more, something he was reluctant to do last season, when the team lost 16 of its first 24 games.But this season, he has given regular playing time in the outfield to Aaron Hicks, who replaced Brett Gardner and contributed two walks and a double.Because of injuries, Girardi has leaned on the backup catcher Austin Romine — who broke up Taillon’s no-hitter with a sharp single — and the reserve infielder Ronald Torreyes, who had four hits and is tied for the team lead in R.B.I. with Castro and Judge.AdvertisementThe Yankees’ winning sequence began in the eighth when Pirates second baseman Adam Frazier booted Romine’s two-out grounder and Torreyes followed with a single.That brought up Carter.He said not playing regularly had been an adjustment. He tried to keep his swing sharp in the batting cages, but it was hard to replicate a live at-bat. Even his unsuccessful turn as a pinch-hitter on Friday night helped, he said.That is why, Girardi said, he will have to live with some of Carter’s empty trips to the plate.“Sometimes people question why I sit a guy here or sit a guy there,” Girardi said. “You can’t have one at-bat every week and expect a guy to be productive. You have to get guys at-bats because they’re going to come up in big situations, like he did today, and really make a difference.”A version of this article appears in print on April 23, 2017, on Page SP3 of the New York edition with the headline: Yankees Are Satisfied by First Taste of a Slugger’s Tantalizing Power.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.