By THE ASSOCIATED PRESSAPRIL 22, 2017
CONSTANTA, Romania — Ilie Nastase, the Romania Fed Cup captain and former star player, was expelled from a Fed Cup tie with Britain on Saturday after making abusive comments.The International Tennis Federation had already launched an investigation into racially offensive comments Nastase apparently made on Friday about Serena Williams’s pregnancy.On Saturday, with Britain’s Johanna Konta leading Sorana Cirstea by 6-2, 1-2, Nastase became embroiled in a squabble about noise from the crowd. When the umpire appealed for calm, Nastase said: “It’s not the opera. What’s your problem?” The comment included an expletive.Nastase, who is 70, was heard to hurl expletives at Konta, the British captain Anne Keothavong — who also is pregnant, and whose room number he had publicly asked for — and the umpire.AdvertisementHe was sent off the court by the referee, Andreas Egli, and, after taking a seat in the stands, was escorted back to the locker room. “Mr. Nastase was also removed from the grounds due to his serious misconduct,” the I.T.F. said, and his accreditation was removed.Get the big sports news, highlights and analysis from Times journalists, with distinctive takes on games and some behind-the-scenes surprises, delivered to your inbox every week.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.In a separate incident on Saturday, Britain’s Press Association said Nastase berated the journalist Eleanor Crooks for reporting his comments about Williams. Nastase told Crooks: “Why did you write that? You’re stupid, you’re stupid.” The tirade went on for more than two minutes, the news agency said.AdvertisementThe I.T.F. had said it was investigating Nastase after Crooks reported that speaking of Williams’s baby, he told a member of his team at Friday’s news conference: “Let’s see what color it has. Chocolate with milk?”Williams, 35, the winner of the Australian Open in January and of 22 previous Grand Slam singles titles, confirmed on Wednesday that she is pregnant. She and Alexis Ohanian, a founder of Reddit, are engaged.“He repeatedly called me stupid, asked me why what he said was racist,” Crooks said. “I explained we simply reported what he said and that it was unnecessary to make such a comment about color. He said the English were out to get him and called me stupid a few more times.”The match between Konta and Cirstea eventually resumed, with the British player winning five games in succession to record a 6-2, 6-3 victory and level the tie at 1-1.Nastase won two Grand Slam titles: the United States Open in 1972 and the French Open in 1973.A version of this list appears in print on April 23, 2017, on Page SP7 of the New York edition with the headline: Nastase’s Abusive Remarks Lead to Expulsion.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.