By DAVID WALDSTEINJULY 11, 2017
WIMBLEDON, England — Johanna Konta was born in Australia to Hungarian parents and trained in Spain, but she is the reigning darling of Britain.Konta, 26, who likes to discuss muffin baking and her adoration of the band U2, captivated her adopted nation on Tuesday by ending a 39-year spell of futility for British women at Wimbledon.The sixth-seeded Konta, who gained her British citizenship in 2012, came from a set down to defeat No. 2 Simona Halep, 6-7 (2), 7-6 (5), 6-4, and became the first British woman to advance to a Wimbledon singles semifinal since Virginia Wade in 1978.“To be in the semifinals of my home Slam, and to do that in front of a full Centre Court, I mean, it’s pretty, pretty special,” Konta said.AdvertisementWade, who is also the last British woman to win the event, in 1977, watched nervously from the royal box, and when victory was ensured, she beamed with joy and high-fived guests sitting near her in a celebration of British tennis.Advertisement“I was so happy for her,” Wade told a pool reporter. “I know how much pressure there is, but she behaves very nicely.”The home fans are also hoping that Andy Murray, the men’s No. 1 seed, can win his quarterfinal match against Sam Querrey on Wednesday and keep alive hope of a British sweep in the singles championships, something that has not been done since 1909.But Konta’s next barrier in her quest is a tall one. She will play No. 10 Venus Williams, a five-time Wimbledon singles champion who beat the reigning French Open champion, Jelena Ostapenko, 6-3, 7-5, with little difficulty.Konta was not the only player to achieve a milestone for her nation on Tuesday. The unseeded Magdalena Rybarikova became the first woman from Slovakia to reach a Wimbledon semifinal when she beat CoCo Vandeweghe, 6-3, 6-3.The match was suspended in the middle of the second set because of rain and then moved to Centre Court. Vandeweghe, who had been playing well under her new coach, Pat Cash, handed Rybarikova more than half of her 59 points, with 30 unforced errors and seven double faults.“That’s why Grand Slams are the hardest tournaments,” Vandeweghe said. “They’re over two weeks, and you have to play well for two weeks.”Rybarikova, 28, has done that for several months after recovering from surgery on her left wrist and right knee a year ago. Her victory made this the 17th straight Grand Slam tournament with a first-time women’s semifinalist, underscoring the wide-open nature of the women’s game during the past four years. Rybarikova, ranked No. 87, will play 14th-seeded Garbiñe Muguruza, who beat No. 7 Svetlana Kuznetsova, 6-3, 6-4.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.The fifth women’s winner on the day did not even play. With Halep’s loss, Karolina Pliskova will rise to the No. 1 ranking when the new WTA rankings come out on Monday. Pliskova, who lost to Rybarikova in the second round, replaces Angelique Kerber, who was eliminated by Muguruza on Monday.AdvertisementKonta is No. 1 with British fans, many of whom stood in a steady rain inside the grounds to watch her victory. They huddled under umbrellas on Henman Hill, watching on a giant video screen as Konta played under the roof of Centre Court.“We’re born waterproof here, so we’re used to this,” said Paul Austen, a retired archaeologist from Carlisle, England, referring to the rain and not to a British woman’s reaching the semifinals. “It’s just terrific for British tennis.”One school group traveled from the county of Shropshire, three hours northwest of here, and also stood in the rain as Konta overcame a sluggish start to overwhelm the steady Halep.“I think because it’s her, the British fans are willing to break out their brollies and stand in this rain,” said Matt Lowe, a physical education teacher from Shropshire, referring to umbrellas. “She’s got a real chance.”The match was a small measure of revenge for a Fed Cup matchup that went awry in Romania in April. Konta, in tears that day, complained about abusive treatment from the stands, and Ilie Nastase, the Romanian Fed Cup captain, verbally disparaged her and the British Fed Cup captain Anne Keothavong. The next day, Halep thrashed Konta and said she felt the pro-Romania fans had been fair throughout.On Tuesday, the fans were decidedly in Konta’s favor, right down to the final point, when a woman yelled out from the stands, presumably thinking Halep had hit long on match point. She had not, and Konta returned the ball, but Halep just smacked it into the net. It brought her only complaint about the fans.“Very nice and very fair,” said Halep, the runner-up at the French Open last month. “Just the last point, I was surprised that that lady was screaming.”One of the steadiest players on tour, Halep made only nine unforced errors in the match, which included 226 points. But Konta was the aggressor and scored 48 winners. She played patiently, moving Halep farther and farther out wide until she found her opening and then driving home decisive winners with both her backhand and her forehand.Against Williams, Konta will have to return one of the best serves on grass, and contend with Williams’s savvy and power. Wade said she thinks Konta will win. If so, she will be one step closer to her dream.Advertisement“I’ve dreamed of success in every Slam,” Konta said. “I think it makes it more special because it is home. I do get that home support, which I don’t get anywhere else. In that sense, I guess it makes it that much sweeter.”A version of this article appears in print on July 12, 2017, on Page B13 of the New York edition with the headline: Transplant Sweeps In To Fill a British Void.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.