By BILLY WITZJULY 9, 2017
When a drive by Chase Headley down the right-field line bounced off the facing of the second deck at Yankee Stadium on Sunday, the first-base umpire, Alfonso Marquez, twirled his finger above his head — the signal for a home run.The stadium came to life as Gary Sanchez, Jacoby Ellsbury and Headley circled the bases in the sixth inning and the Yankees, who had trailed from the start of the game, seized the lead.Or so it seemed.Headley appeared to have doubts that the ball was fair. He stopped in his tracks along the first-base line and picked up his trot only after Marquez’s call. A replay review confirmed Headley’s suspicions, showing that the ball was indeed foul. Sanchez and Ellsbury returned to the bases, and Headley to the batter’s box.Three pitches later, he struck out. Saturday’s hero, Clint Frazier, who had already hit a home run in this game, popped up for the second out. A strikeout by Ji-Man Choi finished off a sequence that amounted to a harsh coda for the Yankees as they headed into the All-Star break.AdvertisementWith a 5-3 loss to the Milwaukee Brewers, the Yankees’ 18th defeat in their last 25 games, a promising season continued to deteriorate.AdvertisementThe Yankees, who less than a month ago had a four-game lead in the American League East, now trail the Boston Red Sox by three and a half games and are tied atop the wild-card standings with Tampa Bay. Minnesota and Kansas City are within a game and a half.Manager Joe Girardi is hoping that four days away — even for the five players headed to the All-Star Game in Miami — will help rejuvenate the Yankees.“The big thing is we need to play better,” Girardi said. “You can’t worry so much about where you are. We have to play better, and we just haven’t done that lately.”But Masahiro Tanaka, the erstwhile ace who had regained his form over the last three starts, could not muster another strong performance and send the Yankees into the break with their first series victory in nearly a month.Tanaka gave up a three-run homer to Travis Shaw in the first inning and a homer to Stephen Vogt to begin the second. Shaw also added a run-scoring single off Chasen Shreve in the fifth.And though the Yankees closed the gap with Headley’s run-scoring single and Frazier’s two-run homer in the fourth, they failed to capitalize on a multitude of opportunities. They were 1 for 16 with runners in scoring position.Headley’s near-miss foul ball was emblematic of the last month for the Yankees.“If it goes one inch the other way,” Headley said, “we’re winning the game.”AdvertisementThe would-be home run by Headley was not the only tease.With two on and two outs in the seventh, Brewers right fielder Domingo Santana made a terrific running catch to deprive Sanchez of a game-tying double. And with two runners aboard in the eighth, Tyler Wade grounded out to end the threat.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.In the ninth, after Brett Gardner led off with a walk, Brewers closer Corey Knebel — who allowed Frazier’s game-winning homer on Saturday — struck out Aaron Judge, Didi Gregorius and Sanchez to end the game.When the Yankees do return from the break, they will not have the luxury of easing themselves into the second half. It begins with a weekend series at Fenway Park, including a day-night doubleheader on Sunday, followed by three games at Minnesota and four at Seattle. The Yankees will not have a day off on the trip and will most likely call up a minor leaguer to start a game.“It’s a really significant trip for us,” Girardi said, while acknowledging that a large portion of the season would remain when the Yankees returned home on July 25.At least, the Yankees are beginning to get healthier. Matt Holliday, who has been out since June 25 with a viral infection, has played for Class AAA Scranton/Wilkes-Barre the last two days, and he is expected to be in the lineup on Friday. The same projection applies to Starlin Castro, who — after being out since June 27 with a strained hamstring — will play one or two rehabilitation games this week. Castro was chosen as an All-Star reserve, and he will attend the game in Miami but will not play.Other reinforcements are likely to be modest. General Manager Brian Cashman, who was not available to the news media, said in an interview Sunday on the YES Network that the Yankees would be buyers in the trade market — sort of.Cashman said he would not make any deals that could jeopardize a rebuilding plan that has thus far yielded three All-Stars who are 24 or younger: Judge, Sanchez and pitcher Luis Severino — as well as Jordan Montgomery, a promising starting pitcher.Cashman said the scouting and analytics department had met the last two days to clarify the team’s assessment of its young prospects. He also said the Yankees still viewed the injured Greg Bird as their long-term first baseman, but Cashman acknowledged that the team may have to make a short-term upgrade at the position for the rest of the season. Bird is scheduled to visit another doctor on Monday about the bruised right ankle that has kept him on the disabled list since early May.Several good alternatives could be available, including Oakland’s Yonder Alonso and Atlanta’s Matt Adams, who will be free agents at the end of the season. But with three weeks to go before the nonwaiver trade deadline, the market favors sellers.Advertisement“So far, I can tell you sticker prices are pretty high,” Cashman said. “I’d like to think our fan base would be happy that we’re saying no to a lot of things that are currently being presented to us.”Cashman was not asked whether the Yankees — should they find themselves further out of the playoff picture — would consider a reprise of last year’s sell-off. They gave up reliever Andrew Miller and several soon-to-be free agents: Aroldis Chapman, Carlos Beltran and Ivan Nova.Holliday, who has a one-year deal, and the talented but erratic pitcher Michael Pineda could be inviting trade chips. If Frazier continues to shine and Aaron Hicks returns late this month, left fielder Brett Gardner — who has been shopped around the last two winters and has one more year left on his contract — could be on the block again.A version of this article appears in print on July 10, 2017, on Page D5 of the New York edition with the headline: Tantalizingly Close Calls Yield Only Another Series Loss for the Yankees.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.