By ADAM SCHUPAKJULY 10, 2017
When Russell Knox beat a star-studded field, including the current world No. 1 Dustin Johnson, in Shanghai in November 2015, he became the first Scot to win a World Golf Championship event. Afterward, a writer asked Knox about his amateur career in Scotland.“There weren’t many highlights,” Knox said. “I think I finished third in the Scottish under-21 championship or something. I wasn’t very good.”Yet when Knox, 32, tees off this week at the Scottish Open at Dundonald Links in Troon, Ayrshire, he will be his country’s top-ranked golfer, at No. 46 in the world, and one of only two Scots, along with Martin Laird, competing on the PGA Tour. They are also the only Scots ranked in the top 100 of the Official World Golf Ranking.Scotland, long dubbed the home of golf, has failed to produce homegrown talent in the professional ranks. Scott Jamieson, 33, is the highest-ranked Scot on the European Tour at No. 287, and there are only 11 Scots in the World Golf top 500. In contrast, 11 Englishmen competed in the 93-man Masters field this April.Advertisement“I don’t know why Scottish golf isn’t better than it is,” Knox said. “It should be. I mean, the amateur system is great and coaching’s great. But for some reason, there just haven’t been as many players to win, especially from my kind of age.”AdvertisementFor Knox, a top 10 finish at the 2005 Scottish Men’s Open Stroke Play Championship at Royal Aberdeen stoked his desire to play professionally, lifting golf above soccer in his pursuits.“That was kind of the turning point for me,” Knox said. “I was like: ‘I think I can do this. I’m not as bad as I thought I was.’”He hired a recruiting agency to help place him at a university in the United States, and he scoured his list of options.“I started narrowing it down,” he said. “I was like: ‘Cold, out. Cold, out. Florida, ooohhh.’ You grow up in Scotland and you’re cold pretty much your whole life. So going to a school where the sun shines was my No. 1 priority.”He landed at Jacksonville University, and when the coach asked him if he knew another player to round out the squad, he brought along Duncan Stewart, who had grown up 30 minutes away in northern Scotland.Knox said going to the United States to play college golf is the best decision he ever made.“I wouldn’t change it for anything,” he said. “I didn’t realize how bad a golfer I was when I came to the U.S. What I mean by that was, if I went to a bigger school, University of Florida or University of Georgia or somewhere that had a great golf program, I would have been completely overwhelmed and devastated by how good other players were in this country.”Knox and Stewart, who competes on the European Tour and is ranked No. 427 in the world, made a formidable one-two punch for Jacksonville. Stewart, the 2005 Atlantic Sun Conference Player of the Year, won eight college tournaments to Knox’s three.AdvertisementStewart returned to Scotland to pursue playing on the European Tour, and the two did not see much of each other from 2009 to 2012. One day, they played together, and Stewart noticed how much Knox had improved.“I said, ‘You played quite good today,’” Stewart said. “He said, ‘I play like this every day.’ I could see that he had the game and was going to win and be successful.”Knox, who is known for a beautiful swing and his accuracy off the tee, won a second PGA Tour title at the 2016 Travelers Championship, and finished 10th in the FedEx Cup, earning nearly $5 million that year. Yet Darren Clarke, the European Ryder Cup captain, did not select him as a captain’s pick for the 2016 team.“That was a pretty big diss considering how well he was playing,” said the Golf Channel analyst Brandel Chamblee, who admires Knox’s steely determination. “I’ve seen so many players that were ‘can’t-miss players’ that never get out on tour. It’s the players that won’t quit that make it, and I see that in Russell.“He’s had to earn it and come from nowhere to almost make the Ryder Cup team and win on the PGA Tour in an era when the game has become so prejudiced to power.”Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.Laird, 34, who is ranked No. 87 in the world, took a path similar to Knox’s. He went to college at Colorado State University, and stayed in the United States to play professional golf.Laird said his father, Charles, took him to the 1994 British Open at Turnberry, his first professional event, and they followed Greg Norman, the winner of the championship there in 1986.“I suppose it’s been Martin’s goal ever since that day to be a pro and play in the Open himself,” Charles Laird said.The seed may have been planted that day, but it blossomed across the ocean. While Laird is a product of Scottish Golf, the governing body for amateur golf in Scotland, and won the Scottish Youths Under-21 title and represented his country on its elite junior teams, he was never considered one of its most promising players. (The Under-21 tournament is now known as the Scottish Youths Stroke Play Championship.)Laird got a scholarship to Colorado State when Jamie Bermel, the coach at the time, was not able to recruit a couple of high-profile American players. He had one scholarship to fill and contacted a recruiting service in London that recommended the 17-year-old Laird.Advertisement“When I first went to college, I had ambitions of turning pro, but I wasn’t good enough, so my goal was to go over there and get better and see where it took me,” Laird said.There, he transformed his ball flight from a low draw to a high cut to fit America’s aerial game and became a two-time All-American.As a pro, Laird made a steady ascent, earning conditional status on the Nationwide Tour straight out of college in 2004, becoming the first Scot to win a Nationwide Tour event in 2007, and graduating to the PGA Tour that year. He has won three PGA tournaments, and until Knox earned his card in 2012, Laird was the only Scottish player on the PGA Tour.In the past, Sandy Lyle and Colin Montgomerie were the standard-bearers of Scottish golf. Paul Lawrie, 48, won the British Open in 1999 on Scottish soil at Carnoustie, and played on victorious European Ryder Cup teams twice.Stephen Gallacher, 42, was the last Scot to represent his country on the European Ryder Cup side in 2014, and Richie Ramsay, 34, was the last Scot to win a full-field event on the European Tour in March 2015.But Scottish Golf has been under attack for its failure to produce a talent pipeline commensurate to its reputation as a golf mecca. “My age group, for some reason, didn’t really achieve, and I don’t know why that is,” Knox said. “I think if some of the players would have come to the U.S. and played in college, they would have become better players.”One promising young player, Grant Forrest, 24, has followed the example of Knox and Laird and attended the University of San Diego. He was named the West Coast Conference Golfer of the Year in 2014, and won the prestigious St. Andrews Links Trophy before he turned pro.AdvertisementForrest, who has three top 10 finishes on the Challenge Tour, the European Tour’s minor league, has been supported by Scottish Golf since he was 15.And perhaps one day he will earn the same honor that was given to Knox, who as the highest-ranking Scottish golfer was allowed to select his partner to represent his country in the World Cup, a two-man team event, in November.Knox chose Stewart, his former college teammate. As they walked the first fairway at Kingston Heath in Melbourne, Australia, the magnitude of the moment was not lost on Stewart.“I said, ‘This is a bit surreal,’” Stewart said. “Two guys from a small town in the middle of the Highlands sure have come a long way since 2003 when we came to America.”A version of this article appears in print on July 10, 2017, in The International New York Times.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.See More »