By MIKE VORKUNOVJULY 10, 2017
When the Knicks traded Tim Hardaway Jr. two summers ago, it was the end of an unremarkable two-year tenure. Hardaway, a former first-round pick, had fallen out of favor with Phil Jackson, the Knicks’ new president, and his performance had been rocky during his first season under new leadership. The general manager who had drafted him, Glen Grunwald, was gone, and soon after that, so was Hardaway.Yet after Jackson and the Knicks parted ways two weeks ago, Hardaway began to think a reunion might be possible. In two days, he would become a restricted free agent — ready to hit the market after rehabilitating his reputation and improving his game during two seasons with the Atlanta Hawks. Still, if a return was to happen, Hardaway thought, it would be further off, once all the tracks of his exit had been scrubbed away.“Maybe, but not right now,” he said Monday. “Maybe in the future.”Instead, the timetable played out quicker than he thought. The Knicks came calling several days after the start of free agency on July 1, and the sides reached an agreement on a contract Thursday night. Two days later, after the Hawks declined to match the offer, Hardaway was a Knick again. The four-year, $71 million deal he signed brought him back to the organization with which he began his N.B.A. career, and he will arrive, he said Monday, as a different person with a newfound maturity.While the reception to the deal leaguewide was surprise and skepticism — the Knicks will pay nearly $18 million a year to a player they once discarded, one who has started only 62 career games — Hardaway said he was shocked, too.Advertisement“You play here for two years and then you’re gone, and then two years later, you get a phone call and it’s like, ‘Wow, I wouldn’t expect it coming from them,’” Hardaway said. “I would expect it from a different team or a different franchise. When I got the call, I was very, very happy and overwhelmed. I really wouldn’t want to be with any other team — if it wasn’t the Hawks, then it would definitely be the New York Knicks.”AdvertisementThis new marriage will come on terms different from the earlier version. Like Hardaway, the Knicks are markedly changed from the 17-win team he left behind. Only Carmelo Anthony and Lance Thomas remain from that roster, and in some ways, Hardaway’s signing could help ease Anthony’s exit.Though Hardaway insisted that he hoped Anthony would stay, the Knicks are positioned to move away from a team centered on one star player. General Manager Steve Mills said he hoped to build a core of players with “youth, athleticism, accountability and unselfishness.” It was not a stretch to read the line as a turning away from Anthony, who must waive his no-trade clause for one to occur.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.For now, Mills retains the power to make that decision. He has run the team since Jackson and the club parted ways, and he is also part of the search, with the adviser Tim Leiweke, to find a replacement for Jackson in the front office.The shift away from Jackson might be just as evident in the Knicks’ new personnel. Hardaway is expected to team with Courtney Lee on the wings, giving the team outside threats to go with the young big man Kristaps Porzingis and a dose of youth at guard in the first-round pick Frank Ntilikina. The refurbished Knicks, in casting off Jackson’s beloved triangle offense, will probably play more in line with the modern N.B.A., emphasizing pace and 3-point shooting.In Hardaway, the Knicks have signed a 6-foot-6 guard who averaged 14.5 points last season while shooting 35.7 percent on 3-pointers. He flourished in Atlanta after a rocky start that included a temporary stay in the N.B.A. Development League. The experience, Hardaway said, was a “reality check.”The Knicks’ investment also made clear that they believed Hardaway’s career was still on an upward trajectory. In Atlanta, Coach Mike Budenholzer told him he would not play unless he defended, and the Knicks have sent a message to him, too, that they expect progress.“I just think they saw the growth over all, as a person and just my overall game,” Hardaway said. “They loved how I competed on both ends of the floor. They saw the energy I gave, and it was a great feeling just to hear all of that.”He added, “And they said straight up, ‘You have to obviously improve a lot more on defense and improve a lot more on the offensive end.’ So you can never settle.”A version of this article appears in print on July 11, 2017, on Page B13 of the New York edition with the headline: For Knicks, a Familiar Face but a New Day.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.