
On Tennis By                     
 CHRISTOPHER CLAREY
 
JULY 9, 2017
WIMBLEDON, England — No matter what anyone tells you, they do play every day during Wimbledon.It just doesn’t count on the first Sunday, when no matches are scheduled but the practice courts on the grounds of the All England Club are still full of life and conversation.There were hand slaps and fist bumps galore as contenders and coaches crossed paths on the grass. A small gallery of observers — friends, would-be friends, agents, would-be agents, tournament officials and journalists — milled about on the viewing platforms above.It is one of the great scenes in tennis — all the better this Sunday with a powder-blue Tiepolo sky for a backdrop — and it doubles as a scene setter for the second week of the granddaddy of all tennis tournaments.All of the fourth-round singles matches will be played on Manic Monday, as the former Los Angeles Times tennis writer Thomas Bonk named it, borrowing the title from a 1980s hit  for the Bangles.AdvertisementBut this is not just another Wimbledon.It is the Wimbledon where Roger Federer, at 35, has a real opportunity to break his record tie with Pete Sampras and William Renshaw by winning an eighth singles title. It is the Wimbledon where anyone who professes to know who is going to win the women’s title should be administered sodium pentothal.Advertisement“I’ve honestly never seen anything like this,” Eric Van Harpen, the 73-year-old, very veteran Dutch coach, said as we sat together on a bench on Sunday and looked at a printout of the women’s draw.We were trying to identify the players who had no real chance to win. Of the 16 women remaining, Van Harpen discounted only three: Petra Martic, Magdalena Rybarikova and Agnieszka Radwanska. I eliminated one: Martic, a qualifier from Croatia. (No woman has ever won Wimbledon after coming through qualifying.)“I literally don’t know if I would single any one player out and say there’s no one who can’t win,” said Martina Navratilova, the nine-time Wimbledon singles champion, who is working at Wimbledon for the BBC.She pointed to Jelena Ostapenko, the 20-year-old Latvian who, as an unseeded player, won the French Open last month with no visible fear of the occasion.“Maybe she gives collective confidence to the locker room: ‘If she can do it, I can, too,’” Navratilova said.Above all, what helps the collective confidence is the absence of Serena Williams, the seven-time Wimbledon singles champion who is pregnant and, until further notice, out of the game — though hardly out of the headlines. (See her recent Vanity Fair cover.)“Once you’re a star, you don’t still have to be active to steal the limelight,” Navratilova said.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.But you do have to be active to take temporary possession of the Venus Rosewater Dish, which is awarded to the women’s champion. Amid the haze and disorder, what is clear is that some contenders have more time than others to win it in the future.AdvertisementConsider Monday’s opening match on Centre Court between Venus Williams, 37, and Ana Konjuh, 19, who had not been born when Venus Williams played in her first Wimbledon in 1997.Konjuh, a huge-hitting Croatian, is quite a threat to Williams now, with her powerful baseline game and aggressive returns. But Williams, seeded 10th, has already fended off one dangerous 19-year-old here, beating Naomi Osaka of Japan in the third round.It is, of course, quite an achievement that Williams is still in the mix at Wimbledon at all. She is the oldest woman to reach the fourth round in singles here since Navratilova in 1994. (Navratilova, then 37 and much closer to 38 than Williams is now, lost in the final.)The two are also known for an ability to keep personal turmoil from undermining their work.On June 9, Venus Williams was involved in a traffic accident in Palm Beach Gardens, Fla., that led to the death of Jerome Barson, 78. Williams broke down in tears when she was questioned about the accident after her first round here but has appeared as unflappable as usual on court.“Martina compartmentalized incredibly well, too,” said Pam Shriver, Navratilova’s former doubles partner. “The tennis court absolutely can be the most peaceful place when you are going through trauma, and I also think Venus has been through so much already. This is another sad tragedy that she’s figuring out how to deal with. I was happy to see her come out with the emotions the other day, though. I think that was very good.”It is also good to see Williams back on Centre Court. For a five-time Wimbledon singles champion who fought the good fight for equal prize money here, she has too often been relegated to the hinterlands at the All England Club, which has come far in its attitude toward women but still needs to work on its scheduling.There is no good reason that the No. 1 seed Angelique Kerber and No. 14 Garbiñe Muguruza, both recent singles finalists at Wimbledon, should have their match on Monday relegated to Court No. 2, the third-most important show court here.One of the Big Four men should have had his match moved to a lesser court to make room — perhaps Rafael Nadal, who will face No. 16 Gilles Müller; perhaps Novak Djokovic, who will meet the unseeded Frenchman Adrian Mannarino.But that is Monday’s problem. On Sunday, the leading men and women were on more equal footing as they exchanged strokes and small talk on adjacent courts in the sunshine.Advertisement“I love this day,” Gunter Bresnik, who coaches the eighth-seeded Dominic Thiem, said as he gazed at the practice sessions. “Everything seems possible.”A version of this article appears in print on July 10, 2017, on Page D3 of the New York edition with the headline: Truly ‘Manic Monday’ Awaits Amid a Mad Scramble in the Women’s Draw.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.See More »