By TYLER KEPNERJULY 11, 2017
MIAMI — Joe Maddon earned the right to manage the National League in the All-Star Game when his Chicago Cubs reached the World Series last October. The Cubs then won the title, their first since 1908, making good on a summer full of hope.The Cubs had five starters in the All-Star Game last July, including all four infielders. But when Maddon left Wrigley Field for this year’s event, he brought none of the players who made the trip possible. The Cubs are just 43-45, and their lone All-Star is their new closer, Wade Davis. They ended the first half with a 14-3 loss to Pittsburgh on a day that began with an uncomfortable All-Star jersey ceremony.“I actually talked to Zo about it before this ever occurred,” Maddon said, referring to Ben Zobrist, the starting N.L. second baseman last summer, “just to let him know how much I respect and appreciate what they had done for us, and how awkward it was for me personally to accept this jersey while they’re all sitting in the dugout. It’s a little bit different. I guess this never really happened before.”Maddon was right; the Cubs are, indeed, the first defending champion to take no players from the championship team to the next year’s All-Star Game. Even departed Cubs standouts, like Aroldis Chapman of the Yankees and Dexter Fowler of the St. Louis Cardinals, are not here.AdvertisementOnly Davis, who previously made two All-Star teams with the Kansas City Royals, earned the honor. He said his team would be fine.Advertisement“Those guys are gonna be good in the second half — there’s no doubt about it, they’re gonna be great,” Davis said. “They’re probably gonna play twice as good in the second half to overcome whatever it is that people think they didn’t do in the first half.”The defending American League champions, the Cleveland Indians, have five All-Stars: pitchers Corey Kluber and Andrew Miller; starting third baseman Jose Ramirez; outfielder Michael Brantley; and shortstop Francisco Lindor. The Indians’ manager, Terry Francona, is resting in Cleveland after undergoing a cardiac ablation for an irregular heartbeat last Thursday.“He’s resting and doing well,” said the A.L. manager, Brad Mills, Francona’s bench coach and close friend, adding later: “When he did come into our clubhouse yesterday, he sat down and the first thing he said to me is, ‘O.K., who is hitting second?’ And the reason he said that is he knows my fondness for Jose Altuve.”Mills managed the Houston Astros when Altuve reached the majors in 2011. Altuve, though, actually has not led off at all this season. A different Astros All-Star, George Springer, has led off 82 times and has 27 home runs. But Springer will bat cleanup on Tuesday, after Altuve, Ramirez and Aaron Judge.JUST FOR FUN AGAIN For the first time since 2002, the All-Star Game will not determine home-field advantage for the World Series. Most players disliked the link, and abolished it as part of the new collective bargaining agreement.“I thought it was silly,” said Joey Votto of the Cincinnati Reds. “That World Series home-field advantage is predicated on this game didn’t really follow logically.”Before the link, home-field advantage for the World Series had alternated leagues by year. Now it will go to the World Series team with the better record. Managers rarely managed the All-Star Game differently, anyway, prioritizing participation over strictly trying to win. That is the clear goal again.Advertisement“We’re here to see these guys and celebrate these players,” Brad Mills said. “The biggest thing for me is to get everybody in the ballgame and let everyone see them.”Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.LETTING THEM FLY With major leaguers on a record pace for home runs this season, the starting pitchers were asked how the power surge has changed their approach. The A.L. starter, Chris Sale of the Boston Red Sox, said he had made no changes — “Grip and rip as usual,” he said — but the N.L. starter, Max Scherzer, took a different view.“The ball is flying for whatever reason; I really don’t care,” he said. “I’ve given up a lot of homers over the past year and a half. That’s really been something that’s been a thorn in my side. I’ve had to become a better pitcher, locate better. Because of the home run spike, I’ve dialed it in even more to try to make my location better and try to prevent them. I think I have a hand in it — in not letting them hit as many homers — and that’s made me a better pitcher.”Two other former Cy Young Award winners, Dallas Keuchel of the Houston Astros and Clayton Kershaw of the Los Angeles Dodgers, acknowledged the widespread speculation that the balls are tighter now, and more prone to soar over fences. But neither could say for sure.“The ball must be juiced, right?” Kershaw, who has already allowed a career-high 18 home runs, said sarcastically. “That’s the only reason that we’re giving up homers. No, I don’t know. It feels the same to me, just the ball goes further. Maybe it does, maybe it doesn’t. Major League Baseball says it doesn’t, so there you go.”Keuchel, who has allowed just six homers in 75 ⅔ innings, said the ball feels the same in his hand, but was not ready to dismiss the idea that something is different.“I maybe think there’s a little of something going on,” he said. “Viewership likes offense, fans like offense. I just like pitching.”A REWARD WITH HOOVES Two years ago, at spring training in Goodyear, Ariz., Joey Votto asked his Cincinnati teammate Zack Cozart, a shortstop, what he had done after practice the day before. Cozart said that he had taken his young son, Cooper, to feed the donkeys at a nearby farm. Votto asked Cozart if he liked donkeys, and Cozart said he did.“So I was having a pretty good year last year leading up to the All-Star Game, and randomly — this is just Joey being Joey — he’s like, ‘Hey, if you make the All-Star team, I’m gonna buy you a donkey,’” Cozart said. “And it didn’t happen last year, so it was kind of just an afterthought. And then we are where we are now, and it’s kind of just caught on. So there will be a donkey, I’m sure, in Cincinnati when I get back. It’s happening.”AdvertisementVotto said he has researched prices and found that a donkey runs only between $100 and $400.“You’d think prized thoroughbreds like that would be a little more expensive, but no,” said Votto, who now must figure out how to make the presentation. “It’s one of those mysteries, the ability to handle a big crowd, because at some point I have to deliver the donkey on the field in front of a large crowd. I’m hoping one of us don’t get kicked or thrown up on, or spit on. Do donkeys spit?”Cozart insists he is eager to find out. He lives in Nashville, and he said the donkey would stay with his mother, who lives nearby and has more land. Then again, Votto is not planning to buy a full-size donkey, so Cozart could simply remodel.“Maybe I’ll put it in my house,” he said. “If it’s a miniature one, maybe I’ll just build a room for it, put it on concrete and we could just wash it out every day — who knows? — until I get some land. But, yeah, I’ll see a donkey here in about a week.”A version of this article appears in print on July 11, 2017, on Page B9 of the New York edition with the headline: No Champion Cubs Make the N.L. Cut.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.