AdvertisementSupported byBy Geoff MacdonaldThe Australian Open, the first Grand Slam tennis tournament of the year, begins on Monday in Melbourne. While the spotlight may be on the return of Roger Federer, Rafael Nadal and Serena Williams, and the rivalry between Novak Djokovic and Andy Murray, other players have the potential to make a splash over the next two weeks.Under the tutelage of Dani Vallverdu, who once worked with Murray and Tomas Berdych, Dimitrov is playing his best tennis in years. Burdened with the nickname Baby Fed, for his game’s similarities to Federer’s, Dimitrov, 25, has been plagued by inconsistent play and a lack of mental toughness. But this month, in Brisbane, Australia, he stunned the field, beating three top-10 players in a row on the way to the championship. Dimitrov, who has worked his way back to 15th in the rankings, stayed calm in the big moments as he defeated No. 8 Dominic Thiem, No. 3 Milos Raonic and No. 5 Kei Nishikori. His remarkable shotmaking ability is still there, but he is winning by keeping more balls in play, especially on the return of serve. He broke the big-serving Raonic twice in the semifinals, employing a chip return effectively and then using his speed to track down the first-strike groundstrokes.Zverev, a 19-year-old German, is the highest-ranked teenager in the men’s game, at 24th. He began the season by beating Federer in the Hopman Cup in Perth, Australia, a win that echoed his upset of Federer last summer on the grass at Halle, Germany. The 6-foot-6 Zverev has a complete game, with a serve that at times seems unreturnable. His physical strength is improving under the guidance of Jez Green, who helped Murray grow from a scrawny teenager to a superbly fit athlete. Look for Zverev to climb into the top 10 this year after his breakout year in 2016.With his weighty forehand and devastating kick serve, Sock, 24, packs a powerful one-two punch that has vaulted him into the top 25 in the rankings. He backpedals to run around his backhand faster than anyone in the game, with the possible exception of Nadal in his prime. Sock plays an energetic, acrobatic, physical style of tennis, punishing his opponent with audacious shotmaking. He won a warm-up tournament Saturday in Auckland, New Zealand, and this season he has a chance to move past John Isner for good as the top American man. Sock is not yet a threat to win the title in Melbourne, but he has the game and the competitive zeal to go deep into the second week.Pliskova, 24, a surprise finalist at the 2016 United States Open after an upset of Serena Williams, began this season by dominating the field in Brisbane, dropping only one set in the tournament. Last month, she was a leader in the Fed Cup final, beating Kristina Mladenovic, 16-14, in the third set to help the Czech Republic defeat France. Pliskova’s clean, economical technique allows her to hit at great pace with seeming ease. But her serve is what has vaulted her to the top of the women’s game. Her smooth delivery is a pleasure to behold, as she hits her targets with pinpoint accuracy. Pliskova, who has risen to No. 5 in the rankings, has never advanced past the third round in Melbourne, but she is a vastly better player than she was a year ago.With her booming serve and strong, two-handed backhand, Konta, 25, reached the semifinals in Melbourne last year, starting a journey that led her into the top 10. She credited her improvement to a more relaxed, process-oriented approach to competition. In the off-season, she hired Wim Fissette as her new coach and worked to improve her forehand and return of serve. Against Eugenie Bouchard in the semifinals in Sydney, Australia, last week, Konta ripped forehand winners and returned flawlessly in a victory in straight sets, and she went on to overpower Agnieszka Radwanska with 32 winners in the final on Friday. At 5-11, she serves bombs, and her favorite ace is down the middle in the ad court. With the experience she gained last season, she has set her sights on winning a Grand Slam title.Kasatkina, a 19-year-old Russian, stunned top-ranked Angelique Kerber in straight sets in Sydney last week, and came within a point of toppling Garbiñe Muguruza the week before in Brisbane. Ranked 26th, she is a powerful all-court player who uses her heavy topspin forehand to open up the court. She volleys superbly and attacks the net when she earns a short ball. Although she is an aggressive ball striker, she can also play patiently from the backcourt, mixing in loops and slices to break up an opponent’s rhythm.Geoff Macdonald is the women’s tennis coach at Vanderbilt University.Advertisement