AdvertisementSupported byBy James WagnerAs a lunch involving Mets General Manager Sandy Alderson and a group of baseball writers was winding down on Thursday at Citi Field, one of Alderson’s top lieutenants, the assistant general manager John Ricco, reminded him that he had not yet disclosed a new team policy about arbitration.The Mets wanted to proclaim a tougher stance as the deadline approached for major league teams and their arbitration-eligible players to exchange salary-figure proposals for the 2017 season.The deadline was 1 p.m. Friday, and it often serves as the impetus for deals to be announced. However, players who did not reach an agreement by then could still negotiate with their teams ahead of an arbitration hearing in February.Except there was Alderson, prompted by Ricco, telling reporters that any Mets player not signed by the 1 p.m. deadline would have to deal with a hearing. There would be no additional negotiations leading up to the hearing, Alderson said. Case closed.“The key thing is trying to eliminate a lot of the unnecessary conversation back and forth that exists between the time the numbers are filed and the arbitration is set,” Alderson said.Was Alderson posturing a bit, talking tough to make sure everyone agreed to a deal on Friday? It is impossible to know for sure, but as the 1 p.m. deadline passed and afternoon turned into evening, six of the seven players who were unsigned at the start of the day had agreed to new one-year contracts. One, the versatile infielder Wilmer Flores, remained unsigned.Whether the six who did sign — Matt Harvey, Jacob deGrom, Jeurys Familia, Addison Reed, Travis d’Arnaud and Josh Edgin — were all officially on board by 1 p.m. or an hour or two or three later seemed like a moot point.More significant, perhaps, is that Flores, who made $526,000 in 2016, will now go to an arbitration hearing with the Mets, a rare occurrence for the team in recent years.Arbitration is the first promised land that players reach as they accumulate service time in the majors. In their first three seasons in the major leagues, players have little or no bargaining leverage. Once they reach three years of service time, however, they are eligible for arbitration, which rewards players yearly based on performance.DeGrom was eligible for arbitration for the first time this off-season as a so-called Super 2, a player who ranks in the top 22 percent of players with between two and three years of service time.A year ago, with no arbitration rights, deGrom was so unhappy with the $607,000 salary the Mets assigned him that, in an act of protest, he refused to sign it. It was easy to see why he was mad. He had just come off a 2015 season in which he had been the ace of a pitching staff that helped the team make the World Series.His 2016 season, in contrast, was not nearly as good and was cut short by injury. He went 7-8 with a 3.04 earned run average in 24 starts. But because he was now in the arbitration system, his salary for 2017 is jumping to $4.05 million.Harvey, in his second year of arbitration, will see his salary move upward from $4.325 million in 2016 to $5.125 million for 2017. He had a nightmarish 2016, with a 4-10 record and a 4.86 E.R.A. before having season-ending surgery in July.Familia, who is facing a possible domestic-violence suspension at the start of the season, will get $7.425 million to continue as the team’s closer. Reed, who is Familia’s main setup man out of the bullpen, will get $7.75 million. D’Arnaud will get $1.875 million. A figure for Edgin, a left-handed reliever, was not immediately available.Flores was having a good 2016 season as a right-handed hitter who could play all over the infield when he injured his wrist sliding into home plate against Houston in September. He probably should have had a pinch-runner in the first place.The injury kept him out of the lineup for the remainder of the year. He ended up with 16 home runs, along with 49 R.B.I. and a .267 average.Now he will be part of a hearing in which he and the team will present salary figures to an arbitrator, who will pick one or the other. It is an awkward process, with a team, in effect, arguing against its own player, although Alderson maintained Thursday that it had “gotten less personal” over the years.Advertisement