By MATT FORTUNAJAN. 13, 2017
CHICAGO — When the Cubs chairman, Tom Ricketts, took the stage on Friday night to kick off the team’s annual winter fan convention, it was hard to ignore that it was, after all, Friday the 13th. But after last November’s World Series triumph, which ended 108 years of confounding misery, anything superstitious no longer applies, at least when it comes to the Cubs.Instead, Ricketts promised the throng that had gathered that this would be the best convention of the 32 that have taken place. Then again, how could it not be?It has been more than two months since the Cubs outlasted the Cleveland Indians in seven games to capture their first World Series since 1908. Players and fans — and the Cubs’ fan base extends across the country and is visible wherever they play — exulted in the historic moment. The team’s victory lap, a seven-mile parade through Chicago, drew a crowd that some estimates put at 5 million people.Cemeteries swelled with fans paying tribute to deceased loved ones who never had the opportunity to see the Cubs finish on top.AdvertisementBut now it is January, and pitchers and catchers are a month away from reporting to spring training. The reality of who the Cubs now are — the defending champions — is starting to set in in a way that it could not immediately after the victory.AdvertisementThe Cubs are no longer baseball’s lovable losers. Whether they can be the sport’s “Lovable Winners,” as a Nike T-shirt proclaimed after the World Series, remains to be seen. In any case, the work toward repeating has already begun. And as it does, fans cannot help but feel pretty good.“Last year was hope,” said Tom Stoudt, a fan who, along with his wife, Sue, took a train trip of about 300 miles to get to the convention. “This year is celebration.”The Stoudts, Illinois natives who said they would celebrate their 48th wedding anniversary in May, wore matching black T-shirts with Manager Joe Maddon’s signature glasses. And the T-shirt had an updated message: “We did not suck.”Get the big sports news, highlights and analysis from Times journalists, with distinctive takes on games and some behind-the-scenes surprises, delivered to your inbox every week.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.Maddon released the new version, as a charity endeavor, after the 2016 season. Last year, the shirt read, “Try Not to Suck.” That motto became an irreverent battle cry during the 2016 campaign.Now, as spring training approaches, Maddon seems to have a new theme in mind: authenticity. As in winning two World Series in a row to demonstrate that the first one was not a fluke.Few can speak to the philosophical shift that represents better than Theo Epstein, the Cubs’ president of baseball operations who served as the general manager of the Red Sox when they won their first World Series in 86 years, in 2004, before winning it again in 2007. (Boston also won the title in 2013, two years after Epstein left.)“The biggest challenge that comes with winning is avoiding all the factors that are pulling you away from what got you there in the first place,” Epstein said before the convention’s opening ceremony. “So we’re lucky that we have a group of such great guys, because after you win, there are all these voices in your head about, ‘Now it’s your turn to get more playing time. Now it’s your turn to get paid. Now it’s your turn to be recognized for your contribution.’”AdvertisementHe added, “When in reality, what got us here, and the most rewarding part of last year, was that we were all part of something bigger than ourselves.”The Cubs captured the World Series twice before 2016, in 1907 and 1908. Fans most likely needed no reminder of what a repeat would mean — or just how possible that might be — but they received one anyway from Ricketts, who punctuated the renewed sense of optimism halfway through his opening speech.“Now, we’re looking forward to 2017,” Ricketts said, “and I think that anyone who knows Cubs history knows that when the Cubs win the World Series, they always win the next one.”Can they? That will be answered next fall. For now, there are the three days of the convention at a downtown hotel, and then a trip to Washington on Monday, where the team will be honored by President Obama in his last week in office.Obama, who called Chicago home before he became president, is a White Sox fan. But he wanted a chance to congratulate the Cubs in person. Lovable winners, indeed.A version of this article appears in print on January 14, 2017, on Page D6 of the New York edition with the headline: ‘Lovable Winners’ Celebrate Once More, and Gear Up for a Repeat.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.