AdvertisementSupported byTV SportsBy Richard SandomirSTAMFORD, Conn. — NBC Sports’ promise to stream every sport live at the Summer Olympics in Rio de Janeiro is fulfilled here at its headquarters — a former Clairol factory — where the digital feeds from every event are sent to tablets, computers, smartphones and other connected devices. They are visible on flat screens throughout the vast broadcast operations center — mosaics of sports that are being played simultaneously.Streaming is a part of NBC’s Olympic future — an extension and repudiation of a history in which the prime-time broadcast was not to be trifled with. But the new model is unfolding in Rio: unfettered live streaming of all events and live Olympic programming on NBCUniversal’s cable networks, combined with NBC’s traditional prime-time broadcast, which has live and taped elements.Through Thursday, NBC’s live streaming had reached 1.28 billion minutes — more than in all of the 2012 London Olympics. The minutes have helped NBC add the equivalent of a few hundred thousand viewers to a prime-time broadcast audience that has fallen since 2012. Still, NBC’s streaming is less than halfway to the 2.6 billion live minutes that ESPN streamed during the 2014 World Cup.“Going past one billion minutes — I’m impressed, excited and overjoyed,” said Eric Black, the chief technology officer of NBC Sports Group Digital, who has watched Olympic streaming advance, sometimes fitfully, over several Olympics. He recalled an unexpectedly large surge of streaming during the 2014 Winter Games in Sochi, Russia, for the men’s United States-Russia preliminary-round game in hockey, at 7:30 a.m. Eastern.“We expected an O.K. crowd, but it went viral, and went to a shootout,” he said. “The numbers rose dramatically, and we had to add more video sources to back it up.” Nearly 600,000 unique users streamed the game, the most in Olympic hockey’s short online viewing history.16 PhotosView Slide Show ›Quinn Rooney/Getty Images.So far in Rio, that number has been eclipsed by five streams: two from swimming, the opening ceremony (which was not shown live), and the women’s gymnastics all-around final (1.16 million) and team final (1.35 million).By comparison, the average World Cup game on ESPN two years ago averaged about 900,000 unique users.Chris Reed, a freelance writer and publicist in Los Angeles, said in an interview Friday that he had been streaming gymnastics live in the afternoon on his tablet because he was unwilling to wait until NBC showed it on a tape delay on the West Coast.“Take gymnastics yesterday,” he said, referring to the all-around final won by Simone Biles of the United States. “Do I stay up until midnight to see how they did and avoid all social media, or watch it live? The answer was to watch it live and celebrate with the rest of the country.”Streaming has become an essential way to view sports and entertainment as people change the way they consume media: cutting the cords to their subscriptions with satellite, cable and telephone companies; binge-watching new series on internet services like Netflix and Amazon; and choosing mobile devices for watching the sports that they (or their parents) once tuned in to their televisions for.The NBC building is in full Olympics mode, and not only for streaming. It is a bustling northern outpost of the International Broadcast Center in Rio. One of its large studios is filled with portable announcing and production booths where announcers call many of the sports NBC is showing, from archery and badminton to rugby and weight lifting. They describe the action using video feeds from Rio with the ambient sounds of the venues piped to their headsets. In one quirk of the setup, Mary Carillo calls tennis from the broadcast center in Brazil; one of her partners, Rennae Stubbs, speaks from one of the booths in Stamford; and a reporter works on site at the tennis arena.Black and his staff spend much of their time making sure the live streams run without serious glitches, a task that was largely unheard-of when he began working in the early 2000s as the webmaster at WNBC-TV’s website in New York. “We pointed a camera at the Rockefeller Center Christmas tree — it was like Yule log — and people watched it,” he said. “If you think about it, that was pretty advanced for 2002.”On a wall in Black’s office is a large heat map — its colors ranging from pale yellow to dark orange — that shows the number of concurrent video feeds scheduled, in 15-minute intervals, to be streamed or televised by the NBC networks carrying the Rio Games every day. The peak was reached last Saturday when about 50 feeds were live simultaneously, 40 of them streams produced by the Olympics’ world broadcaster.“My 5-year-old godson loves it that Uncle Eric makes it possible to watch soccer on the iPhone,” Black said.Although he is a devoted fan of New York teams and of boxing, his job has led him to redefine what his favorite sports are.They are, he said, “the streams that start and end successfully.”He added, “After we streamed our first Super Bowl, I had no idea who won.”But those who stream often care, some quite deeply, in a world where people want to be entertained on demand — and buffering of the live hammer throw or trouble signing on to NBCOlympics.com can be causes for an angry tweet.Email: sandor@nytimes.comAdvertisement