AdvertisementSupported byOn BaseballBy Tyler KepnerPaula Kurman first met her husband, Jim Bouton, in 1977, at a hospital fund-raiser at a Bloomingdale’s in Hackensack, N.J. She thought he was handsome, but she didn’t understand why people wanted his autograph. He said he had once pitched for the Yankees, but for Kurman that wasn’t a good enough reason. She is a doctor, a behavioral scientist, and the more she talked to Bouton, the more she knew there was something else there. She found him witty, maybe even brilliant, and she knew she liked him.“But I couldn’t really call it love until I read the book,” Kurman said Wednesday, “because I realized something that Jim still doesn’t quite absorb, which is that he is one of the best social scientists around.”The book, of course, was “Ball Four,” and it made Bouton, who published it in 1970, much more famous than his pitching career ever did. Bouton had two big years for the Yankees and won twice in the 1964 World Series. Otherwise, he was a fairly average pitcher, with one extraordinary skill: observation.Bouton noticed everything, and recorded it all for posterity in 1969, when he decided to write a diary of his season with the expansion Seattle Pilots (and, at the end of that year, with the Houston Astros). From an initial run of 5,000 copies, the book has sold millions worldwide. It is probably the most honest, engaging book ever written about the funny, fascinating and flawed people who play the game.Now, Bouton and Kurman are auctioning all of the materials that came from the writing and the stormy aftermath of “Ball Four”: every note Bouton scribbled, every tape he recorded, the full manuscript and all the heated correspondence from Major League Baseball, which ordered him to deny it. Bouton refused, understanding that the league’s problem was not with his brazen tales of carousing — which now seem more playful than tawdry — but with his stark recounting of team owners’ one-sided, shifty negotiating in the era just before free agency.Dan Imler, the managing director of SCP Auctions, said the “Ball Four” collection had attracted multiple bidders. The minimum bid is $50,000, but Imler said he expected it to command “somewhere in the $300,000-to-$500,000” range. The auction closes Jan. 21.Bouton is also auctioning off about 20 lots of equipment and uniforms from his 10-year career with the Yankees, the Pilots, the Astros and the Atlanta Braves. But the prize is the raw material that produced a seminal work.“It’s unbelievable to see the bones, if you will, of a book like this,” Imler said.Bouton, 77, had a stroke a few years ago that made it hard to speak, read or write. He has recovered well, though not completely, and Kurman helps with interviews. She said Bouton had kept the “Ball Four” notes meticulously organized at their home in western Massachusetts, and had often enjoyed delving into them to stir an old memory.But after dispersing some baseball items to their children, and keeping a few for themselves, they decided it was time to part with the rest. The family retains the reproduction rights for all the notes, but the buyer is bound to discover reams of unpublished anecdotes — on everything from index cards to airsickness bags to cocktail napkins to stationery from the Radisson in Minneapolis.“The idea was to write down anything that was interesting, so I had to have a notebook with me, little pieces of paper, popcorn boxes,” Bouton said. “I wrote notes on the back of a cereal box in the dugout. I remember Fred Talbot” — a fellow pitcher — “saying, ‘You know, Bouton, taking notes like that is worse than whispering!’“But there were so many characters like that where it was just so wonderful. We were an expansion team, so we were all rejected by the other teams and we were getting to know each other. That was part of the fun.”Throughout “Ball Four,” Bouton reflected on more than just the 1969 season; he also shared stories from the rest of his life and career. For decades, he was not invited to Old-Timers’ Day at Yankee Stadium, supposedly for having written about Mickey Mantle’s drinking habits. In 1994, after Bouton sent a sympathy note following the death of Mantle’s son, he got a surprise voice mail from Mantle, telling him he was never hurt by the book and had never asked the Yankees to exclude him. That tape is included in the auction.Kurman said that she and Bouton hoped the buyer might make the materials available for study, and Imler said various institutions — he would not specify which — had inquired. The Baseball Hall of Fame does not purchase artifacts, but a buyer, in theory, could lend the material to Cooperstown. Wherever it lands, his former teammates can rest easy.“Almost 50 years after the events, nobody’s going to be hurt by any revelations,” Kurman said. “It’s just time to get it out there.”Perhaps the only item related to “Ball Four” that was lost to time is the person who named it. Bouton said the inspiration came when he and his editor, Leonard Shecter, slipped into a tavern in Greenwich Village after the season.“Shecter and I had the final manuscript, and we went down to the Lion’s Head,” Bouton said. “We were thrilled to have the book on its way, but we still didn’t have a name! So I say to him: ‘What do we call it? We still don’t have a name.’ And at that moment, this drunk lady at the bar said, ‘Why don’t you call it “Ball Four”?’“We laughed about it and thought it was pretty funny, and as we’re walking through the streets later, he said, ‘You know, “Ball Four” is not a bad name.’”Advertisement