By THE ASSOCIATED PRESSJAN. 12, 2017
PHILADELPHIA — It is a headline that once seemed more likely to appear on a fake-news website: Philadelphia 76ers win for fourth time in five games!But that claim has been verified: The Sixers, that franchise shamed by accusations of tanking and making a sham of competitive basketball, are actually winning games.So now what? Time to dance!Joel Embiid did not let a sprained left ankle stop him from showing off his moves after a recent victory. He crashed the 76ers dance team’s celebration and flailed his arms in the air like one of those inflatable figures at car dealerships. Embiid was energetic after the Sixers rallied from 10 points behind with 2 minutes 29 seconds left and beat the Knicks on T. J. McConnell’s jumper at the buzzer.Embiid, a social-media darling, is positive about the Sixers’ future.“Playoff time, baby,” Embiid said.AdvertisementHold up. Do not download those postseason tickets just yet. Even after that encouraging streak, the Sixers are only 11-25.But Embiid, a 7-foot center with an affinity for nonalcoholic cocktails, has added a splash of fun in his long-delayed rookie year, helping to make the Sixers more compelling this season.Embiid has generated buzz through his celebrity crushes (hello, Rihanna!) and celebrity fans (hi, Mike Trout!), and he has become the Ellen DeGeneres of the 76ers with a victory dance in big moments.Get the big sports news, highlights and analysis from Times journalists, with distinctive takes on games and some behind-the-scenes surprises, delivered to your inbox every week.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.And it is because of Embiid that the Sixers are finally finding those big moments. Even with playing-time restrictions, Embiid has helped the Sixers win 11 times, already one more win than all of last season.Embiid has played in 26 of 36 games and leads the Sixers in per-game averages for points (19.4), blocks (2.3) and rebounds (7.5). His 52 assists have allowed the team’s public address announcer to refer to “the feed from Embiid” at times.AdvertisementAlready a fan favorite before he played a game, Embiid had adopted the Process as a nickname and is introduced as such in the pregame lineup. Embiid waves his arms and exhorts fans to get louder as they chant, “Trust the Process!” — the mantra coined in the Sam Hinkie era, when tanking games, rather than winning them, was the theme.As protective as the Sixers have been of Embiid’s health, they have orchestrated a social-media effort to get him into the All-Star Game. Embiid has long been a fan of Shirley Temples, an alcohol-free concoction of lemon-lime soda, grenadine and a maraschino cherry, and the Sixers sold the drink in a promotional push to get him an All-Star spot.With 457,300 fan votes, Embiid was fourth among frontcourt players in the latest round of All-Star voting totals released Thursday. He needs to crack the top three to earn an Eastern Conference starting spot but was 16,028 votes shy of Cleveland’s Kevin Love for third.The team still faces a harsh reality check as it moves closer to the Feb. 23 trade deadline. The Sixers have one too many starting centers, and the combination of Embiid and Jahlil Okafor was a flop. Okafor, the No. 3 overall pick in the 2015 draft and last season’s leading scorer, has been benched. He sat against the Knicks on Wednesday, the fourth time he had done so in the last six games.“I’m just trying to do my part to make sure it all works out,” Okafor said.Nerlens Noel has been solid and has been the best option to team at power forward with Embiid. Ersan Ilyasova has made everyone better, and acquiring him in a trade was a major coup for the team’s president, Bryan Colangelo.Ben Simmons, the No. 1 overall draft pick, has been strong in his comeback from a broken right foot and could make his season debut this month. The Sixers have not put a timetable on his return, but he competed in 5-on-0 drills this week for the first time and has started traveling with the team.Coach Brett Brown may have his best team in four seasons, but the Sixers are well out of the playoff picture. The wins in their 4-1 streak (which included two buzzer-beaters) came in games against the Denver Nuggets, the Minnesota Timberwolves, the Nets and the Knicks — all sub-.500 teams. They play teams with records of .500 or above in eight of the next nine games.Embiid, who sat out two seasons with a broken right foot, is restricted to 28 minutes per game and does not play full sets of back-to-backs. He is scheduled to start Friday against Charlotte and sit Saturday at Washington.But there are high hopes that Embiid, Simmons and Noel could be the trio to lead the Sixers back to the playoffs next season for the first time since 2012.Advertisement“When you really set the bar as high as we have, there is a lot left to be learned — and done,” Brown said. “It’s a heck of a lot clearer now than it ever was.”We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.