By VICTOR MATHERJAN. 12, 2017
After 21 years without an N.F.L. team, Los Angeles, the nation’s second-largest city, will soon have two. The Rams moved to town for this season, and on Thursday, the Chargers announced that they would join them next season. Here’s what we know about football in Los Angeles for 2017.A second bad football team.After consecutive 9-7 seasons, the San Diego Chargers sank to 4-12 and 5-11 the last two years. Particularly disappointing, after a decent 5-6 start, were the last five games, all losses. The team fired Coach Mike McCoy after four seasons and is hunting for someone new who likes sunny weather.The Chargers’ chief problem was on the defensive side; they allowed 423 points, the fourth highest total in the league.
            A letter from Dean Spanos pic.twitter.com/rTNIvrsN1A Still, the Chargers are not as bad as the Rams. That franchise has endured 10 straight losing seasons, including an abysmal 4-12 record this season, their first in Los Angeles. The Rams fired their coach, Jeff Fisher, and announced on Thursday that they had hired Sean McVay, who at 30 years old is the youngest head coach in N.F.L. history.AdvertisementThe Rams were 32nd and last in yards per play, and also 32nd in yards per pass. The good news is that they were 31st in yards per rush. Those numbers mean they scored only 224 points, an average of 14 a game, the lowest in the N.F.L. Hardly a way to take the town by storm.AdvertisementNot exactly. The Rams somehow managed two Pro Bowl players, defensive tackle Aaron Donald and a punter, Johnny Hekker. (The Rams punted 98 times, second most in the league.) The Chargers will not help the star power: Their only selection was a cornerback, Casey Hayward, as a backup.At the marquee position of quarterback, the Chargers’ Philip Rivers churned out another so-so season. The Rams’ anemic offense was led first by the journeyman Case Keenum and later by the rookie Jared Goff, who has not yet lived up to being the No. 1 pick in the draft.Are you seeing any strong contenders for cameos on “Family Guy” or “Code Black” in there?While they wait for a new stadium to be finished, maybe for 2019, the Rams are playing in the ancient Los Angeles Memorial Coliseum, whose huge capacity has meant that seats have been readily available. Sections of the stadium were often blocked off to avoid the sight of fans sunbathing in their own rows.That could have been the case for the Chargers as well. But until the new stadium is ready, they have opted to play  in the StubHub Center, in Carson, Calif., which seats only 27,000 for its primary tenant, the Los Angeles Galaxy of Major League Soccer. That will make the Chargers one of the toughest tickets in the N.F.L., no matter how bad they are.At the very least, the Chargers will avoid the possibility of playing in front of thousands of empty seats.Most people remember that the Rams played in the Los Angeles area for decades before heading to St. Louis and playing there from 1995 to 2015. But the Chargers are also coming home again.In 1960, the first year of the American Football League, the Los Angeles Chargers played in the Coliseum. The team was actually good, with a 10-4 record and a trip to the championship game. But the owner Barron Hilton shipped the team to San Diego after one year.Get the big sports news, highlights and analysis from Times journalists, with distinctive takes on games and some behind-the-scenes surprises, delivered to your inbox every week.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.“Chargers” was selected in a name-the-team contest and stuck around for all those years in San Diego.AdvertisementLos Angeles joins East Rutherford, N.J., (Giants and Jets) as locales with two N.F.L. teams.The team began using a new logo on its social media accounts, although it is not getting sterling reviews so far. As you might expect, it’s an “LA” with a lightning bolt. It doesn’t help that the San Diego Chargers’ classic lightning bolt logo was revered.Many people are seeing distinct similarities with the Los Angeles Dodgers’ logo, and maybe the Tampa Bay Lightning’s too.
            *checks mentions**squints**clears throat*for the record, us &amp; the @dodgers are just friends https://t.co/jBoJhZlYVD The consensus of modern economists is that the benefits of a major sports franchise are dubious. Money spent on games would probably be spent on other forms of entertainment anyway, they say.Any small financial gains may be negated by municipal subsidies and givebacks to teams anyway.Most of the benefits to a city are psychic. Pro teams can make a city feel “major league,” although an inferiority complex is not something Los Angeles has generally been afflicted with (unless the topic is competing with New York for cultural relevance).Sure. San Diego and St. Louis for starters.Discounting Riverside, Calif., which could be considered part of the Los Angeles region, the biggest metropolitan area without an N.F.L. team is now San Diego, ranked 17th. St. Louis, the 20th biggest area, is next.The biggest metropolitan area that has never had an N.F.L. team is 23rd-ranked Portland, Ore.And Los Angeles remains a huge television market. Ultimately, broadcasting contracts are where the N.F.L. makes its money.A version of this article appears in print on January 13, 2017, on Page B9 of the New York edition with the headline: No Team to Two Not-So-Great Teams.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.