AdvertisementSupported byPenguins 3, Rangers 2 | OvertimeBy Allan KredaEric Staal, who joined the Rangers a month ago, surely was waiting for a night like the one he finally enjoyed Sunday against the surging Pittsburgh Penguins.Staal, a late-season acquisition and a veteran offensive force, had just one goal for the Rangers since he was acquired from Carolina on Feb. 28. The pressure to produce had been growing.Staal scored both goals for the Rangers on Sunday, but the Penguins forged a 3-2 victory at Madison Square Garden when Sidney Crosby scored at 4 minutes 30 seconds of overtime. The victory was the Penguins’ third straight over the Rangers. The victory also moved Pittsburgh (42-25-8) 3 points behind the second-place Rangers (43-24-9) in the Metropolitan Division race. Staal chose to focus on the home team earning a point rather than his personal achievements on Garden ice.“You would have liked to get a bounce the other way after the guys did a great job there, but unfortunately not tonight,” he said. “But we’ll take the point and get a couple of days to recover and look forward to the rest of the week.”The Penguins, who won for the eighth time in their last nine games, are 9-3-1 in their last 13 road games and 10-4 this month.“We stuck with it, stayed focused and found a way to finish it in overtime,” said Crosby, who leads his team with 32 goals. “To find a way to get 2 points against a good team was really good.”Crosby’s star turn was needed to overcome Staal’s best game as a Ranger.After using his long reach for a one-handed redirection of a pass from his linemate Kevin Hayes past Penguins goaltender Marc-Andre Fleury at 4:19 of the first period, the 6-foot-4 Staal exulted with a fist pump.After the former Ranger Matt Cullen tied the score at 1-1 at 15:49 of the first, Staal whipped home his second goal at 2:07 of the middle period, again with assists to Hayes and Jesper Fast, his most recent linemates as Rangers Coach Alain Vigneault has sought the best line complement for Staal, a 31-year-old forward who had spent his entire career with the Hurricanes.“It’s not easy when you’ve played in the same place for a number of years like he was, but he’s fit in real good,” Vigneault said. “He’s been real positive and real upbeat on the bench and I like what he’s bringing to our team.”Another arm-raising celebration ensued for Staal, who will return to Carolina when the Rangers visit Raleigh on Thursday.But later in the second period, another former Rangers forward, Carl Hagelin, managed to race down the ice ahead of the defense and get a shot on goaltender Henrik Lundqvist, who left the puck available on a rebound for Phil Kessel, who notched his 23rd goal at 8:36. Kessel was coming off a 5-point performance in a 7-2 win over Detroit on Saturday.Staal nearly scored a third time late in the second period when his brother Marc found him alone in front of Fleury with a slick pass from the point. But Fleury managed to deny him point blank, sending the teams tied, 2-2, into the third period.The Penguins have turned their season around since the former Rangers assistant coach Mike Sullivan took the reins on Dec. 12, when Pittsburgh was 15-10-3. After losing their first four games with Sullivan behind the bench, they are 27-11-5.That has coincided with the solid production of Crosby and newcomers like Kessel and Hagelin, whom the Rangers traded to Anaheim last summer. The speedy Hagelin, who scored the series winner in overtime when the Rangers eliminated the Penguins in the playoffs last April, was acquired from the Ducks on Jan. 16 and has 7 goals and 14 assists in 30 games.The Rangers had a three-game winning streak after a messy performance last weekend at San Jose and a meltdown against the Kings. They appeared to right the ship, downing playoff-bound Florida and Boston at home before smothering Montreal, 5-2, on Saturday night.But the speedy Penguins proved better again.Lundqvist has played more games against the Penguins than any other opponent: 59. That does not include the three times the Rangers and the Penguins have met in the playoffs during his 11-year career.But Lundqvist was coming off two vexing games against the Penguins, a 5-3 home loss on March 13 and a defeat at Pittsburgh on March 3 when he angrily knocked over his net after he had collided with a teammate and hurt his neck.The Rangers are still 4-2-2 in their last eight games, but second place in their division is still up for grabs, the way the Penguins are winning.“I really thought it was a hard-fought game,” Vigneault said. “We got a point, and we’ll get ready for the next game.”Advertisement