AdvertisementSupported byGlobal SoccerBy Rob HughesLONDON — There is a huge difference between playing for points and playing friendlies. But in many aspects, the way Uruguay came from two goals down against Brazil to earn a point in a World Cup qualifying was no more surprising than how England, also down two goals, emerged a 3-2 victor in Germany. Uruguay is used to upsetting Brazil, especially when Luis Suárez is there to provide the finishing touch, as he did Friday in the 2-2 draw in Recife in northeastern Brazil.Germany, the world champion, is not renowned for giving ground to anyone. It led by two goals against England in Berlin on Saturday before the young English lineup outscored and out-willed Germany in its own stadium.Harry Kane and Jamie Vardy, each with marvelous back-heel improvisations, scored the first two goals for England. Eric Dier, a Tottenham Hotspur defender, then finished the job with a headed goal following a planned corner-kick routine in stoppage time.And yet the top performer during this weekend of comebacks was not a goal scorer. He was Dele Alli, another Tottenham player who is not even 20. He simply took the game away from the Germans with his energy, spirit and ability to keep on taking the game to the opponent, even when his team appeared down and out in Berlin’s Olympic Stadium.Alli revels in new situations. A year ago, he was in the midfield of the Milton Keynes Dons in the third tier of English soccer. Now he is the midfield creator of a Tottenham team challenging Leicester City at the top of the Premier League.Nothing seems to faze him. The adversity of being two goals down, after scores by Toni Kroos and Mario Gomez, only seemed to rouse young Alli.Yes, the Germans thought the game was won. Yes, the world champion relaxed. And certainly Alli was not alone in the defiant manner with which England responded.It had a core of four Tottenham players — Kane, Alli, Dier and the left back Danny Rose — in the lineup, youthful players selected by the 68-year-old coach, Roy Hodgson. These players, given license to be adventurous at Spurs by Coach Mauricio Pochettino, have stepped straight into the nucleus of England’s national team. Kane, sturdy and always running, surprised everyone with the way he scored. Facing away from goal, he suddenly turned, flicked the ball behind his own back and smashed the ball past Manuel Neuer.“Maybe a little dedication to Johan Cruyff,” Kane later said on television.Not to be outdone (because nobody has outdone Leicester so far this season), Vardy emerged off the bench after 71 minutes. Three minutes later, with his third touch of the game, Vardy flicked in the second goal using the inside of his heel.Germany was rocking, England’s force was rolling, and seconds from the end, Dier completed the comeback with his header to win the game. No one doubts that Germany will be different, less generous and certainly less easily distracted when the Euro 2016 tournament starts in June. Saturday was the first time that Germany has lost on home turf after leading by two goals, and it also was the first time in 40 years that England has come back to win from a two-goal deficit.There is a precedent — a famous one — for Uruguay’s thwarting Brazil. In 1950, Uruguay upset Brazil, 2-1, in Rio de Janeiro in the decisive game of the World Cup. The result is one that few will forget.What happened in Recife this weekend was almost to be expected. Douglas Costa knocked in the opening goal for Brazil in the first minute, then after 25 minutes Renato Augusto, who plays for Beijing Guoan in the Chinese Super League scored the second goal.The second half reversed Brazil’s apparent supremacy. Edinson Cavani was allowed time and space by Brazil’s David Luiz to volley the first Uruguay goal, and the same defender, David Luiz, languidly let in Suárez to notch the tying goal.Suárez reacted emotionally, for he had two reasons to. It was his first game for his country after FIFA effectively banned him for 20 months for biting the shoulder of Italy’s Giorgio Chiellini during the 2014 World Cup, in Brazil.Uruguay Coach Óscar Tabárez not only recalled Suárez at the first opportunity, he gave him the captain’s armband. So here was a night in Recife when two F.C. Barcelona strikers, Neymar and Suárez, led their opposing national teams in a crucial Wold Cup qualifier.Suárez celebrated his goal in a way that at first seemed provocative, but later was understood to be so much more. He ran to the sideline where he was handed a T-shirt, which he held to the crowd. The shirt bore tribute to Walter Ferreira, a physiotherapist who put off his own cancer treatment to get Suárez fit for the 2014 World Cup. Ferreira died in January, when Suárez vowed never to forget him.Typical Suárez: One day he bites, on another he exhibits love.Advertisement