AdvertisementSupported byRoundupBy Tim RohanLAKE BUENA VISTA, Fla. — Just watching Jacob deGrom pitch on Saturday, everything looked fine. Freddie Freeman was fooled, swinging through one of deGrom’s fastballs for a strikeout. But the center field scoreboard said the pitch had been only 92 miles per hour. The discrepancy has nagged at deGrom this spring: The results have been there, but the velocity has not. The Mets and the Braves played to a 10-inning tie, 3-3, at Champion Stadium, and deGrom pitched well. He allowed three hits, one walk and two earned runs and had five strikeouts in six and two-thirds innings. But his fastball mostly sat around 91 to 93 m.p.h. — a few ticks slower than usual. “I took a little extra time off this off-season, just because of how many innings I threw,” deGrom said, referring to his workload last season. “It’s taking me a little longer to build up arm strength.”DeGrom rose to prominence in recent years as a result, in part, of his fastball. Last season, according to FanGraphs, it averaged about 95 m.p.h., and the year before, 93.5. DeGrom’s lanky frame made the pitch even harder for batters to pick up coming out of his hand.“One hundred and ten degrees on the field today,” Manager Terry Collins said. “He hit 94 several times, so we know the velocity is there. As we all know, once the season opens, the adrenaline kind of kicks in. It’ll be amped up a couple miles per hour, I’m sure.”CHAMBERLAIN MAKES ROSTER Cleveland Indians Manager Terry Francona said reliever Joba Chamberlain had made the team as a nonroster invitee.Chamberlain signed with the Indians on Dec. 1. Francona said that the right-handed Chamberlain would be “a real valuable piece.”In eight innings this spring, Chamberlain has given up seven hits and three runs. He struck out seven, walked five and has an E.R.A. of 3.38. (AP)REDS SIGN PITCHER Cincinnati and the veteran right-handed pitcher Ross Ohlendorf have agreed to a one-year, $800,000 contract.Ohlendorf was released by Kansas City on Wednesday after making eight appearances. He pitched nine innings, allowing six runs on nine hits, with three walks. Ohlendorf had 10 strikeouts.Ohlendorf, 33, has played nine full seasons in the majors. He has 80 career starts and 65 relief appearances. (AP)BREWERS RELIEVER IS INJURED Milwaukee will start the season without reliever Will Smith, who tore a ligament in his right knee while taking his spikes off after a game.Smith, who was set to share the closer’s role with Jeremy Jeffress, was awaiting test results to determine if surgery is necessary.Milwaukee Manager Craig Counsell said Smith will miss “significant time.”Smith injured himself Thursday in the clubhouse. (AP)Advertisement