By THE ASSOCIATED PRESSMARCH 26, 2016
Jamie Vardy scored his first international goal two minutes after coming on as a substitute, and Eric Dier scored in injury time Saturday to help England beat Germany, 3-2, in a friendly.England swept back from a two-goal deficit to remain unbeaten in Berlin, where it has won six games and drawn three against Germany.It was Germany’s first match since a 2-0 loss to France in Paris on Nov. 13, a game overshadowed by the attacks outside the stadium and across the city that killed 130 people.Europe is on alert after the attacks in Brussels on Tuesday that left 31 dead, and security was tight on Saturday, with about 1,500 police officers on duty.AdvertisementElsewhere, Poland routed Finland, 5-0, in Warsaw; Hungary drew with visiting Croatia, 1-1; and Kazakhstan won in Azerbaijan, 1-0. Russia cruised past Lithuania, 3-0, in Moscow; and Austria defeated Albania, 2-1, in Vienna.AdvertisementThe games served as a dress rehearsal for the monthlong Euro 2016, starting June 10. About 2.5 million fans are expected to attend matches in 10 cities.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.N.Y.C.F.C. TIES Chris Tierney’s goal off a free kick in the 38th minute helped the short-handed New England Revolution tie host New York City F.C., 1-1.New York City took a 1-0 lead in the 10th minute when Thomas McNamara headed home a rebound of a volley by David Villa off the crossbar.New England’s Gershon Koffie drew a red card for a tackle on McNamara in the 51st, and the Revolution (0-1-3), a man down, held on for the draw.N.Y.C.F.C. (1-1-2) is winless in its last four home matches — including three this season.CRUYFF TRIBUTE Fans mourning the death of Johan Cruyff paid their respects to the former player and coach at a memorial in the Camp Nou Stadium in Barcelona, Spain. The club said more than 15,000 fans had attended the memorial. Barcelona’s players are expected to go to the memorial Tuesday after returning from international competition.A version of this article appears in print on March 27, 2016, on Page SP9 of the New York edition with the headline: England Remains Unbeaten in Berlin.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.