AdvertisementSupported byBy The Associated PressThe Seattle Seahawks placed running back Marshawn Lynch on the N.F.L.’s reserve/retired list Thursday, confirming what had been implied in February when Lynch indicated he was ready to end his football career. The procedural step made Lynch’s retirement official. Lynch played nine seasons in the N.F.L., including six with Seattle. He is second in Seattle history for rushing touchdowns and fourth in yards rushing. Lynch, an All-Pro and Pro Bowl selection, ended his career with 9,112 yards rushing and 74 touchdowns in the regular season, and another nine touchdowns in the postseason. He helped the Seahawks cap their 2013 season with a victory in the Super Bowl. ■ Johnny Manziel made his first court appearance in a domestic violence case in Dallas. Manziel, 23, a free-agent quarterback, is preparing a defense against a misdemeanor assault charge that carries a penalty of up to a year in jail and a $4,000 fine. Manziel was indicted last month after ex-girlfriend Colleen Crowley said he had hit her and threatened to kill her during a night out in January. ■ The Washington Redskins have signed tight end Jordan Reed to a five-year contract extension, worth up to about $50 million, including $22 million in guaranteed money, starting with the 2017 season. Reed emerged as an elite tight end last season, finishing with 87 catches for 952 yards. ■ The Jets have signed cornerback Juston Burris, offensive tackle Brandon Shell and punter Lachlan Edwards, three of their seven draft picks, and waived Joe Anderson, the wide receiver who made headlines last year by standing outside Houston’s stadium with a sign seeking an N.F.L. job. Burris was a fourth-round pick out of North Carolina State; Shell was the Jets’ fifth-round pick; and Edwards, from Sam Houston State, was selected in the seventh round. ■ The widow of the former Saints defensive end Will Smith accepted Smith’s degree from the University of Miami on Thursday, nearly a month after he was shot and killed. Smith was in an executive M.B.A. program for artists and athletes when he died. Advertisement