
Sports of The Times By                     
 WILLIAM C. RHODEN
 
APRIL 20, 2016
Elmer Anderson got the news early Wednesday morning. His former high school teammate, soul mate and friend, Dwayne Washington — known far and wide as Pearl — had died.It was not a surprise, yet it still came as a shock.Washington had been fighting cancer, successfully for the most part, for the past two decades, but his health had worsened over the last year. Anderson, who was Washington’s backcourt mate at Boys and Girls High School in Brooklyn for two seasons, had been bracing himself for the end.“We understood that the time was coming,” Anderson said Wednesday morning. “But sometimes there’s a reality check, and when you get checked, you understand that this is truly the reality of life.”Over the next few days there will be tributes to Washington, 52, one of the most celebrated guards to come out of Brooklyn. His freewheeling game put him on the list of legends like Roger Brown and Connie Hawkins as one of the most transformational high school players New York City has ever produced.AdvertisementMore than Brown and more than Hawkins, whose college careers were cut short by scandal, Washington was a high school star whose fame and celebrity actually grew in college. At Syracuse, he not only became the face of the program, he became the charismatic force who ushered in a dominant era of Big East basketball, and the star of dozens of showcase nights at Syracuse’s new Carrier Dome.“We had just opened, and we were getting 18,000 a game,” Syracuse Coach Jim Boeheim said Wednesday. “It got to 25,000 when Pearl came here, because he was exciting. He never thought, and I never thought, he was the best point guard. But he was the most exciting guard I’ve ever seen.”
                A look at the use and effectiveness of the crossover move in basketball.            Boeheim added: “I was very lucky to have a guy like Pearl. He made our program, he helped make the Big East Conference, and he helped make Jim Boeheim.”Get the big sports news, highlights and analysis from Times journalists, with distinctive takes on games and some behind-the-scenes surprises, delivered to your inbox every week.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.I covered Anderson and Washington for the two seasons they played together at Boys and Girls High. Washington was the most electric high school player in the country and the king in a crop of sensational New York City guards that included Kenny Smith and Mark Jackson. Smith and Jackson were more traditional guards, and they went on to long and successful college and N.B.A. careers. But Washington oozed something else; he was able to do his job while maintaining an exciting playground style of play that resisted the conformity of so-called organized ball.“He did things that nobody could understand, but yet everyone enjoyed,” said Anderson, who played in college at St. Bonaventure. “He’s out on the court just flat-out having fun, and making everyone else have fun as well.”AdvertisementWashington was important on other levels, too. His decision to attend Syracuse announced to the college basketball world that the Big East had arrived and that it had the prestige and the muscle to attract the nation’s top high school stars. Boeheim once told me that Washington was the most important player he had ever recruited.“He still stands as that today,” Boeheim said Wednesday.“It was the start of the league, the start of Syracuse being a big-time program,” he added. “He was the No. 1 player in high school that year. His coming here just changed the face of our program, the face of the league.”Washington was the 13th player taken in the 1986 N.B.A. draft. Plagued by injuries and poor supporting casts, he played three N.B.A. seasons.While he left Syracuse early Washington returned to earn his degree and later returned a second time to begin work on a master’s degree.He also was as humble and selfless a person as he was flamboyant as a player. Entering their senior year of high school, Anderson and Washington were invited to the fabled Five-Star summer camp, where they competed against the best players in the nation. Anderson was having an extraordinary camp, yet was overlooked for the All-Star team.Crestfallen, Anderson returned to his cabin. “I’m in tears,” he said, “and who comes to my cabin at the foot of my bed and taps me and goes, ‘Elmer, here’ ”? It was Washington, handing Anderson his All-Star jersey.Washington had told the top camp official, Howard Garfinkel, that he was injured and that Anderson would take his place.“He loved Five-Star, he loved Howie Garfinkel and those guys, but he also loved me because I was going to be the one sweating with him for a whole year and not for a momentary existence for a week in camp,” Anderson said.AdvertisementIn January, as Washington’s health deteriorated, members of the Syracuse basketball team wore warm-up shirts with his nickname, Pearl,  on the front. Boeheim, whose Orange reached the Final Four, said the tribute was the players’ idea.He also said the news of Washington’s death was an emotional body blow. “I’ve been here 40 years, so to me, these are my family guys, and as a father you don’t want to see your sons go before you go,” he said. “That’s what it’s like. It’s like losing a son. I’ve cried on and off all day today. You knew it was coming, but I’m a little shocked.”Two weeks ago, Anderson gathered about 500 of Washington’s friends, former teammates and opponents, and fans who had never met Washington but had enjoyed watching him play. In a speech, he praised Washington as the rare player who united fans on both sides because it was such a joy to watch him perform.“He could make the opponents’ fans stand up in anticipation of his next move,” Anderson said. “You knew something was coming next. You just didn’t know what it would be.”Email: wcr@nytimes.com A version of this article appears in print on April 21, 2016, on Page B16 of the New York edition with the headline: A Guard Who Inspired Wonder Is Remembered Fondly.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.See More »