 THE ASSOCIATED PRESSDEC. 13, 2016
James Harden had 36 points, 11 assists and 8 rebounds on Monday as the Houston Rockets held off the visiting Nets, 122-118, for their seventh straight win.Brooklyn trailed for much of the game until Joe Harris’s layup tied the score 118-118 with less than 40 seconds remaining. Eric Gordon gave Houston a 2-point lead with 11.9 seconds left. The Rockets then forced a turnover on the ensuing inbound pass, and Gordon hit two more from the line for the final margin.Brook Lopez scored 26 points and Sean Kilpatrick added 17 for the Nets. Gordon had 24 points and was 6 for 10 on 3-pointers.Arizona receiver Michael Floyd was arrested on charges including driving under the influence after the police said he was found unconscious behind the wheel of his running vehicle in Scottsdale.AdvertisementFloyd was also charged with failure to obey an officer and obstructing a roadway after his car was spotted an intersection just before 3 a.m., the police said.AdvertisementFloyd has 33 catches for 446 yards and four touchdowns this season. Cardinals Coach Bruce Arians said he was determining “what our options are going forward.”MCKNIGHT FUNERAL HELD Five former teammates served as pallbearers at the funeral of Joe McKnight, the former Jets running back who was shot to death on Dec. 1 in suburban New Orleans.McKnight played for the Jets from 2010 to 2013. His former teammates Sione Po’uha, Antonio Cromartie, Bart Scott, Willie Colon and D’Brickashaw Ferguson were pallbearers, along with LenDale White, who played at Southern California before McKnight attended.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.Lane Kiffin, the offensive coordinator at Alabama, agreed to become the head coach at Florida Atlantic, according to Crimson Tide Coach Nick Saban.Kiffin was an assistant coach at Southern California before he was hired to coach the Oakland Raiders in 2007. He went 5-15 with the Raiders before being fired. Kiffin returned to college football in 2009, going 7-6 in his lone season at Tennessee and 28-15 in parts of four seasons with the Trojans.PLAYER CHARGED IN KILLING Jovieair Kennedy, a member of the Western Michigan basketball team, was charged with murder and armed robbery in the shooting death of a fellow student.Kennedy, 20, was denied bond at his arraignment in the death of Jacob Jones, 19, at an off-campus apartment in Kalamazoo on Thursday. The authorities said Kennedy killed Jones while robbing him of a cellphone and money.Buzunesh Deba was formally named the women’s winner of the 2014 Boston Marathon two months after Rita Jeptoo was stripped of the title and banned from international competition for four years for doping.Deba, of Ethiopia, was also recognized as the current course record-holder. Her blistering finish of 2 hours 19 minutes 59 seconds was the fastest women’s race in Boston’s 121-year history, besting the previous mark of 2:20:43 set in 2002 by Margaret Okayo of Kenya.A version of this article appears in print on December 13, 2016, on Page B10 of the New York edition with the headline: Rockets Fend Off Nets’ Rally.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.