By THE ASSOCIATED PRESSNOV. 9, 2016
Darian Thompson, the Giants’ rookie starting free safety, will miss the rest of the 2016 season because of foot surgery. Thompson, who was the team’s third-round pick, assumed a pivotal role in the team’s defense shortly after he was drafted because he had impressed coaches with his mastery of defensive schemes and his ability to get his teammates lined up properly. As the last line of defense, Thompson also displayed an uncanny knack for breaking up and intercepting passes.Thompson injured his right foot late in the Giants’ second game this season and missed six games. Thompson reinjured the foot when he returned to practice last week. The undrafted rookie free agent Andrew Adams has replaced Thompson, along with the third-year safety Nat Berhe. BILL PENNINGTONJETS SHAKE UP ROSTER The Jets placed left tackle Ryan Clady on injured reserve with a shoulder injury, and wide receiver Devin Smith was activated from the physically unable to perform list.The team also signed defensive lineman Anthony Johnson from New England’s practice squad to the active roster and waived defensive lineman Jarvis Jenkins. Offensive tackle Zach Sterup was also signed to the practice squad.AdvertisementClady was acquired in the off-season from Denver to replace the retired D’Brickashaw Ferguson, who in 10 seasons never missed a snap in a game or practice because of injury. Clady was coming off a torn knee ligament that had sidelined him all of last year, but he was ready to start the season for the Jets.AdvertisementClady has been dealing with an ailing rotator cuff, however, since injuring it at Kansas City in Week 3. Ben Ijalana will replace him.Miami Marlins pitcher Jose Fernandez, who died in a boating accident in September, was voted the National League comeback player of the year by his peers in the annual Players Choice Awards of the Major League Baseball Players Association.The Baltimore Orioles slugger Mark Trumbo, who led the major leagues with 47 home runs after hitting 13 for Seattle in 2015, won the American League comeback award.Mets outfielder Curtis Granderson earned his second Marvin Miller Man of the Year Award, given to the player who most inspires his fellow players through his on-field performances and contributions to his community. Granderson also won in 2009.Houston second baseman Jose Altuve was voted player of the year and the A.L.’s outstanding player. Second baseman Daniel Murphy was selected as the N.L.’s outstanding player in his first season with Washington.Get the big sports news, highlights and analysis from Times journalists, with distinctive takes on games and some behind-the-scenes surprises, delivered to your inbox every week.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.Kyle Hendricks of the Chicago Cubs, who lead the majors in E.R.A., was the N.L.’s outstanding pitcher, and Rick Porcello won the A.L. award in his second season with Boston.Kemba Walker scored 21 points, and the streaking Charlotte Hornets defeated the visiting Utah Jazz, 104-98, for their fourth straight win.AdvertisementWalker, the third-leading scorer in the Eastern Conference at more than 24 points per game, struggled with his shot early and finished just 7 of 20 from the field, but he made several key baskets down the stretch, in which he had 9 points.Marvin Williams had 19 points, including a big 3-pointer in the fourth quarter to help stretch Charlotte’s lead to 4. Marco Belinelli and Frank Kaminsky each had 13 points as Charlotte’s bench outscored Utah’s, 41-20.The Hornets overcame a solid effort from Jazz guard Gordon Haywood, who finished with 29 points and 7 rebounds. Rodney Hood had 20 points, and Derrick Favors added 16 points and 10 rebounds.DEROZAN LEADS RAPTORS OVER THUNDER DeMar DeRozan scored 37 points to help Toronto win at Oklahoma City, 112-102. Kyle Lowry added 19 points, 13 assists and 9 rebounds, and Patrick Patterson had 13 points for the Raptors. Russell Westbrook led the way for the Thunder with 36 points, 7 rebounds and 7 assists, but he made just 9 of 26 shots and committed eight turnovers.CAREER HIGH FOR WIZARDS’ PORTER Otto Porter scored a career-high 34 points, and host Washington jumped out to a big first-quarter lead and beat the Boston Celtics, 118-93, for its second victory of the season. John Wall had 19 points before being ejected for a flagrant foul in the final minutes, and Trey Burke added 18 for Washington. Isaiah Thomas led the Celtics with 23 points, and Avery Bradley had 21.HAWKS HOLD OFF BULLS Thabo Sefolosha scored 20 points, Dwight Howard added 18, and Atlanta beat visiting Chicago, 115-107, for its third consecutive victory. Jimmy Butler finished with 39 points, and Dwyane Wade had 25 for the Bulls, who have lost four of five.Artemi Panarin scored 25 seconds into overtime, and Corey Crawford made 27 saves, leading Chicago to a win at St. Louis, 2-1, its seventh straight victory.Crawford won his sixth consecutive game and improved to 15-5-5 against the Blues. Chicago has earned a point in nine straight games.Panarin scored on a wrist shot from the slot for his sixth goal of the season.St. Louis’s Alex Pietrangelo tied the score with 2 minutes 11 seconds left in the third on a drive from the point that squeezed past Crawford, who got a piece of the shot.AdvertisementYannick Carrasco scored a late equalizer, and his teammate Romelu Lukaku squandered two good chances as Belgium came from behind to draw, 1-1, with the Netherlands in the 126th Low Countries derby. Davy Klaassen had given the Netherlands the lead from the penalty spot in the 38th minute as the neighbors played an exhibition in Amsterdam to prepare for their World Cup qualifiers on Sunday.A version of this article appears in print on November 10, 2016, on Page B10 of the New York edition with the headline: Foot Injury Ends Season for Giants’ Rookie Free Safety.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.