AdvertisementSupported bySports BriefingBy The Associated PressJosh Hart scored a career-high 37 points, and No. 1 Villanova (10-0) rallied from an 11-point deficit to beat No. 23 Notre Dame (9-1) by 74-66 on Saturday in Newark.Hart was the only Villanova player to score in double figures. Matt Farrell and Steve Vasturia each had 18 points for Notre Dame.A MILESTONE FOR PITINO Quentin Snider scored 15 points, V. J. King added 13, and No. 11 Louisville (9-1) gave Rick Pitino his 400th victory as the Cardinals’ coach with a 102-71 victory at home against Texas Southern (4-5).SPURS DOMINATE NETS Kawhi Leonard scored 30 points, and San Antonio rebounded from its first road loss of the season with its most efficient home performance, rolling to a 130-101 victory over the Nets. Bojan Bogdanovic led the Nets with 20 points.A Mesut Ozil header sent Arsenal to a 3-1 home victory over Stoke that left it atop the Premier League. Arsenal had to come from behind after Charlie Adam converted a 29th-minute penalty shot.Chelsea, which, like Arsenal, has 34 points in the standings, plays West Bromwich Albion on Sunday.GERMAN LEAGUE Bayern Munich routed visiting Wolfsburg, 5-0, to replace Leipzig at the top of the Bundesliga. Leipzig’s record 13-game unbeaten start ended in a 1-0 loss at Ingolstadt.SPANISH LEAGUE Real Madrid set a club record with its 35th consecutive match without a loss: a 3-2 home victory over Deportivo La Coruña on a stoppage-time goal by Sergio Ramos. Lionel Messi scored twice in the second half in a 3-0 Barcelona victory at Osasuna.Jack Johnson, Cam Atkinson and Seth Jones each had a goal and an assist as Columbus beat the visiting Islanders, 6-2, for its sixth straight win.Josh Bailey and John Tavares scored for the Islanders, who had earned a point in a season-high five straight games, going 4-0-1. Jaroslav Halak made 32 saves but was pulled after the Blue Jackets scored four consecutive goals in the third period.The Giants activated halfback Shane Vereen off the injured reserve/designated for return list. Vereen tore his triceps on Sept. 25 against Washington, was placed on injured reserve two days later and had surgery.Tessa Worley of France won her second straight World Cup giant slalom after the first-run leader, Mikaela Shiffrin, struggled in her second run in Sestriere, Italy.After placing third in the opening run, Worley captured her 10th career giant slalom. It was a memorable day for the French team, with Alexis Pinturault winning a men’s giant slalom in Val d’Isère, France.Shiffrin finished sixth.FIGURE SKATING Evgenia Medvedeva stumbled on her first jump but defended her title at the Grand Prix Final in Marseille, France. Yuzuru Hanyu of Japan botched a quad salchow and failed to complete a triple lutz yet still won a fourth straight men’s title. The former Olympic champions Tessa Virtue and Scott Moir of Canada won the ice dance, clinching the title for the first time in their comeback year.Advertisement