By THE ASSOCIATED PRESSNOV. 1, 2016
Andre Johnson called Tennessee Coach Mike Mularkey, asking if they could talk Monday morning. After 14 N.F.L. seasons, Johnson, the receiver with more catches than any other active player, had made up his mind: time to retire.“He said he’s been contemplating it for weeks and his heart was not in it,” Mularkey said. “This is a tough business to be in when your heart’s not in it.”Johnson, 35, was nowhere to be found on Monday, apparently not ready to publicly discuss his decision. He did not release a statement through his agent or the team.That did not prevent Mularkey from trying to talk Johnson into staying. The Titans had signed Johnson to a two-year deal the day they reported for training camp, paying him the veteran minimum for this season with the prospect of a bigger payday in 2017. Johnson started four of the eight games he played this season but had not caught a pass in the last three.AdvertisementJohnson, a seven-time Pro Bowler, spent the first 12 seasons of his career with the Houston Texans, who made him the No. 3 overall pick in the 2003 draft out of the University of Miami. Tennessee was his third team in three seasons, after Johnson spent 2015 with the Indianapolis Colts.AdvertisementJohnson finishes his career with statistics that rank him among the best receivers in N.F.L. history. He is ninth with 1,062 catches and 10th with 14,185 receiving yards, and he also had 70 touchdowns. Johnson led the N.F.L. in catches in 2006 (103) and 2008 (115). He led the league in receiving yards in 2008 (1,575) and 2009 (1,569).Jay Cutler threw for 252 yards and a touchdown after missing five games with a thumb injury, the rookie Jordan Howard ran for a career-high 153 yards and a touchdown, and the Bears stunned the Minnesota Vikings, 20-10, in Chicago.The Bears (2-6) sacked Sam Bradford five times while handing the N.F.C. North-leading Vikings (5-2) their second straight loss.Cutler, who completed 20 of 31 passes, played well in his return from a sprained right thumb. Howard easily surpassed his previous high of 118 yards, Alshon Jeffery got his first touchdown reception of the season, and Chicago outgained Minnesota 403 yards to 258.Bradford, playing behind a porous line, finished 23 of 37 for 228 yards.BROWNS ACQUIRE A TOP PATRIOTS LINEBACKER The winless Cleveland Browns were perceived to be sellers, not buyers, at the N.F.L.’s trading deadline, set for Tuesday at 4 p.m. They proved that theory wrong by acquiring the Pro Bowl linebacker Jamie Collins from the New England Patriots in exchange for a conditional third-round draft choice, bolstering a defense that has allowed the most yards in the league.The 6-foot-3, 250-pound Collins was a second-round selection by New England in 2013. He is earning $485,928 in the final year of his rookie contract, but negotiations for a new deal had stalled.Collins, 27, led the Patriots in tackles in each of the last two seasons, starting every defensive snap in their Super Bowl victory in February 2015. He has 285 tackles, 10 ½ sacks and five interceptions in 50 career games, making him Cleveland’s most accomplished linebacker.Get the big sports news, highlights and analysis from Times journalists, with distinctive takes on games and some behind-the-scenes surprises, delivered to your inbox every week.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.ROETHLISBERGER TAKES PART IN PRACTICE Pittsburgh Steelers quarterback Ben Roethlisberger practiced in a limited capacity, just two weeks after having surgery to repair the meniscus in his left knee.AdvertisementRoethlisberger, who did not speak to reporters after practice, was initially expected to miss four to six weeks after the operation, but he could return earlier than expected.Jimmy Butler scored 22 points, Dwyane Wade had 12, and the Chicago Bulls improved to 3-0 by beating the Nets, 118-88, at Barclays Center.The Bulls had seven players in double figures, with Wade the last to reach the milestone. He did so by leaving the Nets’ Bojan Bogdanovic behind with a crossover and getting fouled on a drive to the basket in the fourth quarter.Nikola Mirotic had 16 points and 10 rebounds while Taj Gibson had 14 points and 11 rebounds for the Bulls.Bogdanovic scored 15 points, and Jeremy Lin had 14 for the Nets, who fell to 1-3. The Nets, who entered Monday averaging an N.B.A.-high 37.3 3-point attempts per game, were 5 for 31 from behind the arc.Stoke striker Wilfried Bony scored twice against his former club in a 3-1 victory over visiting Swansea City in the English Premier League, leaving Bob Bradley still seeking his first win as Swansea’s coach.Bony put Stoke ahead after only three minutes, but Wayne Routledge tied the score for Swansea five minutes later.AdvertisementStoke went back ahead 10 minutes after halftime with an own goal by Alfie Mawson, and Bony headed in a third goal to extend the lead in the 73rd minute.Bradley, an American, oversaw a 3-2 loss at Arsenal in his first game with Swansea and a 0-0 draw at home against Watford in his second. GERMAN COACH HAS DEAL EXTENDED Germany’s coach, Joachim Löw, extended his contract through the 2020 European Championship, giving him another chance to win the Continental title.Löw guided Germany to the World Cup title in 2014 in Brazil but has failed to win the European Championship in three attempts, most recently this year in France, where the Germans lost in the semifinals.As Germany’s coach, Löw has free rein over sporting decisions, a reported salary of about $3.8 million and a squad capable of winning major tournaments.A version of this article appears in print on November 1, 2016, on Page B12 of the New York edition with the headline: After Stellar Career, Receiver Abruptly Retires.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.