By THE ASSOCIATED PRESSNOV. 7, 2016
The birdie putt was still a foot away from the hole when Rod Pampling thrust his right arm in the air. The ball tumbled into the cup, giving him a victory Sunday in Las Vegas that was a long time coming.Pampling left nothing to chance by making a 30-foot putt on the final hole to close with a six-under-par 65 for a two-shot victory in the Shriners Hospitals for Children Open, his first PGA Tour title in 10 years.“Sometimes you amaze yourself at what you can do under the gun, which hadn’t been for a long time,” Pampling said. “And it was great.”Pampling, 47, last won on the PGA Tour at Bay Hill in 2006. He lost his card and spent two full seasons on the Web.com Tour and then had to return to the Web.com Tour Finals at the end of last season just to get his card back.Advertisement“Coming back from what we’ve had the last few years, to get a win under the belt, it’s phenomenal,” he said.AdvertisementBrooks Koepka closed with a 67 to finish second.A PLAYOFF PLAYOFF Scott McCarron missed a birdie putt on the 18th hole but made one on the first hole of a playoff to win the Dominion Charity Classic, the second of three PGA Tour Champions playoff events, in Richmond, Va.SHAKY, BUT SUCCESSFUL Shanshan Feng closed with a double-bogey 6 but still won by a stroke at the Japan Classic in Ibaraki, her second straight L.P.G.A. Tour victory.Andy Murray cemented his rise to No. 1 by beating John Isner, 6-3, 6-7 (4), 6-4, to win the Paris Masters for the first time. The tournament victory was Murray’s fourth in a row and his eighth this year.Murray, 29, will officially replace Novak Djokovic at the top of the rankings when they are published on Monday.CZECH WINS IN CHINA Third-seeded Petra Kvitova of the Czech Republic overcame a slow start and defeated Elina Svitolina, 6-4, 6-2, to win the Elite Trophy in Zhuhai, China.The Chicago Cubs declined their 2017 option on Jason Hammel’s contract, making him one of the top starters on the free-agent market.Hammel, 34, went 15-10 with a 3.83 E.R.A. in 30 starts this season but did not pitch in the playoffs during the Cubs’ run to the World Series championship. Over the past three seasons, he is 35-28 with a 3.68 E.R.A.AdvertisementC. J. McCollum equaled his career high with 37 points, including 10 straight in the fourth quarter, and Portland won at Memphis, 100-94.Get the big sports news, highlights and analysis from Times journalists, with distinctive takes on games and some behind-the-scenes surprises, delivered to your inbox every week.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.Damian Lillard added 19 points and 7 assists for the Trail Blazers, who have won two straight.NUGGETS THRASH CELTICS Emmanuel Mudiay scored 24 of his season-high 30 points in the opening quarter, and Denver rolled over host Boston, 123-107.Michael Cammalleri got his first three goals of the season as the Devils prevailed over the Carolina Hurricanes, 4-1, for their first road victory.Cammalleri scored twice in the second period and once in the third for his sixth career hat trick. Keith Kinkaid stopped 33 shots en route to his first win of the season.Mississippi quarterback Chad Kelly will miss the rest of the season after tearing the anterior cruciate ligament in his right knee in a win over Georgia Southern.Kelly, a senior, had thrown for 2,758 yards, the most in the Southeastern Conference, and 19 touchdowns this season. He threw for more than 4,000 yards as a junior.Cristiano Ronaldo, a three-time world player of the year, reached an agreement to extend his contract with Real Madrid until June 2021, when he will be 36.The club said the new contract would be signed Monday. Financial details were not released, although Ronaldo was expected to remain the team’s best-paid player.AdvertisementSTILL UNBLEMISHED Gareth Bale scored twice just before halftime, and Real Madrid remained unbeaten with a 3-0 win over visiting Leganes, securing the Spanish league lead.LIVERPOOL TAKES LEAD Sadio Mané scored twice as Liverpool overwhelmed visiting Watford, 6-1, to move a point ahead of Chelsea atop the Premier League.Arsenal and visiting Tottenham drew, 1-1, in the north London derby, and Leicester was beaten, 2-1, by visiting West Bromwich Albion. Hull beat visiting Southampton, 2-1, to halt a six-game losing streak.Carl Edwards got the victory he desperately needed to earn a place in the Nascar Sprint Cup finale, winning a rain-shortened Texas 500 in Fort Worth.Edwards was leading on the 293rd lap when the race was called with 41 laps to go. Rain had also delayed the start by nearly six hours.Edwards joined Jimmie Johnson as drivers locked into championship-contending spots for the finale. The last two spots will be up for grabs next Sunday at Phoenix.FAST OFF THE TRACK Dale Earnhardt Jr., sidelined from the Nascar Sprint Cup Series because of a concussion, was pulled over for speeding while driving to the Texas 500, although he got only a warning.A version of this article appears in print on November 7, 2016, on Page D6 of the New York edition with the headline: Journey of a Decade Ends With a 30-Foot Putt.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.