By THE ASSOCIATED PRESSNOV. 23, 2016
Kevin Love scored 40 points, including 34 to set an N.B.A. first-quarter record; LeBron James had his 44th career triple-double; and the Cleveland Cavaliers beat the visiting Portland Trail Blazers, 137-125, on Wednesday night.Love fell 3 points shy of the league record for points in any quarter, set by Golden State’s Klay Thompson, who scored 37 in the third on Jan. 23, 2015. Love made 11 of 14 field-goal attempts, including 8 of 10 3-point shots, in the first quarter.James had 31 points, 10 rebounds and 13 assists for his second triple-double of the season. Damian Lillard scored 40 points for Portland, including 25 in the second half. Love missed the only shot he took in the second quarter, scored 6 points in the third and was scoreless again in the fourth. He made 12 of 20 shots over all, including 8 of 12 from 3-point range.NETS FALL AT HOME Isaiah Thomas scored 23 points, Avery Bradley had 22, and visiting Boston beat the Nets, 111-92. Sean Kilpatrick scored 23 points for the Nets, who have lost five in a row.AdvertisementThe Barcelona star Neymar could be fined more than $10 million after an investment group asserted that the true value of his transfer fee had been concealed, Spanish prosecutors said.AdvertisementThe prosecutors said that the Brazilian investment group D.I.S., which was entitled to 40 percent of the fee for Neymar’s transfer from the Brazilian club Santos in 2013, said that it had been underpaid by about $3.4 million.The prosecutors also said they would seek a two-year prison sentence for Neymar and his father, who acts as his son’s agent, although in Spain sentences of less than two years for first offenses are usually suspended.STILL UNBEATEN Atlético Madrid, last season’s Champions League runner-up, is the only team to have won all of its first five group stage matches in the league this season with a 2-0 victory over visiting P.S.V. Eindhoven.Get the big sports news, highlights and analysis from Times journalists, with distinctive takes on games and some behind-the-scenes surprises, delivered to your inbox every week.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.CHAMPIONS LEAGUE Lionel Messi scored twice, and Barcelona won at Celtic, 2-0, to reach the knockout stage of the Champions League for the 13th straight time.  Manchester City advance to the knockout stage with a 1-1 draw against host Borussia Mönchengladbach.  F.C. Rostov defeated visiting Bayern Munich, 3-2, to avenge a five-goal loss and deny Bayern a chance to catch Atlético Madrid in Group D.  Paris St.-Germain drew at Arsenal, 2-2, but still seized control of Group A based on their head-to-head results.Browns quarterback Robert Griffin III practiced for the first time since breaking a bone in his left shoulder in the season opener.But Griffin cannot return for games yet. Further tests on his shoulder are ahead and the Browns have 21 days to decide whether to activate him or keep him on injured reserve.Two women who reported being gang-raped by Baylor football players reached a settlement with the university, which has been criticized over its handling of sexual assault allegations.AdvertisementThe settlement was announced Tuesday night in a joint statement by David Garland, Baylor’s interim president, and the lawyers representing the women. Terms were not disclosed.The scandal led to the firing of Art Briles, the football coach; the demotion and resignation of the university’s president, Ken Starr; and the resignation of Athletic Director Ian McCaw.TUTOR CLAIMS FRAUD The University of Missouri has begun investigating claims by a former university tutor who said that she could document at least a dozen cases of serious academic fraud involving male and female athletes.The tutor wrote on her Facebook account Tuesday that she had taken entrance exams and completed entire courses for Missouri athletes. Hours later, the university announced its investigation.COLLEGE BASKETBALL Malik Monk scored 23 points as top-ranked Kentucky routed visiting Cleveland State, 101-70, without their leading scorer Isaiah Briscoe.  Josh Hart had 13 points and 11 rebounds, and No. 2 Villanova rolled past visiting College of Charleston, 63-47.  Frank Jackson scored 19 points, and No. 6 Duke beat visiting William & Mary, 88-67.A version of this article appears in print on November 24, 2016, on Page B10 of the New York edition with the headline: Love’s Hot Start Sends Cavaliers Over the Trail Blazers.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.