By RICHARD SANDOMIRDEC. 10, 2016
And now, after 25 years covering sports media for The New York Times, I’m off to the obituaries department. Live sports to dead folks? I needed a new challenge, time away from pregame shows that have become indistinguishable towers of babble, three-man broadcast booths (deliver me from low-talking Cal Ripken Jr. on TBS baseball) and treacly, genteel Masters coverage that is done to please the overlords at Augusta.And time away, too, from both televised Olympic coverage that too often ignores interviewing significant non-American winners and from Rowdy Gaines  — that’s right, ROWDY GAINES  — whose keening voice will forever ring in my ears when I find myself in a swimming pool.And, for that matter, I don’t need to watch another N.F.L. draft or listen to another Mel Kiper Jr. conference call forecasting the 25th pick in the first round.Still, for the past quarter of a century, I had the best job I’ve ever had.I had a voice that some wanted to muffle. I watched enormous and ridiculous amounts of TV sports, at night, on weekends, on holidays, taking notes in case somebody said something stupid. This was a job? Watching TV for a living?AdvertisementDon Imus once told me that writing about what sportscasters said was stupid work. I responded that calling unsuspecting women on the telephone to ask them if they were naked was an equally stupid vocation. I had fun, taking all those notes and rewinding videotapes to render precisely what Charles Barkley or the Scooter had uttered, how many times Tom Coughlin’s face turned cranberry red on the sidelines when he coached the Giants, or how many replays CBS amassed during an early 1990s World Series game.AdvertisementI went to stadiums and arenas as I wished. I stood in production trucks, marveling at the way producers and directors turned live shots, replays and graphics into (nearly) seamless broadcasts. I was in Pat Summerall’s extraordinarily messy hotel room before the Super Bowl in 1992 when he confessed to fascinating feats of ribaldry and told me I was free to write it all.I hung around the SNY booth at Citi Field, home of the Mets’ TV broadcasts, and observed Keith Hernandez’s psychedelic scorecards, their spaces filled with the colors of six Sharpies. I would, I can let the world now know, text Hernandez when he was stuck, on the air, on naming who played a particular Batman character. (For what it’s worth, three actors played Mr. Freeze.)I sat a few feet from a fit and jaunty Ernie Harwell, at 84, as he finished his wonderful career during a Tigers road game at the SkyDome in Toronto. I rode John Madden’s bus twice, eating the gaseous food he took aboard.Bob Costas and I would start a conversation with a stated purpose, but we would finish by giggling about Shemp Howard, one of the Three Stooges, or Bob Uecker. Bob Wolff tried to persuade me, during a session with a tape recorder in a remote part of the press box at Yankee Stadium, that play-by-play was easier than I thought. No, Bob, it’s not.I’ve seen Mary Carillo — in places as diverse as the Winter Olympics in Turin, Italy, and the Westminster Kennel Club Dog Show in New York — become one of the smartest people in sportscasting and sports journalism.I interviewed the great Chris Schenkel, the gentle voice of the Pro Bowlers Tour — at a bowling alley on Long Island. When Keith Jackson was in the midst of his retirement tour in 1998 (after which he would unretire for eight seasons), I drove with him to the Big House in Ann Arbor, Mich., where he chastised a driver who coveted his intended spot in a nearby parking lot.Get the big sports news, highlights and analysis from Times journalists, with distinctive takes on games and some behind-the-scenes surprises, delivered to your inbox every week.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.“I’m going in here, so hold your damned taters,” he said in that irreplaceable, Saturday-afternoon, Big Ugly voice.AdvertisementThere was a pre-Olympic visit to Jim McKay’s farmhouse in Maryland horse country in 2002, where the stories flowed and so did the love between McKay and his wife, Margaret. If you were a kid in the 1960s, McKay, Jackson and Schenkel were the cornerstones of your sports experience at ABC Sports. Between bowling, college football, the Olympics and “Wide World of Sports,” you got plenty from the division built by the red-haired Yoda, Roone Arledge.Six years later, at McKay’s funeral in a church in Baltimore, his grandson revealed a side of him that only his family knew.“He’d swallow a balloon full of helium,” said James Fontelieu, “and recite the opening of ‘Wide World of Sports.’”If only that had been taped and shown on “Wide World.”I never quite recovered, as a fan of a certain age, from the demise of ABC Sports and “Wide World” at the hands of omnivorous ESPN. I wasn’t covering ESPN from its start in 1979, but over the past 25 years, it has become the sports equivalent of the Pentagon. It is an intertwined mix of games, entertainment and news that, for so long, looked as unstoppable as a fleet of Air Force bombers.But just as I’m leaving, it faces a cord-cutting phenomenon that has purged millions of subscribers from its rolls. Now the challenge will be to find alternate ways, over the internet, to lure some of those subscribers (and their monthly fees) back.My greatest regret about ESPN is not that I wasn’t harsh enough about Jon Gruden of “Monday Night Football” (I still have reams of unused, really critical notes I’m willing to sell to the highest-bidding TV critic), or that I was too tough on Chris Berman’s unwillingness to change his clownish act.No, my great regret is that I was not more accepting of Stuart Scott’s hip-hop-infused creativity. I didn’t appreciate it until he was a year from dying and we spent an afternoon together. Scott was sui generis, a very rare anchor talent. But it took me too long to see the joy in his work, and that came well after his many fans already knew how unique and riveting he was.Unique and riveting in wholly different ways was Howard Cosell, who had largely departed the sports scene by the time I arrived. I watched him while growing up and met him once at a launch party for the magazine I worked for, a party at which he startled a hard-nosed executive named Gertrude by telling her, “You throw a hell of a party, Gertie!”AdvertisementCosell was smart, passionate about civil rights, paranoid and insecure, and had a limited range of bad toupees. His voice — a verbal instrument and a vessel for his many opinions — was remarkable.No doubt, I would have liked to write his obituary.I may return to the sports section now and then — I’ll still cover the Westminster show and the Baseball Hall of Fame induction ceremonies one more time. But wait, I’ve come this far in my farewell without mentioning the joy of covering the legal battle between the owners of the Mets and the trustee for the victims of Bernard L. Madoff’s Ponzi scheme. Oh, those court papers!For sure, I’ll still be watching sports — but without a pen and a notebook at my side. I need not restrain my cheering anymore, although as I am a Jets fan, there may not be many opportunities to exult anyway.I might even join friends to watch the Super Bowl — and not tell them to keep their voices down. No longer do I need to hear every word on the broadcast.A version of this article appears in print on December 11, 2016, on Page SP2 of the New York edition with the headline: Pressing the Off Button on an Indelible Marathon of Images.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.