By THE ASSOCIATED PRESSOCT. 20, 2016
The N.F.L. will require the athletic trainer in the press box to stay in contact with on-field doctors to help determine whether a player has a concussion.The requirement, announced Wednesday, is an enhancement made to prevent confusion of the type that occurred in the season opener, when the Carolina Panthers’ Cam Newton was allowed to return after being hit in the head.Under the league’s concussion protocol, the N.F.L.’s athletic trainer was not allowed to call a medical timeout after being contacted by personnel on the field. In Newton’s case, the team physician and an unaffiliated neurotrauma consultant asked the trainer for video of the hit, but a technology glitch delayed the video.After seeing the replay and observing Newton on the sideline, the physician and the neurotrauma consultant said that no further evaluation of Newton was necessary.AdvertisementUnder the new protocol, the trainer in the booth would be able to stay in contact with doctors on the field until receiving word that a concussion evaluation had occurred.TIGHT END STAYED SILENT ABOUT CONCUSSION Washington tight end Jordan Reed said he knew he had sustained a concussion during a recent game and did not tell anyone.Reed missed the Redskins’ most recent game, against the Philadelphia Eagles. He was limited in practice Wednesday and was wearing a yellow noncontact jersey.Get the big sports news, highlights and analysis from Times journalists, with distinctive takes on games and some behind-the-scenes surprises, delivered to your inbox every week.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.Coach Jay Gruden said Reed had not been ruled out of Sunday’s game against the Lions in Detroit.Reed, 26, sustained a concussion on a hit to the back of the head in the third quarter of a game at Baltimore on Oct. 9 and did not leave the field.Giants receiver Odell Beckham Jr. missed practice with a hip injury.Coach Ben McAdoo said that he was taking a day-to-day approach as Beckham dealt with a hip pointer he sustained in Sunday’s 27-23 win over Baltimore.AdvertisementBeckham, the team’s star wide receiver, had a career game, catching eight passes for 222 yards and two touchdowns, including a winning 66-yard catch-and-run with 1 minute 24 seconds to play.McAdoo said Beckham was sore on Wednesday.The Giants (3-3) will practice Thursday and then travel to London for a game Sunday against the Los Angeles Rams (3-3).McAdoo said Beckham did not have to practice this week to play in the game.Bayern Munich dispelled any doubts about its commitment by ending a three-match winless run with a comfortable 4-1 victory over P.S.V. Eindhoven in a Champions League game in Munich.Bayern wobbled briefly after P.S.V. had cut the deficit to 2-1 but quickly restored its dominance to extend its Champions League home record of 14 consecutive wins.Thomas Mueller opened the scoring in the 13th minute, and Joshua Kimmich doubled the lead in the 21st before Luciano Narsingh pulled one back for P.S.V. in the 43rd with its first shot at goal. Robert Lewandowski scored in the 59th, just as P.S.V. seemed to be making a comeback, and Arjen Robben scored an insurance goal in the 84th.Bayern now has 6 points in Group D while Atlético Madrid, which won by 1-0 at Rostov, has 9. P.S.V. and Rostov each have 1 point. NAPOLI’S QUEST IS THWARTED Vincent Aboubakar scored twice, and Besiktas won at Napoli, 3-2, in a Champions League game, denying Napoli a chance at advancing from the group stage in record time.Aboubakar, a Cameroon international on loan from Porto, scored the winner with four minutes left, having restored Besiktas’s lead late in the first half. The win was Besiktas’s first in the competition since 2009.AdvertisementIf Napoli had won and the other group match had ended in a draw, Napoli would have become the first team in Champions League history to advance from its group after just three matches.Napoli has a 1-point lead over Besiktas, with Benfica 2 points back after its 2-0 win at Dynamo Kiev.Ivo Karlovic needed three sets to beat Mikael Ymer of Sweden in the second round of the Stockholm Open.Ymer, 18, who upset Fernando Verdasco in the first round for his first ATP Tour victory, thrilled the home crowd by winning the first set but ultimately could not match the power of Karlovic, a Croatian.Karlovic hit 16 aces to win, 4-6, 6-4, 6-4, in 1 hour 47 minutes.Alexander Zverev of Germany also advanced to the quarterfinals, beating Adrian Mannarino of France, 7-5, 6-4.In first-round action, Jack Sock of the United States, a finalist in last year’s Stockholm Open, beat Malek Jaziri of Tunisia, 3-6, 6-3, 7-6 (5).Juan Martín del Potro of Argentina and Jurgen Zopp of Estonia also advanced to the second round.Del Potro beat John Isner of the United States, 6-4 7-6 (6). Zopp advanced with a 6-3, 6-4 win over Benjamin Becker of Germany.A version of this article appears in print on October 20, 2016, on Page B16 of the New York edition with the headline: N.F.L.’s Concussion Protocol Gets a Change.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.