By THE ASSOCIATED PRESSMAY 15, 2017
Rafael Nadal defeated Dominic Thiem in the Madrid Open final on Sunday to win his third straight title on clay and stay hot heading toward the French Open.Nadal withstood a tough challenge from Thiem, 7-6 (8), 6-4, and converted on his fourth match point to earn his 15th straight victory on clay and tie Novak Djokovic’s record of 30 career titles in Masters 1000 events.The triumph at his home tournament gave the fifth-ranked Nadal his 72nd career title, 52 of which have come on clay.It was Nadal’s second straight win over the ninth-ranked Thiem, two weeks after the Barcelona Open final, where Nadal beat Thiem in straight sets. Nadal, 30, also won at Monte Carlo last month, beating Albert Ramos Viñolas in the final.Advertisement“These last few weeks have been very special,” Nadal said. “I’m very happy for what I achieved.”AdvertisementNadal, a 14-time Grand Slam champion, has a tour-leading 34 victories in a superb season following some lean years. After missing much of last year because of a wrist injury, Nadal has won 30 of his last 32 sets going into the tournament in Rome this week.After that comes the French Open, where he will try his 10th title. It was the site of his last Grand Slam title three years ago.Kevin Pillar homered with two outs in the ninth inning to give the Toronto Blue Jays a 3-2 victory over the visiting Seattle Mariners and a sweep of their four-game series.Justin Smoak added a two-run homer for Toronto, which has won five straight and seven of its past eight. Pillar also made a leaping catch in center to take a hit away from Danny Valencia in the fourth, when Seattle had runners at first and second.CARDINALS SHUT OUT CUBS Yadier Molina homered twice, and Adam Wainwright threw seven shutout innings as the host St. Louis Cardinals beat the Chicago Cubs, 5-0.Matt Carpenter also homered for St. Louis, which won for the eighth time in nine games. Chicago has lost three of its past four.AROUND THE MAJORS Jason Kipnis, moved to the leadoff spot for the first time this season, hit two homers and drove in four runs as the host Cleveland Indians beat the Minnesota Twins, 8-3. Carlos Santana and Lonnie Chisenhall also homered for Cleveland, which had scored one run in 24 innings going into the game.  Ty Kelly hit a tiebreaking single to cap a three-run ninth inning as the visiting Philadelphia Phillies beat the Washington Nationals, 4-3. In the second game of the doubleheader, Max Scherzer shook off a line drive to the knee and struck out eight as the Nationals won, 6-5.  Pinch-hitter Tyler Moore hit a three-run homer in the seventh inning to spoil a shutout bid by R. A. Dickey, and the Miami Marlins ended a five-game losing streak by beating the visiting Atlanta Braves, 3-1.  Steven Souza Jr. hit a three-run homer, Jesus Sucre drove in three runs, and the Tampa Bay Rays beat the host Boston Red Sox, 11-2.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.Romain Alessandrini scored two goals a minute apart, and the visiting Los Angeles Galaxy beat the Red Bulls, 3-1, ending their 19-game home unbeaten streak.AdvertisementLos Angeles, which had scored just three times in the first half all season, led by 2-0 before the game was 10 minutes old.Daniel Royer scored in stoppage time for the Red Bulls, who had last lost at home on April 24, 2016.SPECTACULAR GOAL NETS A TIE Thomas McNamara dived over the flailing legs of goalkeeper Jesse Gonzalez to head in a goal and give New York City F.C. a 1-1 tie against host Dallas F.C.McNamara’s goal came after David Villa’s free kick in the 68th minute went off the crossbar. With Gonzalez falling to the ground, the ball deflected down and bounced up for McNamara, who charged in to knock it home and tumbled into the back of the net.The United States defeated Slovakia, 6-1, in Cologne, Germany, to stretch its winning run at the ice hockey world championship to five games as it headed into a Group A showdown with Russia.Johnny Gaudreau had two goals and an assist, while Jimmy Howard made 19 saves for the Americans, who appear confident with a quarterfinal place secured.Kevin Hayes and Brady Skjei played their first game for the team after the Rangers were eliminated from the N.H.L. playoffs. Hanes had two assists and Skjei one.Lewis Hamilton of England beat Sebastian Vettel of Germany to win the Spanish Grand Prix in Montmelo, tightening Formula One’s intense title fight.Vettel edged past Hamilton, the pole-sitter, at the first corner, but Hamilton overtook Vettel’s Ferrari with more than 20 laps left while running on a faster set of tires as Mercedes’s pit strategy paid off.Daniel Ricciardo of Red Bull Australia finished a distant third, his best result of the season.ALMIROLA LEAVES HOSPITAL The Nascar driver Aric Almirola was released from the University of Kansas Medical Center after being treated for a compression fracture of a vertebra in his back, sustained in a fiery crash at Kansas Speedway in Kansas City, Kan.AdvertisementAlmirola was trailing Joey Logano and Danica Patrick on Saturday night at the Go Bowling 400 when a broken brake rotor caused Logano to veer into Patrick. Almirola plowed into Logano’s car, and safety crews had to cut off the top of Almirola’s car to free him.An earlier version of this article misstated, in one instance, the surname of an American player who had two assists in a 6-1 victory over Slovakia at the men’s ice hockey world championship. As the article correctly noted elsewhere, he is Kevin Hayes, not Haynes.A version of this article appears in print on May 15, 2017, on Page D6 of the New York edition with the headline: Tennis; Nadal Is Right at Home as French Open Nears.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.