By THE ASSOCIATED PRESSMAY 10, 2017
Novak Djokovic, the defending champion, recovered from a 3-0 deficit in the third set to defeat Nicolás Almagro, 6-1, 4-6, 7-5, and reach the third round at the Madrid Open on Wednesday.Djokovic rallied in the final set by breaking Almagro to go up, 6-5, and served out to earn his 15th win of the season. The victory left Djokovic on track to play a semifinal against Rafael Nadal, the four-time Madrid champion and home-crowd favorite, who struggled in a 7-6 (3), 3-6, 6-4 win over Fabio Fognini of Italy.Nadal will play Nick Kyrgios, who defeated Ryan Harrison, 6-3, 6-3. The second-seeded Djokovic will play Feliciano López, who got past Gilles Simon, 6-3, 3-6, 7-6 (3).It was an important opening-round win for Djokovic as he tries to turn around his season and regain his form going into the French Open this month.Advertisement“I’m still finding my way to that consistency level and quality of tennis that I’m looking for,” Djokovic said. “I’m aware that I’m not playing at my best, but I’m definitely believing in myself and the process. Eventually the game will come together. I can take a lot of positives from today.”AdvertisementIn the women’s draw, Eugenie Bouchard advanced to the quarterfinals after top-seeded Angelique Kerber retired with a left thigh injury in the second set.In an atmosphere of uncertainty, International Olympic Committee leaders began three days of meetings and site visits to weigh Los Angeles’s plans for the 2024 Games in its showdown with Paris. A decision is scheduled for September. The two cities are the only remaining bidders. Looking to avoid another messy competition, the I.O.C. has made an unusual proposal to award the next two Olympics, 2024 and 2028, one to each city.Get the big sports news, highlights and analysis from Times journalists, with distinctive takes on games and some behind-the-scenes surprises, delivered to your inbox every week.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.Los Angeles organizers have publicly winced at the 2028 option. The consolation prize would leave the city with challenges including maintaining public interest and recasting deals for stadiums, arenas and housing that have been in the works for months and even years.Brock Nelson of the Islanders scored twice as the United States cruised to its third win of the ice hockey world championship with a 3-0 defeat of Italy in Cologne, Germany. Nelson broke the deadlock with a wrist shot to the top right corner early on and then scored a short-handed goal in the second period, minutes before Anders Lee completed the scoring on a power play. The Americans moved to second in Group A behind Latvia.The United States women’s national team will host Brazil, Australia and Japan in the Tournament of Nations, to be played in three West Coast cities this summer. The round-robin tournament will feature doubleheaders in Seattle, San Diego and Carson, Calif., from July 27 to Aug. 3.ARSENAL CONTINUES LATE PUSH Arsenal kept alive its hopes of qualifying for next season’s Champions League by winning at Southampton, 2-0, in the Premier League thanks to second-half goals by Alexis Sánchez and Olivier Giroud.Matt Wieters hit a winning, two-run single in the bottom of the ninth inning against his former team, and the Nationals rallied to beat the Orioles, 7-6, in Washington to end Baltimore’s six-game winning streak.AdvertisementWashington trailed by 6-2 in the seventh before coming back. Down by two in the ninth, the Nationals rallied against Brad Brach (0-1), who is serving as Baltimore’s closer while Zach Britton is on the disabled list.Jayson Werth led off the ninth by homering, and Bryce Harper doubled. With one out, an intentional walk and a single loaded the bases for Wieters, who hit a liner to right.AROUND THE MAJORS Ryan Goins singled home the winning run in the ninth inning to cap the Blue Jays’ rally from a four-run deficit in an 8-7 victory over the Cleveland Indians in Toronto.  Carlos Ruiz hit a three-run double against his old team, Robinson Cano and Danny Valencia homered, and the Seattle Mariners beat the Phillies, 11-6, in Philadelphia.  German Marquez allowed three hits over eight innings and got his first major league hit with a two-run single in the seventh to lead the Colorado Rockies over the visiting Chicago Cubs, 3-0.  Los Angeles Dodgers outfielder Andrew Toles has torn the anterior cruciate ligament in his right knee and will need season-ending surgery. Toles, 24, was hitting .275 with five home runs and 15 R.B.I.A version of this article appears in print on May 11, 2017, on Page B10 of the New York edition with the headline: Tennis; Djokovic Rallies for Victory; Nadal Struggles.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.