By THE ASSOCIATED PRESSMAY 9, 2017
Top-ranked Andy Murray made his debut at the Madrid Open with a comfortable 6-4, 6-3 win over the wild card Marius Copil of Romania in the second round. Murray broke serve once in each set and conceded no break opportunities to the 104th-ranked Copil.“When I started to control the points more towards the end of the first set and second set, I was hitting the ball pretty clean, creating a few chances,” Murray said. “I didn’t give him any opportunities. It was good for the first match.”Murray, who won the Madrid title in 2008 and 2015 and was runner-up to Novak Djokovic last year, has been trying to regain his form after a difficult start to the year.“I still think there’s a ways to go,” Murray said. “I don’t think I’m playing perfectly just now. I think there’s just things I can definitely do better.”AdvertisementEighth-seeded Dominic Thiem of Austria advanced to the third round by defeating Jared Donaldson of the United States, 6-3, 6-4, while ninth-seeded David Goffin of Belgium had nine aces on his way to a 7-6 (3), 6-0 win over Florian Mayer of Germany.AdvertisementIn the women’s draw, third-seeded Simona Halep of Romania defeated the Italian Roberta Vinci, 6-3, 2-6, 7-6 (2).The Dallas Stars have acquired the rights to goalie Ben Bishop from the Los Angeles Kings for a fourth-round pick in the coming draft. Bishop, a two-time Vezina Trophy finalist, spent parts of the past five seasons with the Tampa Bay Lightning, reaching the 2015 Stanley Cup finals.KOVALCHUK COULD RETURN Devils General Manager Ray Shero has had preliminary talks with Ilya Kovalchuk’s agent regarding the possible return of Kovalchuk, a former No. 1 draft pick, to the N.H.L. four years after he bolted to play in his native Russia. The Devils still own Kovalchuk’s N.H.L. rights but can’t formally sign him to a contract until July 1. Kovalchuk, 34, was a nine-time 30-goal scorer in 11 N.H.L. seasons.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.LATVIA EDGES ITALY AT WORLDS Center Andris Dzerins scored his second goal of the game with a little more than a minute left as Latvia beat Italy, 2-1, in Cologne, Germany, at the ice hockey world championship to remain atop Group A, ahead of Russia.The Buffalo Bills hired Brandon Beane to fill their general manager vacancy in yet another indication of the rookie head coach Sean McDermott’s growing influence over team decisions. Beane’s hiring completes a short search process, which began after Doug Whaley and his entire scouting staff were fired the day after the N.F.L. draft finished. The hiring also completes Buffalo’s front-office overhaul, which began with Coach Rex Ryan’s being fired in the final week of last season.Beane, 40, has spent his entire 19-season N.F.L. career working up the Carolina Panthers’ ranks, including the past two as the team’s assistant general manager under Dave Gettleman. It’s in Carolina where Beane had direct ties to McDermott, who was hired by the Bills in January after having spent the previous six seasons as the Panthers’ defensive coordinator.COLTS TO RETIRE MANNING’S JERSEY Peyton Manning will become the first Indianapolis Colts player to have his jersey retired during a two-day celebration of his career this fall. The weekend will begin with the unveiling of Manning’s statue outside Lucas Oil Stadium on Oct. 7, and it will conclude the following day when he is inducted into the team’s Ring of Honor and becomes the seventh player in franchise history with a retired number.Mark Trumbo singled in the tiebreaking run in the 12th inning, and the Orioles extended their season-best winning streak to six games with a 5-4 comeback victory over the Washington Nationals in Baltimore.Singles by Adam Jones and Manny Machado, along with an intentional walk to Chris Davis, loaded the bases for Trumbo against Jacob Turner (1-1). Trumbo hit the first pitch to left field, ending the game just seven minutes short of four hours.AdvertisementAROUND THE MAJORS Ryan Hanigan hit a two-out, bases-clearing single as part of a six-run third inning, Mark Reynolds homered for a fourth straight game, and the Colorado Rockies beat the Chicago Cubs, 10-4, in a day-night doubleheader opener in Denver.  The Rangers right-hander A. J. Griffin dominated his hometown Padres with a four-hitter for his second career shutout in an 11-0 victory in San Diego.  Pinch-hitter Dexter Fowler singled home the tiebreaking run with one out in the ninth inning, and the St. Louis Cardinals rallied from a late four-run deficit for their fifth consecutive victory, over the Marlins, 6-5, in Miami.  Carlos Correa and Carlos Beltran hit consecutive homers off Bartolo Colon during a five-run first inning, and the Astros cruised to an 8-3 win over the Atlanta Braves in Houston.A version of this article appears in print on May 10, 2017, on Page B12 of the New York edition with the headline: Tennis; Murray Opens With Victory in Mandrid.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.