By THE ASSOCIATED PRESSMAY 8, 2017
Andre Burakovsky scored twice, Nicklas Backstrom notched his sixth goal of the playoffs and the visiting Washington Capitals beat the Pittsburgh Penguins, 5-2, on Monday night to force a Game 7 in their taut Eastern Conference semifinal.John Carlson and T. J. Oshie also scored for the Capitals. Braden Holtby stopped 16 to send the series back to Washington for the deciding game on Wednesday night.Late in the third period, the Penguins’ Jake Guentzel picked up his playoff-leading ninth goal and Evgeni Malkin added another 52 seconds later to make the score look better, but the Penguins were never in it. The Capitals controlled play throughout. Penguins goaltender Marc-Andre Fleury finished with 21 saves and received little help.This is the fourth time the Penguins and Capitals will meet in a Game 7. Pittsburgh has won each of the three previous deciding games, the last in 2009 in Washington on its way to the Stanley Cup.AdvertisementRUSSIA AND CANADA REMAIN UNDEFEATED Russia and Canada, the favorites, remained unbeaten at the ice hockey world championship after convincing wins over Germany and Belarus.AdvertisementVadim Shipachyov and Nikita Kucherov scored twice each as Russia defeated Germany, 6-3, in Cologne, Germany, while Nathan MacKinnon notched two more goals and an assist as Canada shut out Belarus, 6-0, in Paris.In other games, the United States bounced back from its loss to Germany on Friday with a 4-3 win over Sweden in Cologne. Johnny Gaudreau scored twice, J. T. Compher scored the winner, and Jimmy Howard stopped 39 shots as the Americans notched their second win.In Paris, the Czech Republic came back from a three-goal deficit to beat Finland, 4-3, in a shootout.Top-seeded Angelique Kerber defeated Katerina Siniakova, 6-2, 1-6, 7-5, to advance to the third round of the Madrid Open. With the victory, she will regain the No. 1 ranking.Kerber overcame seven double faults and won the final four games to defeat the 37th-ranked Siniakova in just under two hours on the center court in Madrid.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.Kerber will face Eugenie Bouchard, who defeated Maria Sharapova, 7-5, 2-6, 6-4.Second-seeded Karolina Pliskova, ranked third in the world, lost to Anastasija Sevastova, 6-3, 6-3, ending her hopes of reaching No. 1 this week.As a result, Kerber is guaranteed to retake the top ranking from Serena Williams next week.In the men’s tournament, Tomas Berdych defeated Denis Istomin, 6-4, 6-4, while Grigor Dimitrov beat Philipp Kohlschreiber, 7-6 (7), 6-4.Nate Karns struck out 10 while pitching into the seventh inning, Eric Hosmer had three hits, and Kansas City broke out of an offensive slump to beat Tampa Bay, 7-3, in St. Petersburg, Fla.AdvertisementThe Royals matched their best run output of the year and finished with a season-high 13 hits. Drew Butera had two hits and drove in his first two runs of the season.Karns (2-2) went six and a third innings, allowing two runs on six hits, with two walks.ORIOLES 6, NATIONALS 4 Trey Mancini capped a three-homer binge in the first inning against Gio Gonzalez, and host Baltimore beat Washington for its season-high fifth straight victory.ESPN announced that it had reached a multiyear agreement with Tim Tebow, who will continue as an analyst on the SEC Network.Tebow has worked as a studio analyst for the SEC Network since its 2014 debut. He will remain part of “SEC Nation,” the network’s traveling Saturday pregame show.Tebow, a former quarterback who won the Heisman Trophy in 2007, is playing minor league baseball for the Columbus Fireflies, the Mets’ Class A affiliate.JETS WIDE RECEIVER ARRESTED The police in Miami said the Jets’ 23-year-old wide receiver Robby Anderson had been charged with resisting arrest and obstruction of justice after sparring with officials who had asked him to leave a music festival.A version of this article appears in print on May 9, 2017, on Page B12 of the New York edition with the headline: Hockey; Capitals Defeat Penguins to Force a Game 7.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.