By THE ASSOCIATED PRESSMAY 8, 2017
Ryan Johansen scored the game-winning goal 3 minutes 15 seconds into the third period on Sunday, and the host Nashville Predators advanced to their first Western Conference finals by defeating the St. Louis Blues, 3-1, to take the series in six games.Goaltender Pekka Rinne made 23 saves and had an assist. Roman Josi had a goal and an assist, and Calle Jarnkrok added an empty-netter with a minute left.OILERS FORCE GAME 7 WITH ROUT Leon Draisaitl had three goals and two assists as the Edmonton Oilers cruised to a 7-1 victory over the visiting Anaheim Ducks, forcing a decisive Game 7 in their Western Conference semifinal series.Mark Letestu scored twice, and Zach Kassian and Anton Slepychev also scored for the Oilers, who led by 5-0 after the first period.AdvertisementAMERICANS ROUT THE DANES The United States bounced back from its surprise opening loss to the Germans at the world championship with a 7-2 rout of Denmark in Cologne, Germany. Clayton Keller of the Arizona Coyotes scored a hat trick, and Anders Lee of the Islanders had two goals.AdvertisementBradley Beal scored 29 points and the Washington Wizards mounted a 26-0 run in the third quarter in beating the visiting Boston Celtics, 121-102, to tie their second-round series at two games apiece. John Wall added 27 points and 12 assists for Washington, which forced eight turnovers during the dominant six-minute span.ROCKETS EVEN SERIES WITH SPURS James Harden scored 28 points, Eric Gordon added 22 and the host Houston Rockets rebounded from consecutive losses to beat the San Antonio Spurs, 125-104, and tie their Western Conference semifinal series at two games apiece. The Rockets never trailed and pulled away with hot 3-point shooting in the third quarter.Ricky Stenhouse Jr. sped past Kyle Busch in overtime at Alabama’s Talladega Superspeedway to win the Geico 500 for his first Nascar Cup victory in his 158th start. Stenhouse, who started from the pole, was followed by Jamie McMurray, Busch and Aric Almirola.Sandy Leon hit two two-run homers, Chris Sale struck out 10, and visiting Boston rolled over Minnesota, 17-6, with a season-high five home runs and a 10-run ninth inning. Sale reached double-digit strikeouts for the sixth straight time, stretching his major-league-leading total to 73.CARDINALS 6, BRAVES 4 Tommy Pham hit two homers, including a two-run drive in the 14th inning, and St. Louis recovered after squandering a four-run lead at Atlanta.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.Brian Harman made a 30-foot birdie putt on the final hole to win the Wells Fargo Championship in Wilmington, N.C., and deny Dustin Johnson a fourth straight victory.Harman hit a chip shot on the par-5 18th hole that barely made it onto the green. It appeared there would be at least a three-man playoff, including Johnson and Pat Perez, until Harman holed the putt. He closed with a four-under-par 68 for his second PGA Tour victory.DALY TRIUMPHS John Daly held on to win the Insperity Invitational in The Woodlands, Tex., for his first PGA Tour Champions title. Daly bogeyed the final three holes for a three-under 69 and a one-stroke victory over Kenny Perry and Tommy Armour III.AdvertisementSOUTH KOREAN WINS IN MEXICO Sei Young Kim of South Korea held off Ariya Jutanugarn of Thailand, 1 up, to win the Lorena Ochoa Match Play in Mexico City.Rodney Wallace scored a goal and had two assists, David Villa added a goal and an assist, and New York City F.C. (5-3-1) pulled away from Atlanta United (3-4-2) in the second half for a 3-1 win at Yankee Stadium.ARSENAL MANAGER GETS AN ELUSIVE VICTORY Arsène Wenger got the better of his managerial rival, José Mourinho, for the first time in 16 head-to-head meetings as host Arsenal defeated Manchester United, 2-0, in the Premier League. Granit Xhaka and Danny Welbeck scored goals in a four-minute span to end United’s 25-match unbeaten streak.Maria Sharapova recovered from a shaky opening to defeat Mirjana Lucic-Baroni, 4-6, 6-4, 6-0, in the first round of the Madrid Open. It was Sharapova’s fifth match following a 15-month suspension after she tested positive for meldonium at last year’s Australian Open.Fernando Gaviria of Colombia won a sprint at the end of the third stage of the Giro d’Italia to claim the leader’s jersey from André Greipel of Germany. Gaviria edged the German Rüdiger Selig after great work from his Quick-Step team in the final six miles of a windy leg in Sardinia.A version of this article appears in print on May 8, 2017, on Page D6 of the New York edition with the headline: Hockey; Predators Reach Their First Conference Final.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.