By THE ASSOCIATED PRESSJULY 31, 2017
Adrian Beltre doubled for his 3,000th career hit on Sunday, reaching the milestone in the Texas Rangers’ 10-6 home loss to the Baltimore Orioles.The Rangers were down, 4-0, when Beltre, a 38-year-old third baseman who went 1 for 5 in his 2,771st game, had a hard hit down the line past third base in the fourth inning.Beltre became the first player from the Dominican Republic, and the 31st over all, to reach 3,000 hits in the major leagues.Wade Miley (5-9) went five innings for Baltimore and yielded only four hits, including Beltre’s. JAYS’ PEARCE HITS ANOTHER GAME-ENDING SLAM Steve Pearce hit his second game-ending grand slam in four days, and the Toronto Blue Jays pulled off the biggest ninth-inning comeback in team history, rallying for seven runs to beat the Los Angeles Angels, 11-10, at Rogers Centre.AdvertisementROCKIES TRADE FOR LUCROY Colorado acquired catcher Jonathan Lucroy from Texas for a player to be named. Lucroy has hit .242 with four home runs and 27 runs batted in, appearing in 77 games. Since 2011, he has thrown out 159 runners trying to steal, the most in the major leagues.AdvertisementCaeleb Dressel won his seventh gold medal of the world championships in Budapest, putting the United States team ahead to stay with another dominating swim in the 4x100-meter medley relay.One night after becoming the first swimmer to win three golds in one night at a major international meet, Dressel joined Michael Phelps by winning seven golds at swimming’s second-biggest event after the Olympics.Phelps had seven victories at the 2007 worlds in Melbourne, Australia — a prelude to his record eight gold medals the following year at the Beijing Olympics.Dressel, 20, won three individual golds and was part of four winning relay teams.AMERICAN WOMAN SETS ANOTHER RECORD Lilly King of the United States set another record at the world championships, beating Russia’s Yulia Efimova in the 50-meter breaststroke in Budapest. King touched in 29.40 seconds, breaking the mark of 29.48 set by Lithuania’s Ruta Mielutyte at the 2013 worlds in Barcelona, Spain. King added the 50-meter mark to her record-setting performance in the 100-meter breaststroke.Kyle Busch used a bump-and-run on Kevin Harvick to take the lead and held on to halt a 36-race skid and win the Nascar Cup Series Overton’s 400 at Pocono Raceway in Long Pond, Pa. Busch won for the first time this season in the No. 18 Toyota and for the first time ever at Pocono. Harvick finished second.NEWGARDEN TRIUMPHS AGAIN Josef Newgarden dominated in Troy, Ohio, to win the Honda Indy 200, his second straight IndyCar victory. Newgarden finished 5.156 seconds ahead of his Team Penske teammate Will Power.Get the big sports news, highlights and analysis from Times journalists, with distinctive takes on games and some behind-the-scenes surprises, delivered to your inbox every week.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.VETTEL PREVAILS AT HUNGARIAN GRAND PRIX Ferrari’s Sebastian Vettel overcame steering problems to win the Hungarian Grand Prix in Budapest and extend his championship lead over Lewis Hamilton heading into the summer break. Vettel’s teammate Kimi Raikkonen finished second, and Hamilton was fourth.AdvertisementJhonattan Vegas successfully defended his Canadian Open title by defeating Charley Hoffman with a birdie on the first hole of a playoff in Oakville, Ontario.Vegas closed with a seven-under-par 65 to match Hoffman at 21-under 267. Hoffman, the third-round leader, birdied the 18th for a 68.SOUTH KOREAN VICTORIOUS IN SCOTLAND South Korea’s Mi Hyang Lee took advantage of the Hall of Famer Karrie Webb’s late double bogey to win the Ladies Scottish Open in Irvine for her second L.P.G.A. Tour title. Lee shot a six-under 66 to finish at six-under 282 and won by one stroke.LANGER ROLLS ON Bernhard Langer of Germany won the Senior British Open in Bridgend, Wales, extending his record for victories at senior majors to 10. Langer, 59, closed with an even-par 72 to finish at four-under 280 and defeat Corey Pavin.ENGLISHMAN CLAIMS EUROPEAN OPEN TITLE Jordan Smith of England defeated the defending champion Alexander Levy of France in a two-hole playoff to win the European Open in Hamburg, Germany.Tina Charles had 15 points and 10 rebounds, Kiah Stokes contributed 10 points and 16 rebounds, and the visiting Liberty beat the Chicago Sky, 86-82.Sugar Rodgers hit four 3-pointers and finished with 14 points, Epiphanny Price scored 12 points, and Shavonte Zellous had 10 for the Liberty (12-10). The Liberty, who have won four of five, shot a season-high 53.3 percent (8 of 15) from 3-point range.Sebastian Giovinco scored twice, and Toronto F.C. beat visiting New York City F.C., 4-0, to increase its overall lead in Major League Soccer to 5 points.AdvertisementJozy Altidore and Raheem Edwards also scored to help Toronto improve to 12-3-7 over all and 8-0-3 at home.Maxi Moralez fired over the bar on a penalty kick for N.Y.C.F.C. (11-7-4) in second-half stoppage time.Caroline Wozniacki of Denmark struggled with a wrist injury as she lost the Swedish Open final in Bastad to Katerina Siniakova of the Czech Republic, 6-3, 6-4.A version of this article appears in print on July 31, 2017, on Page D4 of the New York edition with the headline: Baseball; Rangers Lose Even as Beltre Gets 3,000th Hit.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.