AdvertisementSupported byBy Zach SchonbrunOLD WESTBURY, N.Y. — A few days after suggesting he might skip the FedEx Cup playoffs, end his season early and finally give his fractured rib a chance to heal, Rory McIlroy found himself in a luxury box at Yankee Stadium on Tuesday, wedge in hand, aiming soft lobs into the outfield.It was a charity event, not a real warm-up for the Northern Trust tournament unfolding here at Glen Oaks this week. But McIlroy has repeatedly said that he would prefer that the grind of a long season eased up.But despite his threats to rehabilitate his injury and refocus on 2018 — threats that were apparently taken quite seriously by tour officials and sponsors — McIlroy, last year’s winner of the FedEx Cup, did in fact start the first of the four playoff events, carding a three-over-par 73 that put him in a tie for 95th after the opening round on Thursday.McIlroy is nine strokes behind the leader, Russell Henley, who shot a six-under 64. Henley headed up a star-studded leaderboard, with Dustin Johnson (five under), Rickie Fowler (two under), Justin Thomas (two under), Jordan Spieth and Jason Day (both one under) all in contention.McIlroy made three birdies on the front nine, but each followed a bogey. He finished three over on the back nine.McIlroy said his up-and-down performance seemed an accurate reflection of a disappointing — and winless — season.“It has felt a little disjointed,” he said. “But I’m working on a few things. My body is only allowing me to work a little on them, not work full-bore on it. Sort of stuck a little bit in between just trying to go out there and play and then concentrating a little bit on some technical stuff as well.”McIlroy, a four-time major winner, has been bothered by the fractured rib since January and has lately been dealing with back spasms. Both injuries flared up in recent weeks, which prompted him to publicly entertain the idea that perhaps it was time to call it a season. “You might not see me until next year,” McIlroy said after the P.G.A. Championship this month.But in his pretournament news conference Wednesday, McIlroy suggested that there had been considerations beyond his personal desire for rest when deciding whether he would shut down for the season.“There was definitely external pressures,” he said. “Yeah, of course, there’s external pressures. Look, sometimes this decision doesn’t just lie with you but with other factors, other factors. That was definitely a part of it.”McIlroy, ranked No. 4 in the world and one of the game’s most captivating players, won the Tour Championship a year ago with a dramatic comeback that sealed his claim to the FedEx Cup, and its $10 million prize. No player has repeated as FedEx Cup champion since it was first awarded in 2007.But McIlroy and other players have said recently that they would prefer an off-season longer than the one the tour currently affords them. And after McIlroy’s injuries flared up again at the P.G.A. at Quail Hollow, the thought of rest and recuperation was tempting.“I was unsure what I was going to do, and I came pretty close to saying, ‘You know what, I’m going to wait and get myself healthy,’” McIlroy said. “But I still have a lot of time after these events to do that. And I feel like I’m capable of winning.”McIlroy’s putter has consistently let him down this season, and Thursday was more of the same, with two three-putts on the back nine. He missed a 5-foot putt for par on the 10th and another short putt to bogey the par-5 13th, one of two par-5s on the course.“I actually felt like I putted O.K.,” he said. “I didn’t feel like they were bad putts, they were just more misreads.”Unfamiliarity with the course may also have been a factor for McIlroy, and plenty of others. In fact, it was Scott Brown, one of the few players who had played Glen Oaks before this week, who jumped to an early lead in the morning rounds with a four-under 66.“It’s always helpful,” Brown said of playing Glen Oaks last year. “We’re used to seeing it really one or two times for the week; basically I’ve seen it three times.”The course, softened by overnight storms and blanketed with thick rough, played long for some, but length is rarely a challenge for Johnson, who is one of the longest hitters on tour. He made four birdies on the back nine to zoom up the leaderboard. His round would have been even better if he had not missed a 2-foot birdie putt on the ninth.“Today was the first day where I felt like all day I was really in control of the swing,” Johnson said. “Hit a lot of really good shots. Drove it well. Did everything really well. It’s the first time in a long time I’ve done that.”Advertisement