By THE ASSOCIATED PRESSAUG. 22, 2017
EAST RUTHERFORD, N.J. — The Giants’ leading receivers, Odell Beckham Jr. and Brandon Marshall, seemingly averted major injuries during an N.F.L. exhibition game on Monday night.Coach Ben McAdoo said Tuesday that Beckham and Marshall will be day-to-day after they were hurt during the first half of a 10-6 road loss to the Cleveland Browns. McAdoo did not rule out using them in the final two preseason games.One of the N.F.L.’s most dynamic receivers, Beckham underwent a magnetic resonance imaging examination on Tuesday. It revealed that Beckham had sustained a sprained left ankle.Beckham was hurt when he was hit by Browns defensive back Briean Boddy-Calhoun after catching a pass. The impact flipped Beckham onto his side, and his head bounced off the turf.Speaking on a conference call, McAdoo would not say whether Beckham had a high ankle sprain, which usually requires a longer recovery period. McAdoo added that the team will wait to see how Beckham, 24, responds to treatment.X-rays on Marshall’s shoulder were also negative, and the Giants will wait to see how he responds to treatment as well, McAdoo said. It was not immediately clear how Marshall was injured.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.Beckham stood on the sideline in the second half, wearing street clothes and a wrap on his ankle.McAdoo gave no indication that he would rest Beckham and Marshall in the final two preseason games. The Giants have not scored a touchdown in losing their first two exhibition games.“You have to play the game to get better,” McAdoo said. “On offense, we definitely need the work.”Beckham has led the team in receiving during his first three seasons, and he caught 101 passes and scored 10 touchdowns last season in helping the Giants reach the playoffs for the first time since the 2011 season. He has 288 career receptions for 4,122 yards and 35 touchdowns.“I know what Odell brings to the table,” McAdoo said Tuesday. “He’s a tremendous player, one of the best in the league, tremendous competitor. But if you have a chance to get everyone out there, playing together, playing with each other, you do it. If you don’t, you don’t. That’s a medical decision.”A version of this article appears in print on August 23, 2017, on Page B10 of the New York edition with the headline: Pro Football; Two Giants Receivers Avoid Serious Injuries.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.