By SETH BERKMANAUG. 21, 2017
Steven Matz positioned himself next to Jacob deGrom in right field during the Mets’ batting practice Monday afternoon, and the two pitchers spoke for a majority of the team’s session before a game against the Arizona Diamondbacks.Matz emerged to join deGrom as a core member of the Mets’ stalwart starting rotation in his 2015 rookie season, but since then, his path in the major leagues has been repeatedly derailed by injuries. DeGrom is quite familiar with such detours and had plenty of advice to offer after Matz’s latest setback.The Mets received more disheartening news about Matz’s troublesome left elbow. They announced during Monday’s game that Matz had been found to have irritation of the ulnar nerve in the elbow after a magnetic resonance imaging examination and a CT scan earlier in the day at the Hospital for Special Surgery in Manhattan. The Mets said he would have surgery to reposition the nerve. He is not expected to return this season.“It’s tough,” Matz said after the Mets’ 3-2 loss to the Diamondbacks, “but I talked to some guys who’ve had this procedure done before, and they came back feeling good and it solved the problem. I’m happy there’s an answer to it.”AdvertisementMatz’s latest ailment mirrors one that ended deGrom’s 2016 campaign. Both players had Tommy John surgery in 2010, and Matz said that deGrom had offered some encouraging words.Advertisement“He said it was a real easy recovery, a real easy rehab, and that’s something the doctor said, too,” Matz said.“He said he felt great coming back in spring; he didn’t have anything kind of lingering at all,” Matz said of deGrom. “I’m definitely really optimistic.”But the news was still another blow for the Mets’ rotation, which began this season with high expectations before being decimated by injuries.The first indication that Matz’s elbow was troubling him came from Manager Terry Collins during a session with the news media before the game. Collins said that Matz would most likely be placed on the disabled list and would miss his scheduled start Tuesday. Tommy Milone will start instead.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.Collins was vague, and neither General Manager Sandy Alderson nor Matz was made available to elaborate on the injury. There had been signs this season that something was off with the talented but oft-injured Matz — he had been using his slider infrequently this year at the team’s request to reduce wear on his elbow. Matz had also been cutting back on bullpen sessions between starts.He missed the first two months of this season with left elbow inflammation. Upon returning, he posted a 2-1 record with a 2.12 E.R.A. in his first five starts. But then came a sharp drop-off in his performance — in a loss to the Yankees in his last start, Matz fell to 2-7 with a 6.08 E.R.A.But Matz said he did not want to speculate that the elbow issue had contributed to his poor performance.“I was doing everything I could to get out there and pitch,” he said. “To say that this was affecting me on the mound, I don’t know.”AdvertisementLast October, Matz had surgery to remove bone spurs from his left elbow, ending his season.He is certainly not alone in dealing with nagging injuries this season. His fellow Mets pitchers Noah Syndergaard (right latissimus tear), Matt Harvey (right shoulder stress injury), Seth Lugo (right shoulder impingement) and Zack Wheeler (right arm stress reaction) are all currently on the D.L.“You try to get them in the best shape you can,” Collins said before Monday’s game. “We didn’t alter anything as far as the conditioning on any of these guys. Coming out of spring training, we’re saying this is going to be pretty good, and next thing you know, they started dropping.”Robert Gsellman, who started Monday’s game, recently returned after missing almost two months with a left hamstring strain. Gsellman allowed one run over six and a third innings on Monday, escaping a loss after Travis d’Arnaud scored on a single by Yoenis Cespedes in the seventh inning to tie the score, 1-1. But A. J. Pollock hit a two-run homer off Erik Goeddel in the 10th inning, sending the Mets to their seventh loss in eight games, despite a solo home run by Michael Conforto in the bottom of the inning.The only healthy regular starter this season for the Mets has been deGrom, who missed the final weeks of the 2016 season to have surgery to remove scar tissue that was pinching the ulnar nerve in his right elbow and to reposition the nerve. DeGrom, who had Tommy John surgery just five months after Matz in 2010, has bounced back well from the procedure, posting a 13-7 record and 191 strikeouts this season, providing a sliver of hope as Matz prepares for yet another operation.James Wagner contributed reporting.A version of this article appears in print on August 22, 2017, on Page B10 of the New York edition with the headline: Mets’ Matz Needs Elbow Surgery in Another Blow to the Rotation.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.