AdvertisementSupported bySports BriefingBy The Associated PressIn his first public comments since the All-Star point guard Kyrie Irving asked to be traded, the Cleveland Cavaliers’ owner, Dan Gilbert, would not confirm whether he would honor the request, but he also did not rule out the possibility that Cleveland may deal Irving, its second-best player — or if he thinks LeBron James will stay around beyond next season.“These things are fluid,” Gilbert said. “We think that Kyrie Irving is one of the best guards in the N.B.A. He was part of a championship, three years straight to the finals, and we value his talent — significantly.”Gilbert would not provide specifics about recent conversations with Irving or his agent. Gilbert said he expected Irving to be at training camp with the team in September.WIZARDS SIGN WALL TO EXTENSION The Washington Wizards signed John Wall to a $170 million, four-year contract extension that begins in 2019-20. Wall, a four-time All-Star, is the third player this summer to receive a designated player “supermax” extension, joining Houston’s James Harden and Golden State’s Stephen Curry.Chris Sale pitched seven innings of three-hit ball, the top prospect Rafael Devers became the youngest Boston player to hit a home run in more than 50 years, and the Red Sox beat the Mariners, 4-0, to salvage the final game of the series in Seattle. Sale (13-4) was masterly, striking out 11, the 14th time this season he has had at least 10 strikeouts in a game.The United States finished on a strong note with its second world record of the day in the 4x100-meter mixed medley relay at the world championships in Budapest. Matt Grevers, Lilly King, Caeleb Dressel and Simone Manuel won gold with a time of 3 minutes 38.56 seconds, easily beating the mark of 3:40.28 put up by a different American foursome — Ryan Murphy, Kevin Cordes, Kelsi Worrell and Mallory Comerford — in the morning preliminaries.Adam Peaty of Britain cruised to victory in the 50 breaststroke. After breaking the world record in the preliminaries and the semifinals, Peaty settled for the second-fastest time ever (25.99) in the final. The South African Chad le Clos took gold in the 200 butterfly in 1:53.33, with Laszlo Cseh of Hungary earning silver.Mario Balotelli’s first-half goal was only enough for Nice to draw, 1-1, against visiting Ajax in a Champions League third qualifying round, first-leg game. Four-time European champion Ajax leveled with Donny van de Beek’s goal in the 49th. Celtic was held, 0-0, at home to Rosenborg, and Dynamo Kiev beat visiting Young Boys, 3-1, at Olympic Stadium, which hosts the final next May.SOUTH AMERICAN JOINT BID FOR CUP Argentina and Uruguay are going ahead with plans to make a joint bid to host the 2030 World Cup despite expected competition from China and others. The South American neighbors are counting on sentimental support with Uruguay having hosted the first World Cup in 1930.FRANCE IN WOMEN’S EURO QUARTERFINALS A late Camille Abily free-kick sent 10-woman France through to the women’s Euro quarterfinals after a 1-1 draw against Switzerland, alongside newcomer Austria, which defeated Iceland, 3-0. (AGENCE FRANCE-PRESSE)Advertisement