By THE ASSOCIATED PRESSJULY 22, 2017
In the last Diamond League race of his glittering career, Usain Bolt held on to win the 100 meters at the Herculis track meet in Monaco on Friday.Bolt, an eight-time Olympic champion, was under pressure from Isiah Young of the United States in the last 30 meters but used his famed finish to win in 9.95 seconds. Young clocked in at 9.98. Akani Simbine of South Africa was third in 10.02.Bolt is retiring after the world championships in London next month.Wayde van Niekerk of South Africa won the 400 in 43.73, and his countrywoman Caster Semenya pulled clear in the last 50 meters to win the 800 in a world-leading time this year of 1 minute 55.27 seconds.The Olympic champion Shi Tingmao led China to a 1-2 finish in the women’s 3-meter springboard competition at the world championships in Budapest.AdvertisementShi, the defending champion, won comfortably ahead of Wang Han to claim China’s ninth straight gold in this event, and its seventh in 11 diving events in Budapest so far.AdvertisementChad Collins missed a chance for the 10th sub-60 round in PGA Tour history and third of the season, parring the final two holes for an 11-under 60 in the second round of the Barbasol Championship in Opelika, Ala.Jim Furyk shot a record 58 last year in the Travelers Championship in Connecticut and is one of eight players to shoot 59. Justin Thomas and Adam Hadwin shot 59s in January — Thomas in his victory in the Sony Open in Hawaii, and Hadwin in the CareerBuilder Challenge in California.Collins topped the leaderboard at 15-under par, a 127 total, after 36 holes.PILLER MAINTAINS LEAD Gerina Piller followed her opening eight-under-par 63 with a 68 to maintain a one-stroke lead in the Marathon Classic in Sylvania, Ohio.Paul DeJong hit a tiebreaking two-run double in St. Louis’s nine-run eighth inning, and the Cardinals cooled off the visiting Chicago Cubs with an 11-4 victory.Chicago carried a 3-2 lead into the eighth, looking for its seventh consecutive win. But St. Louis sent 14 batters to the plate in its highest-scoring inning of the season, taking advantage of a combined six walks by three relievers.AROUND THE MAJORS Aaron Nola tied a career-high with nine strikeouts in seven sharp innings, Freddy Galvis hit a two-run homer, and host Philadelphia beat Milwaukee, 6-1.  The rookie Yuli Gurriel had a career-high four hits, including a home run, and the Houston Astros received a gritty pitching performance from Mike Fiers in an 8-7 victory over the Orioles in Baltimore.  Edwin Encarnacion homered and drove in four runs against his former team, and the Cleveland Indians broke open the game with an eight-run seventh inning to rout the visiting Toronto Blue Jays, 13-3.Álvaro Morata joined Chelsea from Real Madrid and is set to take over from Diego Costa as the main striker for the English champion.AdvertisementChelsea announced the signing without giving a fee. Morata signed for five years.Costa was one of Chelsea’s key players in its run to the Premier League title last season. But he said last month that he was told by Coach Antonio Conte that he was not wanted for the coming season.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.Morata scored 20 goals in all competitions for Madrid last season, despite playing limited minutes.The Mongolian grand champion Hakuho set the record for most career wins in sumo after capturing the Nagoya grand sumo tournament.Hakuho’s milestone 1,048th win surpassed the total that Kaio, who held the rank of ozeki, finished with in 2011.Hakuho, who holds the highest rank of yokozuna, started his sumo career at age 16 and made his tournament debut in 2001. Hakuho also has set records for winning 760 bouts as yokozuna, clinching 38 tournaments, 13 of them undefeated — also a record.Ilie Nastase has been barred from the Fed Cup and Davis Cup until 2019 because of his foul-mouthed comments and bad behavior as Romania’s captain during a Fed Cup tie in April.In addition to the ban, the International Tennis Federation said Natase, the 1973 French Open champion, will not be able to work in an official capacity for a further two years, until 2021. Nastase, 71, was also fined $10,000. He has three weeks to appeal the decision.Nastase declined to comment, saying he wanted to consult his lawyer.Adam Jones, a Cincinnati Bengals cornerback, has been suspended one game for violating the N.F.L.’s personal conduct policy, the league announced.Jones, 33, was arrested Jan. 3 on a felony charge of harassment with a bodily substance and misdemeanor charges of assault, disorderly conduct and obstructing official business as a result of an altercation with a security guard at a Cincinnati hotel.The Cincinnati prosecutor dropped the felony charge and Jones, who is known as Pacman, entered a plea of guilty to obstruction of official business stemming from the incident.AdvertisementThe Detroit Red Wings agreed to terms with winger Tomas Tatar on a $21.2 million, four-year contract.Tatar, 26, led Detroit with 25 goals last season and also had 21 assists. He has 20-plus goals in each of the past three seasons, including a career-high 29 in 2014-15. In 345 N.H.L. games, he has 99 goals and 95 assists.MONTREAL’S PAPER CHARGE Montreal Canadiens fans looking forward to the annual arrival of their season tickets got an unwelcome surprise when the team announced it would be charging extra for printed tickets.The Canadiens spokesman François Marchand confirmed that the default option will be mobile tickets, and fans who want physical tickets will be charged $150 plus tax per seat. A letter to season-ticket holders cited security, ease of use and environmental sustainability as reasons for the change.A version of this article appears in print on July 22, 2017, on Page D6 of the New York edition with the headline: Track and Field; Bolt, Pressured, Wins 100 Meters in Monaco.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.