By KEVIN DRAPER and ALLAN KREDADEC. 19, 2017
Just three years after leaving Long Island for Brooklyn, the Islanders are poised to move closer to home. Their proposal to build a new hockey arena near Belmont Park has been selected by Empire State Development, according to a person familiar with the situation.The person requested anonymity because he was not permitted to speak publicly before the official announcement, which will be made Wednesday at Belmont Park with Gov. Andrew M. Cuomo.The Islanders’ proposal beat out one from New York City FC, another local sports team shoehorned into an awkward stadium-sharing situation.The decision by Empire State Development was first reported by Bloomberg.For 43 seasons, the Islanders played at Nassau Veterans Memorial Coliseum in Uniondale, about eight miles east of Belmont Park. But after previous majority owner Charles Wang failed to get his Lighthouse Project approved by voters and Nassau County, the team decided in 2012 to leave its longtime home and move to Brooklyn’s Barclays Center for the 2015-16 season.AdvertisementSharing Barclays Center with the Nets has been anything but harmonious. Fans have complained of obstructed views and poor sight lines in an arena not built with hockey in mind, and not many of them have shown up. Despite a 10-3-2 home record this season, the Islanders are last in the N.H.L. in attendance, with fewer than 12,000 fans showing up a game.AdvertisementThe shift to Brooklyn has been fraught with challenges beyond infrastructure. Despite efforts to develop a fresh fan base a short subway ride from Madison Square Garden and the rival Rangers, it has become increasingly clear the Islanders remain a predominantly Long Island team.In July, the state’s economic development agency issued a request for proposals to develop 36 acres of rarely-used parking lots at Belmont Park, the thoroughbred racing facility on the border of Nassau County and Queens that hosts the annual Belmont Stakes. The request asked for proposals to transform Belmont into “one of Long Island’s premier destinations for entertainment, sports, hospitality and retail.”The Islanders’ plan calls for an 18,000-seat arena adjacent to the Belmont Park grandstand, which will host 41 Islanders games a year plus an additional 100-plus events. A 400,000-square-foot retail village and hotel is also planned.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.The Islanders’ proposal is a partnership with Sterling Equities, the developer run by the owners of the Mets, and the Oak View Group, an investment advisory firm led by Tim Leiweke, the former president and chief executive of the sports and entertainment conglomerate AEG.Owner Jon Ledecky, who took majority control of the team with Scott Malkin in 2016, has been a proponent of the Belmont Park plan and is adamant that the Islanders’ next home be similar to the new state-of-the-art hockey-first arenas in Detroit and Edmonton.Moving back to Nassau County would also represent a compromise of sorts for Long Island fans, who have been clamoring for the team’s return. Islanders players all live on Long Island, and the team invested millions of dollars in a new practice facility at Eisenhower Park in East Meadow, near their former home rink.The Islanders or Barclays Center can opt out of their lease agreement in January. The team has said they intend on playing in Brooklyn at least through next season. It is likely to require two to three years to finish a new arena, so the Islanders may need to find a temporary home. The Islanders and Barclays Center have spoken of amending their agreement, which could allow the team to play in Brooklyn while its new home is built.The Islanders also want to solidify their arena future to improve their chances of re-signing their star center John Tavares to a new long-term contract. Tavares, 27, the face of the franchise since he was selected first overall in the 2009 draft, could become an unrestricted free agent on July 1.The Islanders’ gain comes at the expense of New York City FC, which just completed its third season sharing Yankee Stadium. N.Y.C.F.C. has searched across the New York metropolitan area for a potential stadium site. The team’s proposal called for a 26,000-seat soccer stadium, as well as a retail village similar to the Islanders’ proposal.A version of this article appears in print on December 20, 2017, on Page B8 of the New York edition with the headline: Islanders Said to Be Leaving  Brooklyn for Belmont Park.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.