AdvertisementSupported byLawyers, former players, a sports marketing whiz, a financier and Hope Solo made the ballot for U.S. Soccer’s top job.By Kevin DraperTwo months after a humiliating loss to Trinidad and Tobago ensured the United States men would miss next year’s World Cup, the campaigning to decide who will lead American soccer can officially begin in earnest. The United States Soccer Federation named eight candidates to succeed outgoing president Sunil Gulati on Wednesday afternoon. All submitted the three required letters of nomination, and passed background checks, even Hope Solo, who has been a part of a federal employment complaint against the federation and has been arrested on suspicion of domestic violence. The only publicly-announced candidate who failed to secure the letters of nomination was Paul Lapointe, an amateur league manager who mostly drew attention for feuding with soccer reporters on Twitter.One of the eight candidates will be chosen at U.S. Soccer’s annual meeting in February, in Orlando, Fla. The roughly 550 voters are representatives of the youth, adult, pro and athletes councils, as well as board members, life members and a fan representative.Here are the candidates. A former defender for the men’s national team, Caligiuri scored what is considered the most important goal in modern U.S. Soccer history: the so-called “shot heard ’round the world” that defeated Trinidad and Tobago in 1989 and sent the American men to their first World Cup in 40 years. A longtime pro, he became a college coach after retiring. He is a youth soccer coach, a member of the U.S. Soccer Hall of Fame and, to date, a rather low visibility candidate.Carter is the president of Soccer United Marketing, the somewhat opaque marketing arm of Major League Soccer that also has a significant (and profitable) business relationship with U.S. Soccer. She is likely the preferred candidate of Major League Soccer and its commissioner, Don Garber, who is a U.S. Soccer board member. Independently wealthy from a long career in finance, Cordeiro is the U.S. Soccer vice president and, in recent years, Gulati’s deputy and traveling partner on federation business. That close association with Gulati is likely to be the dominant factor in whether voters choose to support him. It also could be the reason others do not. A lawyer from Boston who has held a number of positions in a long (and low profile) career in the game, Gans was the first candidate to announce a challenge to Gulati, declaring that he was running long before the men’s team’s failure to qualify for the World Cup brought challengers out of the woodwork. That early planting of his flag ought to count for something, but the increasingly crowded field has made it hard for Gans to stand out. A former M.L.S. player, Martino is probably most well-known for his work as an analyst on NBC’s Premier League broadcasts. His brand is as a recent former player, but he lacks much in the way of executive or coaching experience.The former standout goalkeeper for the women’s national team, Solo was the last candidate to enter the race. She is one of five women’s players who filed a still-open wage discrimination complaint against U.S. Soccer, meaning, if elected, she will find herself in the strange situation of representing positions on both side of the case. An attorney and former player in Israel, Winograd is the least well-known candidate in the bunch. He has been both a coach and an administrator at the youth level. He has also coached at the University of Richmond, and helped manage a semipro team. He has worked for more than a decade as a corporate attorney at several of the country’s leading law firms, and he has been an adjunct law professor at Fordham University.The fourth highest scoring U.S. men’s player of all time, Wynalda is also a Fox Sports analyst. For years he has been an unpredictable thorn in the side of the soccer establishment in the United States, giving him an amount of outsider street cred. Kevin Draper is a sports business reporter, covering the leagues, owners, unions, stadiums and media companies behind the games. Prior to joining The Times, he was an editor at Deadspin. @kevinmdraperAdvertisement