A chaplain is part of the team for about three-quarters of England’s professional teams, offering spiritual or secular counseling to the players. CreditSupported byBy Rory SmithPhotographs by Rob StothardThe work is done over a quiet cup of coffee, in the privacy of the physiotherapist’s room, or through a brief chat on the touchline after training. It might be no more than a quick text message or email, asking if everything is O.K. It is supposed to take just one day a week, but in reality it means being on call, 24/7, even years after the work has supposedly ended. It is entirely voluntary, and wholly unpaid. It can be sad and troubling: dealing with addictions and pain, fear and death. But it can be joyous, too: helping with births and marriages, healing wounds and building relationships.Most often, though, it is simply being there: a shoulder to cry on and an ear to bend, the one person in the relentless, ruthless environment of professional soccer who is not concerned with how well you are playing or how many goals you have scored. It is why many players, and so many teams, treasure the discreet presence of a club chaplain.According to Sports Chaplaincy UK, a charity that places chaplains with teams, some three-quarters of England’s professional clubs have someone in the post, either an ordained minister or a layperson.Though their backgrounds and beliefs come from a variety of Christian denominations, they work according to Sports Chaplaincy’s credo to be available to people of every faith, and to those with none.Much of the chaplains’ work cannot be characterized as religious. They are not there to proselytize, but simply to support, helping players, staff members and even fans of their clubs deal with problems professional and personal. It sounds, at first, a little like the role of a psychologist.“The difference is that a psychologist is employed by a club to produce better performances,” said Peter Amos, the chaplain at Barnsley for two decades. “A chaplain is a volunteer whose duty is to support the players as people.”It is not a glamorous role, and not a high-profile one. It can, however, be crucial, particularly to young men and women under intense pressure on and off the field.“One thing that has always struck me is how vulnerable players can be,” said Andy Barrowman, the chaplain for Southampton of the Premier League. “They are vulnerable simply because they spend all of their time pretending they are not. I tell them that when they see me, they do not have to pretend anymore.”At the start of every season, the Rev. Liam O’Boyle sends a letter to all of Notts County’s players, from the first team to the academy. It tells new signings, and reminds established faces, of the role the chaplain fulfills at the club. “I let them know I’m here to offer friendship and support to them and their families, whenever they need it,” O’Boyle said.For the players who are not religious, he offers a confidential, independent sounding board; for those who are, there is the chance to tap into the network that O’Boyle, a vicar in the Church of England, has among all faith groups in Nottingham.“Because of the community work we do in the church, I’m very fortunate to know a lot of churches, mosques and temples in the city,” he said. “It means I can help players who are not from the city to find somewhere to fulfill their faith needs.“It can be difficult, for example, for a Muslim player to go to Friday prayers, because of the training schedule, or for a Christian player to attend church on a Sunday if we have a game that day. We can help with that, to let them know what times things are. We can put them in touch with imams or ministers who can help, or with players at other clubs in similar situations.”Helping players establish those links in a new city, O’Boyle believes, is crucial, regardless of whether they are religious. “The nature of football — especially where we are, in League One and League Two — is often short-term contracts,” he said. “The players are often living in a hotel. Their wives and children might not come with them. It can be a lonely time.“Then there are injuries and insecurities to deal with: You can be a favorite of one manager and not the next. It’s best not to bottle feelings up in situations like that. We’re there to be a confidential listening ear, or someone to offload to.”Every Monday and Thursday evening, for six months, Angy King took a seat in the trailer that serves as the changing room for the Reading women’s team. The players would start to arrive 45 minutes or so before training. King would watch, listen, show an interest. “Starting to build relationships is key,” she said.She knew, at least, that the players wanted her there. A layperson — rather than an ordained minister — King had been invited by the team manager one evening to speak with the squad. The players would then “decide if they wanted a chaplain,” she said.After training, several of the team’s senior players sought her out and told her the squad was unanimous. She was more than welcome.King knew she needed time — and a light touch — before the players might be prepared to share their concerns and their anxieties with her, but she believed even in those quiet first few months of sitting and listening, she could still have an effect.“I’ve read studies that suggest the presence of a chaplain can make a difference without saying anything,” she said. “Just being aware that someone is there helps.”Three years on, those relationships have been established. Over coffee, the players and King would talk about the sorts of things the manager, perhaps, does not have time for: whether they should stay in college, for instance, or problems at home. King now serves as the chaplain to Reading’s development teams, spending much of her time with the parents of children hoping to make a career in soccer. In her experience, the women’s game can be considered more supportive than the men’s.“It’s a generalization, but maybe men are less inclined to talk,” she said. “The women in the team are really good at sharing with one another. They support each other.”In more than 20 years as a club chaplain, Peter Amos has only once agreed to pray with a player immediately before a game. He was reluctant to do so, but the player was persistent. Eventually, Amos agreed. “He went on and had the worst game you can imagine,” Amos said.A retired Baptist minister, Amos makes no secret of the fact that he “wants people to come to faith,” but his approach in soccer is discreet. Religion is not, and cannot be, front and center.“I try not to be in your face about it,” he said. He sees his chaplaincy as an “industrial” one: He is there to serve people regardless of their creed.Amos has found, though, that soccer is a more accepting place for faith now than it was when he took the position at Barnsley in 1996. He had initially been unsure of whether he would want the role; he had to be asked three times to take it.“I did not want to start something I could not do justice to,” he said.The environment he found then, he said, was significantly more “laddish” than it is today. “We maybe had one guy who was a nominal Catholic,” he said. “Now I find that players talk about it much more openly. That part of players’ lives is acknowledged. There is not the same embarrassment. There is a greater respect of the need for support, whether that is psychologically or spiritually.”Amos sees his work “more as an industrial chaplaincy,” offering support to staff members at all levels of the club for whatever personal issues they face. But at one point he held regular Bible study and prayer meetings.“We had about 14 who attended regularly,” he said. “People came from other teams in the area, like Doncaster Rovers and the two Sheffield clubs, as well as Barnsley.”A few minutes before Neil Durling’s first game with Tonbridge Angels — a club based in Kent, south of London — he ran into the club’s manager in the stadium tunnel. He introduced himself and explained that he was the team’s new chaplain. “Oh,” came the reply. “And what are you going to do, then?”When Durling, a minister at a local Baptist church, took the post, the idea of a team in English soccer’s semiprofessional seventh tier having a chaplain — even an unpaid one — was seen as “something of a luxury,” he remembered. “Nobody was sure what I would do.”Five years later, the answer is a little of everything. Durling helps lay out the cones at training on Tuesdays and Thursdays. He walks around the field on match days — “offering a prayer,” he said — and goes inside to greet referees and their assistants. “Nobody ever talks to them,” he said.But during the game, his focus switches from the couple of dozen players to the few hundred people who are watching. “I do a circuit of the ground,” he said. “At our level, with our crowds, it’s a good chance to speak to people. I sit and stand in a few different places, and chat to a few people.“Some grab me and say they’d like a coffee. Others tell me if their son is ill, their Dad has just died, about problems at home. Often, they’re people who wouldn’t consider going to church.” Durling sees matches as a time when church can come to them.If nobody at Tonbridge questions his role at the club now, it is because of the events of July 8, 2015, when a 24-year-old player named Junior Dian, who was trying to earn a contract at the club, collapsed and died during a preseason warm-up game.In the hours afterward, many at the club turned to Durling for support. He led a remembrance service for Dian; he fielded calls from the team’s opponents that day. “They wondered if they should still be playing,” he said. For a while, he found himself “the official voice” of a traumatized club. “At moments like that,” he said, “I think everyone was glad to have a chaplain.”Most chaplains have a nickname: Rev, or Vic, a gentle sign of affection and approval from the players. At Charlton Athletic Women, Kathryn Sales is known as Chappie. It is, she said, “one of those little things which make a difference,” making her feel that she has been welcomed into the club.In theory, Sales has committed to one evening a week at the club, and attending as many home matches as she can. At training, she spends much of her time in the physiotherapist’s room, talking to players who are recovering from injuries.“It’s not necessarily a conversation about being injured,” she said. “It’s more the circumstance of being in a rehab environment that provides the opportunity to talk.”With some players, she initiates contact; others, she waits to come to her. Though her faith remains in the background until solicited, she sees her duty as “being someone who is looking out for these girls.” She defines it as “proactively pastoral and reactively spiritual.”That approach means that the role occupies more than the allotted one evening a week. She keeps in touch with players she has spoken to throughout the week — sending a message by text or on WhatsApp, or dropping them an email. “I try to follow their lead,” she said. “I won’t push a conversation if I sense they do not want to talk.”Every so often, Andy Bowerman receives text messages from players who left Southampton long ago. “They tend to say something like ‘Rev, are you still revving?’” he said. Usually, the messages are from players facing retirement, those who remember how helpful it was to have an independent, caring sounding board. A chaplain’s duties extend well beyond the needs of those who currently wear the team’s badge.Bowerman has served as the chaplain to two clubs: Bradford City for five years, and then Southampton.“Alan Pardew was manager when I joined,” he said. “He had a good experience with a chaplain with one of his former clubs, and so he wanted to bring one in here. Stuart McCall — who I had worked with at Bradford — recommended me. From what I know, the price of my transfer was a couple of beers.”Pardew did not last long, but Bowerman has found most of his successors amenable. “Not all of them have been familiar with the job of chaplain, but I think they all accepted it,” he said. Some had religious backgrounds, which made it easier: Mauricio Pochettino had a photograph of Pope Francis on the wall of his office.Bowerman said much of his engagement with players deals with secular matters — “the sorts of things they would be concerned about sharing with the coaching staff: the significant events, like births, deaths, and marriages. And because we’re talking about young men, there is a lot of stuff about relationships, and love.” But some do seek him out to talk about faith, Christian and Muslim alike.“There are quite a few who want to talk about theology,” he said. “Foreign players, in particular, want to engage in deeper conversations.”Ian Nicholson treasures stories like Harry Arter’s. As a teenager, Arter was a bright young thing at Charlton Athletic, possessed of the “huge dreams” that come with a place in a Premier League academy.The dreams were shattered by the time he was 20: Arter had been released and condemned to start rebuilding his career at Woking, a team in the National League, English soccer’s theoretically semiprofessional fifth tier. “At our level, we see kids like that a lot,” said Nicholson, now in his ninth year as the club’s chaplain.“The vast majority of kids in Premier League academies don’t make it,” he continued. “They go from having the dream of being the next Zlatan Ibrahimovic to wondering if they can make a career out of it. It is the switch from idealism to realism.”It is at that border, where daylight breaks in on a dream, that Nicholson spends a considerable portion of his time. “It is wonderful when it works,” he said. It did with Arter, who, at 27, is now a Premier League regular with Bournemouth.But Nicholson has to counsel players facing another transition, too: the end of their careers. “It is a cataclysmic shock for young players having to leave the game through injury,” he said.“But even for those older ones, in the last four or five years before retirement, there is a lot of worry about their families, what they will do next” he said. “The number of players who face bankruptcy or marriage breakdown immediately after they retire is troubling. A lot of the time, they have not thought about it much. They do not know what they are going to do.”Many struggle to thrive, Nicholson said, once they lose the close bonds of soccer. “The most common complaint is that they miss the friendship,” he said.Even more of them find it difficult to cope with the loss of identity. “Who they are is tied up with what they do, as it can be for all of us,” Nicholson said. “I try to help them have a sense of identity in themselves, not just as a footballer.”Advertisement