By KEVIN DRAPERDEC. 12, 2017
Six current and former NFL Network employees, five of them former N.F.L. players, were suspended by their employers after they were named in a lawsuit claiming they had sexually harassed and assaulted a former colleague.The NFL Network suspended the analysts Marshall Faulk, Heath Evans and Ike Taylor pending an investigation in response to the suit.ESPN is investigating the claims made against former NFL Network analysts Donovan McNabb and Eric Davis, who have shows on ESPN Radio. McNabb and Davis “will not appear on our networks as that investigation proceeds,” an ESPN spokesman said.In addition, Eric Weinberger, the president of the Bill Simmons Media Group and a former NFL Network executive, was suspended by the media group.Advertisement“These are very serious and disturbing allegations that we were made aware of today,” a spokesman for the Bill Simmons Media Group said in a statement. “We are placing Eric on leave indefinitely until we have a better understanding of what transpired during his time at the N.F.L., and we will conduct our own internal investigation.”AdvertisementThe allegations were made in a lawsuit by a former NFL Network employee, Jami Cantor, who sued NFL Enterprises, the league’s media arm that operates the network, in Los Angeles Superior Court in October. Cantor, who worked as a wardrobe stylist for the network, claimed age and sex discrimination, sexual harassment and hostile work environment, and wrongful termination, among other complaints.Cantor, who was employed by the network from 2006 until she was fired in October 2016, filed an amended complaint on Monday that more fully laid out repeated instances of sexual harassment and assault she said she suffered while working for the network.In the complaint, Cantor said that Faulk, a Hall of Fame running back, asked personal questions about her sex life, fondled her and exposed his genitals while demanding oral sex; that Evans, a former fullback, sent nude pictures and propositioned her; and that Taylor, a former cornerback, sent her a video that showed him masturbating.Cantor’s complaint also said that McNabb, a former quarterback, sent her sexually inappropriate text messages; that Davis, a former cornerback, made lewd comments and groped her; and that Weinberger groped her and put his crotch against her.McNabb left NFL Network in 2013, but later lost a job with Fox Sports after pleading guilty to drunken driving in November 2015. Davis left the network in 2016, and appears frequently on Fox Sports; a spokesman there declined to comment. Weinberger left the network in 2015.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.The lawsuit also said Cantor had been harassed by Warren Sapp, a former player and an ex-NFL Network analyst, as well as by Marc Watts, a former talent coordinator for the network. Sapp was fired from the network in 2015 after being arrested on charges of assault and soliciting prostitution.“The supervisors knew about it, the supervisors observed it,” Cantor’s lawyer, Laura Horton, said in an interview on Monday. “It was insidious in this particular environment.”NFL Network declined to comment beyond its initial statement announcing the suspensions. Weinberger, Taylor and McNabb did not respond to requests for comment; a representative for Faulk and Evans did not respond to a request for comment; Davis could not be reached for comment.AdvertisementThe network sent employees an email on Tuesday asking them not to comment on the allegations with anyone in the media, according to two people familiar with the email. And the N.F.L. is considering hiring an outside counsel to conduct an independent investigation, as Fox News did last year to investigate allegations of sexual harassment by the longtime network chief Roger Ailes, according to a person involved in the discussions who was not authorized to speak publicly about them.All five players suspended had long and successful N.F.L. careers Faulk, a seven-time Pro Bowler who played for the Indianapolis Colts and the St. Louis Rams, won the Super Bowl with the Rams after the 1999 season and retired in 2007. Taylor spent his 12-year career with the Pittsburgh Steelers, winning two Super Bowl titles before retiring in 2015. Evans played for four teams across 10 seasons, winning a championship with the New Orleans Saints in 2010. He retired in 2011.McNabb was a six-time Pro Bowler who played for three teams across a 13-year career, primarily with the Philadelphia Eagles, before retiring in 2013. Davis played for 13 years and four teams, retiring in 2003.The lawsuit and suspensions are the latest in a wave of sexual harassment scandals that have led to firings and resignations of powerful men across a number of industries after a New York Times investigation into accusations of sexual harassment and abuse against the Hollywood producer Harvey Weinstein.They are not the first accusations to hit the sports world — Fox Sports fired the executive Jamie Horowitz after claims of sexual misconduct in July, the former major league catcher Gregg Zaun was fired from his job as an analyst after inappropriate behavior, and the former N.F.L. quarterback Warren Moon was accused of harassment last week. They are certainly the most high-profile to date.They are also the latest in a string of bad news for the N.F.L. This season has seen continued protests during the national anthem, a bruising fight among owners over the extension of Commissioner Roger Goodell’s contract, a protracted lawsuit over the suspension of Cowboys running back Ezekiel Elliott after he was accused of domestic violence, and falling television ratings.A version of this article appears in print on December 13, 2017, on Page B8 of the New York edition with the headline: Six Suspended Over Claims  Of Sex Assault At NFL Network.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.