AdvertisementSupported byBy The Associated PressThe Hall of Fame quarterback Warren Moon has been accused of sexual harassment by an assistant at his sports marketing firm, according to a lawsuit filed in California this week.The lawsuit was filed Monday in Orange County Superior Court. According to court documents, Wendy Haskell alleged that Moon made “unwanted and unsolicited” sexual advances while she was his assistant working for Sports 1 Marketing. Moon is a co-founder and the president of the company.The Washington Post first reported on the lawsuit Wednesday. Moon, 61, has been working as a radio commentator for the Seattle Seahawks. The team announced later Wednesday that it had accepted a request from Moon for a leave of absence.Moon played parts of 17 seasons in the N.F.L. with Houston, Minnesota, Seattle and Kansas City. He threw for 49,325 yards and 291 touchdowns in the regular season and was elected to the Hall of Fame in 2006. A former star at the University of Washington, he led Edmonton to five Canadian Football League titles before playing in the N.F.L.According to the lawsuit, Haskell was hired as an executive assistant to Moon this summer. The lawsuit alleges that Haskell was forced to sleep in the same bed as Moon on business trips, while wearing lingerie. Haskell said in the lawsuit that she complained about the arrangement but that Moon responded, “this was the way it was.” Additionally, the lawsuit claims Haskell was required to keep the bathroom door unlocked while she showered and Moon repeatedly entered the room.Haskell also claimed she had been drugged by Moon during a trip to Mexico in October. The lawsuit alleges that Moon acknowledged drugging Haskell because he thought she wasn’t “having fun.” She also claimed Moon pulled off her swimsuit during the Mexico trip.The lawsuit claims that Haskell reported Moon’s behavior to the chief executive of Sports 1 Marketing, David Meltzer, but that the company did not investigate her claims. Haskell claimed she was demoted after making the complaints.Advertisement