By KEN BELSONDEC. 15, 2017
Just days after employees at NFL Network were accused of sexual harassment, the Carolina Panthers said Friday that the team had begun an investigation into “allegations of workplace misconduct” made against the team’s owner, Jerry Richardson.In a statement late Friday, the team said it had hired outside counsel to handle the investigation. The team did not describe the allegations against Richardson, the Panthers’ founder and the only owner in their 24-year history.“The Carolina Panthers and Mr. Richardson take these allegations very seriously and are fully committed to a full investigation and taking appropriate steps to address and remediate any misconduct,” the statement said.The investigation into Richardson brings a broadening focus on workplace harassment to the heart of the country’s wealthiest and most powerful sports league. While he has assumed a lower profile recently, Richardson for years traveled in the inner circle of the league’s business. He is the lone former N.F.L. player within the league’s ownership fraternity.AdvertisementThe Panthers announced that the team had hired the law firm Quinn Emanuel Urquhart & Sullivan to look into the accusations against Richardson, and that Erskine Bowles, a Clinton administration official and a minority owner of the team, would oversee the investigation.AdvertisementIt is unclear how independent the investigation will be because it is being led by a team stakeholder who is presumably close to Richardson. In other investigations of sports franchise owners, the league itself has taken the lead, such as when the N.B.A. looked into racist remarks made by Donald Sterling, then the owner of the Los Angeles Clippers.Bowles was the White House chief of staff for President Bill Clinton in 1997 and 1998, when an investigation began into Clinton’s sexual relationship with Monica Lewinsky, who was a White House intern.Richardson has served on many of the influential owners’ committees, and he played a large role in ending the N.F.L. lockout in 2011. In 2015, he was at the center of the league’s handling of domestic violence allegations. He announced the Panthers would not re-sign defensive end Greg Hardy — who had been suspended by the league and convicted of domestic violence, though the conviction was later overturned. Richardson explained the decision simply: “We do the right things.”The investigation into Richardson was first reported by ESPN.The news of the investigation followed a report Monday that a former NFL Network wardrobe stylist had filed an amended complaint in a lawsuit that accused employees at the network of sexual harassment and assault. Six current and former NFL Network employees, including five former N.F.L. players, have been suspended.N.F.L. Commissioner Roger Goodell said Wednesday at an owners meeting in Dallas that the league would investigate the claims in the lawsuit.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.The N.F.L. updated its personal conduct policy in 2014, expanding the guidelines and penalties to cover not just players, but all employees. The league also set up its own investigative unit to look into claims of misconduct off the field.Joe Lockhart, an N.F.L. spokesman, declined to comment on the investigation involving Richardson.Richardson, 81, has largely dropped out of view in the past two years. The turning point came when the league’s owners voted to let the Rams move from St. Louis to Los Angeles in 2016. He had recommended that the Oakland Raiders and the San Diego Chargers be allowed to move there. (The Chargers moved to Los Angeles this year.)Richardson did not attend Wednesday’s owners meeting, where a $200 million contract extension for Goodell became official, but he did send the six owners on the commissioner’s compensation committee a letter that called for more transparency in how the committee did its work.Advertisement“We should not manage to avoid criticism, but work passionately to provide positive outcomes,” Richardson wrote. “Nothing less should be expected or accepted.”Richardson played two seasons in the N.F.L., in 1959 and 1960. He later became a restaurant magnate, running a food service company that worked with the Hardee’s chain. He was awarded an N.F.L. expansion franchise in 1993, and the team began play in 1995.Richardson has endured several health scares. He has overcome prostate cancer, and he had a heart transplant in 2009.After Richardson’s two sons left the Panthers that year, speculation arose about who would take over the franchise. According to various news reports, the team is to be sold two years after Richardson dies.In February, Danny Morrison, the team president, resigned. In July, Richardson fired General Manager Dave Gettleman and hired Marty Hurney, who had been fired by Richardson in 2012, as the interim general manager.A version of this article appears in print on December 16, 2017, on Page D4 of the New York edition with the headline: Panthers Owner Is Accused of Misconduct.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.