By THE ASSOCIATED PRESSMARCH 11, 2017
At this point in his career, it seems that the Detroit Tigers’ Victor Martinez has some sort of ailment every season.In 2016, it was a hernia that hardly anyone else knew about until months after the fact.“I’ve never been a fast guy in my career, but I know I was better than what I showed at the end of the season,” Martinez said recently. “People just didn’t know.”Martinez’s lack of speed is nothing new, and it can often be chalked up to his age or perhaps the knee problems of recent years. Last season, however, he had another problem — one that General Manager Al Avila disclosed shortly before the start of spring training this year.Martinez had surgery on the hernia during the off-season after it had bothered him for about half the 2016 season.Advertisement“I understand the fans got all the right to get frustrated, but trust me, there was no one more frustrated than me,” Martinez said. “I was hitting the balls in the gap, to the wall, and barely get to first base.”AdvertisementDespite the injury, last season was a reasonably encouraging one for Martinez. After finishing second to Mike Trout in the American League’s most valuable player voting in 2014, he signed a four-year, $68 million deal to return to the Tigers. Then he hit a career-worst .245 in 120 games in 2015 after having knee surgery before the season. Right away, his contract looked like a burden for Detroit.But Martinez raised his average to .289 last season with 27 home runs and 86 runs batted in, and he managed to play in 154 games. The hernia was tough to play through, but he could still swing the bat, at least.Get the big sports news, highlights and analysis from Times journalists, with distinctive takes on games and some behind-the-scenes surprises, delivered to your inbox every week.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.The Tigers don’t need Martinez, 38, to be all that speedy on the bases, and they don’t need significant defensive contributions from him, since he is their designated hitter. What they do need is for him to keep hitting for as long as possible. Martinez is a career .301 hitter, and from 2005 to 2014, he finished under .300 in only one season — in 2008, when he hit .278 for the Cleveland Indians.His average has dipped in the past couple years, but the power was still there in 2016.“I’m getting old, man,” he joked at the start of spring training last month. “I’ve got to keep up with — these guys are throwing a hundred now.”The Tigers narrowly missed out on a wild-card playoff berth last year, when they lost two of their final three games at Atlanta. Martinez had only two at-bats in that series, since the designated hitter wasn’t used in the National League park. He indicated last month that he would be willing to play some first base if needed. He started five games there last season.A native of Venezuela, Martinez is currently playing for his home country in the World Baseball Classic. He got off to a 3-for-20 start this spring training for the Tigers.“If I can help this team somehow, I’ll do it,” he said. “We’ll see what happens. I’ve got to show that I’m healthy first.”A version of this article appears in print on March 12, 2017, on Page SP6 of the New York edition with the headline: Tigers’ Martinez Was Ailing, in Private.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.