By THE ASSOCIATED PRESSFEB. 11, 2017
Kevin Durant scored 34 points while being booed throughout the Golden State Warriors’ 130-114 victory over the Oklahoma City Thunder on Saturday night.The game was Durant’s first back in Oklahoma City since he left the Thunder after eight seasons to join the Warriors as a free agent over the summer. The crowd jeered him loudly during pregame warm-ups, during the starter introductions and every time he touched the ball.Emotions ran high throughout the game. At one point in the third quarter, Durant and Oklahoma City’s Russell Westbrook yelled at each other as they walked toward their benches during a timeout. Later in the quarter, Oklahoma City’s Andre Roberson fouled Durant hard, and the two exchanged words before each was given a technical foul.Westbrook led the Thunder with 47 points, 11 rebounds and 8 assists. Victor Oladipo added 20 points.CAVALIERS BEAT NUGGETS LeBron James and Kyrie Irving each scored 27 points as the Cleveland Cavaliers beat the visiting Denver Nuggets, 125-109.AdvertisementJames added 12 assists as the Cavaliers won for the fifth time in six February games after going 7-8 in January.AdvertisementCleveland broke the game open with an 18-0 run to start the second half. Irving drained two 3-pointers on consecutive possessions, Kevin Love hit two more, and James dropped another in a span of 2 minutes 43 seconds.The freshman Josh Jackson had 31 points, making a foul shot with 2.8 seconds left, to lead No. 3 Kansas over host Texas Tech, 80-79.After Kansas inbounded the ball with 5.4 seconds to go, Jackson was fouled, and he missed the first free throw before making the second.Landen Lucas had 13 points for Kansas (22-3, 10-2 Big 12). Keenan Evans had 25 points for Texas Tech (16-9, 4-8).UCONN WOMEN AT 99 STRAIGHT Katie Lou Samuelson scored 22 points as the top-ranked Connecticut women’s team (24-0, 12-0 American) extended its N.C.A.A.-record winning streak to 99 games with an 83-41 win over visiting Southern Methodist (13-11, 4-7).Napheesa Collier scored 10 points and grabbed 13 rebounds to record her ninth double-double this season for the Huskies, who will try to push their streak into triple digits against No. 6 South Carolina at home on Monday.About 90 Borussia Dortmund fans apparently intent on violence were prevented from traveling to the club’s 2-1 loss at Darmstadt in a Bundesliga game in Germany.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.The police in the state of Hesse said they had stopped two buses of Dortmund fans and found them armed with flares, combat gloves, balaclavas, painkillers and drugs.AdvertisementPOLICE BLAMED IN DEADLY STAMPEDE President Eduardo dos Santos of Angola blamed the police for a stadium stampede that killed 17 people and injured dozens more.Dos Santos said too many unticketed fans were allowed near the stadium for a game between host Santa Rita de Cassia and Recreativo de Libolo in the town Uige on Friday. Witnesses said the police had used tear gas on the crowd, provoking panic. (AGENCE FRANCE-PRESSE)ARSENAL BACK ON TRACK Arsenal put two Premier League defeats behind it to post a 2-0 victory over visiting Hull that lifted it above Manchester City into third place.  (REUTERS)Jordan Spieth took just 10 putts on the back nine for a seven-under-par 65 to open up a six-shot lead going into the final round of the AT&T Pebble Beach Pro-Am in California.Spieth birdied his final two holes for a 17-under 198. Brandt Snedeker was in second at 204.Kait Ryynanen scored a power-play goal nine seconds into overtime, and the Finlandia University women beat visiting St. Norbert, 2-1, to end a 70-game losing streak.Sierra Meiners also scored, and goalie Annah Smiddy stopped 37 shots for Finlandia, in Hancock, Mich.SENATORS TOP ISLANDERS Craig Anderson made his first start in 69 days and turned aside 33 shots as the Ottawa Senators beat the visiting Islanders, 3-0. Anderson left the club in early December to be with his wife, Nicholle, who is being treated for cancer, and returned to practice last week.After an outdated stanza of the German national anthem was sung during the opening ceremony, the United States won the opening singles match of a Fed Cup quarterfinal and led in the other before it was halted by rain in Kaanapali, Hawaii.Alison Riske beat Andrea Petkovic, 7-6 (10), 6-2, and CoCo Vandeweghe led Julia Görges, 6-3, 3-1, when their match was suspended.AdvertisementThe stanza of the anthem that was sung dates to World War II-era Germany and prompted an official apology from the United States Tennis Association.A version of this article appears in print on February 12, 2017, on Page SP6 of the New York edition with the headline: Pro Basketball; Durant Triumphs in Return to Oklahoma City.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.