By THE ASSOCIATED PRESSFEB. 10, 2017
The Russian runner Mariya Savinova was stripped of her 2012 Olympic gold medal on Friday for doping, putting Caster Semenya in line to become a two-time champion.Savinova, who won the 800-meter title at the London Games ahead of Semenya, was also barred for four years by the Court of Arbitration for Sport. The court said that Savinova, 31, had been “found to have been engaged in using doping” from July 2010 until August 2013. In 2014, Savinova appeared, in footage recorded by the Russian doping whistle-blower Yulia Stepanova, to admit to having injected testosterone and taken the banned steroid oxandrolone. The footage helped spark a World Anti-Doping Agency inquiry into Russia and led to a re-examination of Savinova’s blood samples.If the International Olympic Committee reallocates the medals from the 2012 final, Semenya would add that gold medal to the one she won last year in Rio de Janeiro.On a bittersweet day for the home team at the world championships, Wendy Holdener led a 1-2 finish for Switzerland in the combined event in St. Moritz, but the country’s top skier, Lara Gut, crashed in practice, tearing her anterior cruciate ligament.AdvertisementGut, who was second in the World Cup standings to Mikaela Shiffrin, will miss the rest of the season.Holdener, a slalom specialist, was five-hundredths of a second ahead of her teammate Michelle Gisin, who took silver. Michaela Kirchgasser of Austria trailed Holdener by 0.38. The finish gave Switzerland its first women’s world title since 2001.Ryan Fitzpatrick’s contract with the Jets has been voided, as expected, making the 34-year-old quarterback a free agent and most likely ending his up-and-down tenure with the team.Get the big sports news, highlights and analysis from Times journalists, with distinctive takes on games and some behind-the-scenes surprises, delivered to your inbox every week.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.Because his $10 million bonus was prorated over two years to help with the salary cap last year, Fitzpatrick will cost the Jets $5 million against the cap this year.Jordan Spieth made the putts and beat the fog at Spyglass Hill, posting a seven-under-par 65 at the Pebble Beach Pro-Am in California.AdvertisementSpieth was at 10-under 133. He was tied for the lead with Derek Fathauer, who was also at 10 under with the ninth hole to play at Pebble Beach. The second round was suspended when fog rolled into the Monterey Peninsula, making it difficult to see more than 120 yards.A top N.C.A.A. women’s basketball referee was arrested in an Atlanta suburb on two counts of child molestation and one count of enticing a child.Wesley Dean, 56, is in custody at the Cobb County Jail after being arrested Sunday. He worked the 2003 championship game between Connecticut and Tennessee. In 2006, he was named the Naismith women’s official of the year.The two-time defending champion Richard Gasquet beat Kenny De Schepper, 6-2, 5-7, 6-4, to reach the semifinals of the Open Sud de France in Montpellier.Tony Stewart, a three-time Nascar champion, finished a disappointing 17th in a 26-car sprint car event late Thursday at Bubba Raceway Park in Ocala, Fla., and he ended the night arguing with a fellow driver and complaining to officials. Stewart was driving a sprint car for the first time since he accidentally struck and killed Kevin Ward Jr. during a 2014 race in upstate New York.A version of this article appears in print on February 11, 2017, on Page D4 of the New York edition with the headline: Olympics; Russian Runner Stripped of 2012 Gold Medal.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.