
On Baseball By                     
 TYLER KEPNER
 
MARCH 5, 2017
PORT ST. LUCIE, Fla. — One of the joys of spring training is the freedom to enjoy the good and dismiss the bad. So when Noah Syndergaard and Jacob deGrom looked sharp in their exhibition debuts, with sizzling fastballs and two scoreless outings apiece, Mets fans could savor it. And when Matt Harvey allowed four runs Sunday and could not complete two innings — well, hey, we’re just getting started.“It’s still early in spring,” Harvey said after facing 10 hitters in a 14-11 loss to the St. Louis Cardinals. “Coming back from Tommy John was a little different story — I was pretty pumped up for that one. But the biggest thing for me is just going out there more and more and getting used to facing other teams. The ‘velo’ will come.”Harvey’s velo, his fastball velocity, reached 94 miles an hour on Sunday, but was usually 92 or 93 m.p.h. In 2015, his comeback season after Tommy John surgery in October 2013, the pitch averaged 95.9 m.p.h. Last season, according to FanGraphs, it was down by a mile and a half per hour.Many of Harvey’s 17 starts last year were painful to watch. He went 4-10 with a 4.86 earned run average, allowed 10.8 hits per nine innings and had thoracic outlet syndrome in July. Of all the pitchers in the majors with as many starts as Harvey, just six gave up more hits per nine innings: Jon Niese, Adam Morgan, Tyler Duffey, Shelby Miller, Luis Perdomo and Mike Pelfrey.AdvertisementThat is not the kind of company Harvey is used to keeping. He started the All-Star Game at Citi Field in July 2013, a month before his elbow gave out. He was the professed Dark Knight of Gotham then, eager for the endorsements and the magazine spreads that went with New York stardom. Serious elbow surgery would be just a routine detour in his ascent.AdvertisementHarvey pushed his physical limits in 2015, stretching his inning count to 216, right into the ninth inning of the final game of the World Series. The Mets lost, but no one could question that Harvey had done all he could.The dreary follow-up has tempered Harvey’s posturing — he may or may not have been humbled, but he seems to understand that it makes no sense to declare himself an ace again. The bulked-up Syndergaard can fearlessly — recklessly? — challenge himself to pump fastballs harder and harder. Harvey, who turns 28 this month, has a more seasoned perspective.“After you’ve had two surgeries, you want to do everything you can to stay on the field,” he said. “I definitely realize that I need to put a lot more effort in before you go out there and just throw, or go out there and run. You have to take care of your body better, and that’s definitely changed for this year.”Harvey said he meant properly stretching and taking care of his arm before morning workouts. It was a sound and sensible explanation, substance over flash.Get the big sports news, highlights and analysis from Times journalists, with distinctive takes on games and some behind-the-scenes surprises, delivered to your inbox every week.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.“He realizes what it takes right now,” Manager Terry Collins said. “He’s had a couple of bumps in the road, so he realizes: ‘Look, this is something I’ve got to endure, and I’ve got to do it the right way. I can’t go charging in there.’“I don’t think that’s what caused any other injuries coming back from Tommy John — the way he just jumped on the mound and started throwing hard again — but I know that right now, he just wants to find the mechanics that he’s had in the past.”Collins gave Harvey the option to skip Sunday’s start; Harvey had a stiff neck but said he felt fine. He wore a heat pad while he pitched and set down the Cardinals in order in the first. His command was off in the second, when he gave up a double, hit a batter, then ran a 3-0 count to Jose Martinez before serving up a three-run homer.AdvertisementAfter a strikeout, a bunt single, an infield single and a forceout, Harvey’s workday was done. He was happy with his slider, pleased with his arm extension on his changeup, and not tempted to match the fastballs of Syndergaard (99 m.p.h.) and deGrom (97 m.p.h.). This is the start of a long season, not a carnival booth.“This year, I’m taking things a little bit slower, realizing that I want to get into the fifth, sixth inning before I really start ramping it up,” Harvey said. “It’s still the beginning of March. I realize there’s time.”The Mets plan to use six starters at points this season, hoping to keep Syndergaard, deGrom, Harvey and Steven Matz to 31 starts or so, while taking advantage of the depth they have in Seth Lugo, Robert Gsellman and perhaps even Zack Wheeler, who has missed two seasons after Tommy John surgery and takes nothing for granted now.“I kind of feel like I’m waiting for a setback,” Wheeler said, smiling, after throwing batting practice Sunday morning. “But everything’s going good. Everything’s coming out of my hand nice.”Harvey and Wheeler are scheduled to start split-squad games on Friday. They were the first budding aces on the scene, and injuries have greatly held them back. They know better than to assume health and success.Some pitchers, like Jaime Garcia, have recovered well from thoracic outlet syndrome. Others, like Noah Lowry, have not. Which Harvey will show up when the season starts — the All-Star, the dud or someone in between? He would not guess.“I just want to make every start,” Harvey said. “Kind of looking start to start right now — day to day down here — working on the process more than expectations.”Step 1 of the process was unremarkable. The important part, for Harvey, was that he took it.The On Baseball column on Monday about Mets pitcher Matt Harvey misstated, in some editions, the number of hitters he faced in a 14-11 loss to the St. Louis Cardinals. It was 10, not nine.A version of this article appears in print on March 6, 2017, on Page D3 of the New York edition with the headline: Harvey Adds a Key Element, Prudence, to His Repertory.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.See More »