
Sports Business By                     
 JOE NOCERA
 
JAN. 29, 2016
John Thrasher, the president of Florida State University, is a former politician who once was chairman of the Rules Committee in the Florida Senate and served a stint as chairman of the Republican Party of Florida. He knows how to spin, and how to play hardball. He proved it this week when he issued an astonishingly disingenuous and meanspirited statement after settling a Title IX lawsuit brought by a student who accused Jameis Winston, the former star quarterback of the Seminoles who won the Heisman Trophy in 2013, of raping her in 2012.The settlement calls for the university to pay the student, Erica Kinsman, $950,000, and to continue, for at least five years, a series of steps aimed at preventing sexual abuse on campus, steps that were initiated after her allegations became public in November 2013 — and after the publication of a detailed article five months later by Walt Bogdanich of The New York Times.Given that the university did not even approach Winston about Kinsman’s accusations until January 2014, after the Seminoles had won the national championship; that the Tallahassee Police Department’s investigation was so slipshod that the local prosecutor threw up his hands when the case finally landed on his desk; that Kinsman was shunned by her fellow students, called a slut and a whore and a liar, and essentially forced off campus as the football-mad student body rallied around its quarterback — given all that, you might think the president of the university would want to issue a statement that would foster a little, you know, healing.But that’s apparently not how Thrasher does business. Although he emphasized Florida State’s various Title IX initiatives, he was contemptuous of Kinsman’s lawsuit. Without so much as a hint that the university had failed to conduct a prompt disciplinary hearing into the rape allegation — as is legally required, and was part of the basis of Kinsman’s suit — Thrasher said, in a statement, that the university would have prevailed in the lawsuit had it continued.AdvertisementTaking a potshot at her lawyers, Thrasher claimed that they would pocket $700,000 of the $950,000. (“Not even close,” Baine Kerr, one of Kinsman’s lawyers, replied.)AdvertisementIn fact, Thrasher explained, the sole reason the university was settling the case was to avoid “additional litigation expenses.” He added, “We have an obligation to our students, their parents and Florida taxpayers to deal with this case, as we do with all litigation, in a financially responsible manner.”In other words, Kinsman was going to single-handedly deprive a financially constrained university of badly needed funds. Right.There were a few things Thrasher conveniently left out of his statement.He failed to note that Winston’s scheduled deposition was only three weeks away, and that those who were to give depositions also included two other football players; an associate athletic director, Monk Bonasorte, who appears to be the team’s fixer; and the campus police chief. Surely, Thrasher and other F.S.U. officials were not daunted by the prospect of Winston and the others testifying under oath, were they?Thrasher also forgot to mention that the Seminole Boosters were picking up $1.3 million of the university’s $1.7 million in legal fees.Winston, who now plays for the Tampa Bay Buccaneers, has emphatically denied raping Kinsman. He acknowledged that they had sex on the night of Dec. 7, 2012, but he said it was consensual. His defenders insist that Kinsman left a Tallahassee bar with Winston and two other players and had sex with him of her own volition. The two players, Chris Casher and Ronald Darby, back Winston’s story. That’s not exactly a surprising — or convincing — development.What is particularly infuriating about this case is that Kinsman’s accounting of what happened has always been clear, which is not always true with allegations of campus rape. As soon as she returned to her dorm that night, she posted a plea for help on Twitter. A friend called 911. A Tallahassee police officer took her to the hospital, where she was examined that night. Then in January, when she saw Winston in one of her classes — and made the connection — she immediately reported him to the police.Even before she had identified Winston, the police investigation was desultory. Afterward, it ground to a halt. Casher had videotaped part of the sexual encounter; by the time the police restarted the investigation — after a Tampa reporter forced the release of the original police report — the video had been disposed of. Other potential evidence was also long gone.AdvertisementMeanwhile, as Bogdanich noted, the university knew by mid-January 2013 that Winston had been accused of rape. Without so much as making a phone call, athletic department officials concluded that “there were no grounds for further action.”Only after Winston and the Seminoles won the national championship game the next January did Florida State try to interview its star quarterback. Winston, who had long since lawyered up, declined.Get the big sports news, highlights and analysis from Times journalists, with distinctive takes on games and some behind-the-scenes surprises, delivered to your inbox every week.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.With so much evidence lost and so much time having passed, any case against Winston was hopelessly compromised. Which was perhaps the intent: Kerr, Kinsman’s lawyer, would later describe Florida State’s failure to act as a cover-up. (In legal papers, Florida State denies being “deliberately indifferent” to Kinsman and it says it offered her “extensive assistance.”)Kinsman’s critics point to inconsistencies in her account. But when the prosecutor William N. Meggs declined to bring charges against Winston, it was not because of problems with his accuser’s story. “They just missed all the basic fundamental stuff that you are supposed to do,” Meggs told Bogdanich about law enforcement’s handling of the case.He cautioned, however, that even a proper investigation might have yielded the same result.A retired State Supreme Court justice who presided over a belated investigative hearing for Florida State, in which both parties gave their versions of events, did not conclude that Winston was innocent. Rather, he said there was simply no way to know who was telling the truth.Although her litigation against Florida State has ended, Kinsman has not dropped her suit against Winston himself. (She is using the settlement money to help fund that case.) Though it is unlikely to conclusively answer the question of what happened on Dec. 7, 2012, if the suit goes to trial, Winston will finally have to tell his version under oath — something no one in Tallahassee ever required him to do.There are two other questions the settlement raises.First, is F.S.U.’s new supposed commitment to preventing sexual abuse on campus a serious effort, or an exercise in public relations? “A settlement agreement can only be as good as those implementing it,” said Nancy Hogshead-Makar, a Title IX expert who runs Champion Women, an advocate for female athletes. (Hogshead-Makar served as a consultant for the plaintiffs.) “The defensiveness of the university and its president gives me pause.”But Kerr told me that the university’s new sexual abuse measures represent a significant step forward. “F.S.U. has instituted a handful of prevention, training and awareness programs that would never have been introduced without this case,” he said. (They were also spurred by an investigation by the Office of Civil Rights of the United States Department of Education.)AdvertisementIt is pathetic that it took until 2014 for Florida State to get serious about sexual abuse on campus, but better late than never. Erica Kinsman may wind up having a more profound — and more positive — effect on Florida State than Jameis Winston and his Heisman Trophy.The second question raised by the settlement has to do with the extent to which athletes at big-time college athletic programs escape the consequences of wrongdoing. This is not just a Florida State issue, but one that confronts every major football and basketball program.The recent documentary “The Hunting Ground,” which included an interview with Kinsman, had a series of snapshots of college presidents, alongside allegations of sexual abuse by athletes on their campuses. The University of Oregon allowed two basketball players accused of gang rape to play in the N.C.A.A. tournament, according to the film. Once the tournament ended, the players were expelled. The University of Missouri “allowed a star football player accused of sexual assault to play two more seasons, until he was convicted of sexually assaulting another student.” And so on.Although Florida State denies it, there is little doubt that members of the football team felt they could get away with just about anything. In a follow-up article, Bogdanich and Mike McIntire convincingly illustrated how the Tallahassee police “soft-pedaled allegations of wrongdoing by Seminole football players.”“From criminal mischief and motor-vehicle theft to domestic violence,” they wrote, “arrests have been avoided, investigations have stalled and players have escaped serious consequences.”In one case, which took place just weeks before his encounter with Kinsman, Winston was stopped — and handcuffed — by the campus police for brandishing a BB gun on a bike path. He was quickly let go. Later that night, Winston was involved in a BB gun “shootout” with other football players that resulted in $4,200 worth of damage. The Times said the police were investigating the case as a possible felony — until Bonasorte, the associate athletic director, intervened, telling the police that the players would pay for the damage. That was the end of the investigation.(Dennis Schnittker, a Florida State spokesman, said in an email that Winston was not disciplined for the bike path incident because the bike path “is not part of the campus” and “campus weapons policies would not govern in that area.”)Although some Seminoles football players have been suspended or thrown off the team for disciplinary reasons in recent years, the handful of examples I found were marginal players.“Everybody in the athletic department only has their job because they are winning,” Hogshead-Makar said. “The minute they start losing, they lose their jobs. There is no other metric that matters. Athletic department employees simply have no economic interest in doing right by the victims of sexual assault.” And you wonder why football players at Florida State — and plenty of other places — feel they can do whatever they want, including sexually abusing women, with impunity?AdvertisementOne of the most important roles of a university is to impart values to its students. Everything Florida State has done since the beginning of the Winston affair — from looking the other way until a national championship was in hand, to using the settlement to heap scorn on the accuser’s lawsuit — has sent one message to its student body: Athletic achievement matters more than the students’ safety. If Thrasher had been honest, that’s what he would have said in his statement.Email: nocera@nytimes.com 
Twitter: @noceraNYT A version of this article appears in print on January 30, 2016, on Page D1 of the New York edition with the headline: After Settlement, Florida State Shows Sympathy for Victim: Itself .  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.See More »