By ZACH SCHONBRUNFEB. 20, 2016
When the text message arrived at 10:15 p.m. Tuesday, Justin Talavera had to be the one to deliver the disappointing news to his team: DePaul’s flight into New York had been delayed, and that night’s game had been forfeited.Not the real game between St. John’s and DePaul, mind you; that was still on schedule to be played at Carnesecca Arena a day later.But the St. John’s student managers had been looking forward to their rematch with the visiting managers from DePaul. When Talavera, a senior, went down to the court to tell his side what had happened, there were 12 student-managers, two graduate assistants, a strength coach and a guy from the equipment room already lacing up their sneakers. So they divvied up teams and played anyway.The scoreboard glowed and a crowd — O.K., three members of the lacrosse team — began to form. But Greg St. Jean, a St. John’s assistant coach who also stuck around to watch, began referring to the contest as a civil war. Before halftime, he dialed the Red Storm’s coach, Chris Mullin, to fill him in on the action.Advertisement“These are the toughest managers in the country,” St. Jean said after one of the players, Luca Virgilio, dislocated his left shoulder diving for a loose ball.AdvertisementIn gyms across the country, usually late on the eve of a Division I game, and usually with nobody watching, managers play other managers in friendly scrimmages that, this season, have assumed new significance. According to the website KPI Sports, which has been tracking these so-called manager games, there have been more than 200 such games played already this winter in something akin to a shadow Division I schedule. National rankings have been assigned, conferences have bragged to other conferences on Twitter, and schedules have been coordinated weeks in advance.Then on Monday, KPI — which is run by a former Michigan State manager, Kevin Pauga — announced its intention to organize a national postseason tournament devoted strictly to the men and women who typically receive little to no recognition (and typically little to no pay) for what can feel like a full-time job. For only the glamour of a courtside seat, managers are asked to do the dirty work of every program: fetching water, rebounding for hours, coding film late at night. It is only natural that at some point they would want to find time to unwind by playing competitive basketball games of their own.Most managers played basketball competitively through high school and are managers at least partly because they want to stay close to the game in college.And, not surprisingly, the competition can trigger a flood of school pride. The Red Storm, who have won all five of their manager games this season, including the DePaul forfeit, seemed to feel slighted by their No. 4 seeding in KPI’s initial postseason bracket.“We believe we can compete with anybody in the country,” said Nick LoPinto, who, as the team’s coach, drew plays on Mullin’s clipboard.The organization and apparent legitimacy of the manager games have developed suddenly, it seems. Ian May, a junior at Michigan State, said that when he arrived on campus in East Lansing as a freshman, the Spartans’ managers occasionally scrimmaged teams from other Big Ten programs a couple of times each winter. The tradition seemed to date back years, intermittently, and no doubt there were other programs in other conferences with similar routines.But this is the analytical era, and last year, May created a Twitter account so he could attempt to curate scores from manager games around the Big Ten. What started as purely an in-league sampling has transformed into a nationwide managers’ drop box, with 1,250 followers. May and a fellow manager, Andrew Novak, aggregate as many records as possible. They now refer to themselves as co-commissioners of the Big Ten Managers’ League.AdvertisementIn January, they started feeding the scores to Pauga, a Michigan State assistant athletic director and the purveyor of the KPI site. Pauga began applying his own weighted rankings system to the manager teams, with updates every Sunday.“As a former manager, I mean, come on,” Pauga said. “It’s awesome.”With the new rankings system and additional Twitter support — the basketball analyst Jay Bilas has been a devoted promoter of manager games — the contests have proliferated. As of last Sunday, KPI had collected scores from 124 colleges, representing 24 conferences, and May and Novak are keeping tabs.“The Pac-12 has been slow for us,” May said. “We’re not happy with them.”The rankings provided equal doses of inspiration and glorification. When Bowling Green (10-1) vaulted into the top 10 in KPI’s rankings earlier this season, it was as if the Falcons were suddenly back on the college basketball map.Get the big sports news, highlights and analysis from Times journalists, with distinctive takes on games and some behind-the-scenes surprises, delivered to your inbox every week.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.“We got up there in the rankings and people were like, ‘Who’s Bowling Green?’ ” said Mitchell Bailey, a sophomore manager at the university. The real Falcons, of the Mid-American Conference, have not been ranked since 1962.As often as possible, games are played on each team’s actual home court. Head managers are generally provided keys to the arena, and most are trusted to use the lights, scoreboard, timers, water coolers and in some cases the locker rooms. Members of the support staff — like graduate assistants, video coordinators and strength coaches — are allowed to play, although assistant coaches would probably be considered off-limits, since many are former college players.According to Pauga, the bracket for the national tournament will be organized with geography in mind, so that as many games as possible can be played during the week of conference tournaments. A Final Four for the championship is being explored for Houston, the site of this year’s men’s Final Four. For those games that cannot be played, a winner will be determined partly by fan vote and partly by KPI’s formula for expected outcome at a neutral site.Scheduling games during the regular season can be challenging. When Maryland visited Michigan State this season, the court at the Breslin Center was covered with desks, chairs and cameras in preparation for ESPN’s “College GameDay” telecast the next morning. The manager game had to be moved to the intramural gym, a demonstration of dubious hospitality.“They were like, ‘Really?’ ” Novak said of the visiting Terrapins, “but it all worked out.”AdvertisementAs St. John’s continued its split-squad contest Tuesday night, an annoyed-looking security guard ambled down the steps of Carnesecca Arena to see what the commotion was about. It was after 11 p.m., and the arena was supposed to be closed. But the fourth quarter was just starting.After nearly 40 minutes of quick-paced play, with only a couple of substitutions, fatigue began to set in for both teams. No matter: A video camera was recording the game so that the managers could go over the tape later to isolate areas for improvement.But other than the fact that it was played in an empty arena, the scene — and others like it — can feel eerily professional. Marquette’s coach is said to favor tucked-in button-down shirts on the sidelines. Maryland’s games occasionally include a highly talented ringer, Juan Dixon, the program’s career leading scorer, who is now a special assistant to Coach Mark Turgeon.Only one thing is missing.“It’d be nice to have managers for the manager game,” said Eli Friedman, a freshman manager at Arizona.A picture caption last Sunday with an article about basketball games between student managers of Division I basketball teams misstated, in some editions, part of the name of the team that Bowling Green managers were playing. It is University at Buffalo, which is part of the State University of New York system; it is not University of Buffalo.A version of this article appears in print on February 21, 2016, on Page SP2 of the New York edition with the headline: Rankings? Bracket? Managers’ Games Count .  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.