

 Michael Powell
 

SPORTS OF THE TIMES
JAN. 17, 2016
CHARLOTTE, N.C. — Somewhere in the fourth quarter, as Seahawks quarterback Russell Wilson spun and feinted and passed over and slid under pursuing Goliaths, and the Panthers’ coaching staff curled into a fetal position, you wondered if Carolina could achieve the impossible.Could the Panthers figure out how to blow a football game they had led by 31-0?Carolina came out in the first half running, throwing, catching and sacking with abandon, and all but tossed the Seattle Seahawks into a Himalayan crevasse. You wondered if the N.F.L. might invoke a mercy rule. End the game and cue the “Friends” reruns.Then the Seahawks came out in the second half intent on another of their resurrections. They scored more or less constantly and, inside the final two minutes, pulled to 7 points behind. They would lose, but barely, 31-24.Cam Newton, the Panthers’ marvelous and linebacker-size quarterback, walked into the postgame news conference wearing a dapper charcoal gray ensemble and gray woolen cap with a black pompom atop it. He smiled, faintly.Advertisement“There were a lot of guys playing with their butts tight, coaches with their butts tight,” he said of his team. “Hell, at one point, fans and myself were butt-tight, too.“You just got to find ways to get your groove back.”In truth, the Panthers did not get their groove back so much as this game simply expired. The Seahawks fell just short of what would have been one of the greatest comebacks in N.F.L. playoff history.“We battled,” Seahawks cornerback Richard Sherman said. “I mean, that’s all you’re going to take out of it.”None of that should diminish what the Panthers accomplished in the first half, however. Their running backs broke long gains, their receivers made sticky-fingered Spiderman catches, and their defenders were like Visigoths stomping through the Seahawk gates. They tossed aside 300-pound offensive linemen and repeatedly leveled the quarterback. Wilson’s first interception came as a 290-pound defender hit him from behind. A little later, another giant fellow tossed him to the turf, and the pass spun weakly into a defender’s hands.The errant throws led to a touchdown and a field goal.One of the fascinations of this matchup was the contrast of quarterbacks. Russell Wilson was the too-short (5-foot-11) third-rounder; Cam Newton was the No. 1 overall pick, the anointed Next Big Thing. Both recorded fine years, both are acknowledged team leaders.AdvertisementNewton claimed the role of surgeon Sunday, elegantly dissecting one of the best defenses in football. He is known as a scrambler, but just as often he stood behind a stout barricade of linemen and tossed darts into the hands of his receivers. He artfully blended long passes with quick tosses out to the corners.Newton sometimes is called “controversial” in the silly nature of the N.F.L.’s contrived controversies. It’s not as if he’s LeBron James, who has courageously spoken out on guns and killings, or Muhammad Ali, who refused to fight in a misbegotten imperial war. He is simply an alpha-dog leader who makes the mistake of taking great joy in this often brutal gladiatorial sport of his.He jumps and prances, and grooves on the crowd. And when he kneels in his huddle surrounded by teammates, he is their chieftain.So early in the first quarter he plunged left on a run and brought his team to the 4-yard line. He popped up, strode into the end zone and pointed as dramatically as Zorro at his home crowd, as if to say: Here we come.He was right. On the next play, running back Jonathan Stewart plowed into the end zone.Then Newton crouched and did a little shuffle and went bouncing into Stewart’s arms.All of these flourishes appear to ruffle some N.F.L. official sorts, as well as a few of those writers who view themselves as the Knights Templar of this orgasmically wealthy and violent game. It reminds me of those baseball grumps who watched Ken Griffey Jr. — one of the great joyous players of recent baseball vintage — and groused that he wore his baseball cap backward in practice.Both of these transcendent players are African-Americans. That may be coincidental, or not.The second half, however, belonged not to Newton but to Wilson. He is a curious quarterback, rarely ranking at the top of his pass-throwing class. With the game close, however, you strain to imagine a quarterback you would rather see with the ball in his hands.Often on Sunday you could count to five before a defender came near Newton; Wilson usually got a three count before he had to vacate the pocket like a man pursued by bill collectors. On one play he hit Tyler Lockett in the end zone, a toss that came off the back of his heel as he was getting hurled to the turf.Get the big sports news, highlights and analysis from Times journalists, with distinctive takes on games and some behind-the-scenes surprises, delivered to your inbox every week.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.After one such play by Wilson, Newton — who was pacing the sidelines and periodically turning and, in a jumping jack motion, urging the crowd to get noisier — briefly shut his eyes. He nodded in something like acknowledgment of mutual artistry.AdvertisementWith 1 minute 16 seconds left in the game, the Seahawks kicked a field goal, and the margin had been cut to 7. You took to your binoculars to see if ushers had begun the ritual distribution of Xanax to the crowd.Then an onside kick failed and the game ticked to the end.Newton talked of lessons and what was to come.“We’ve been known to let a foot off the throttle,” said Newton, whose team blew a 35-7 lead against the Giants in a late-season game before winning, 38-35, on a final-play field goal. “We ain’t proved nothing.”For Wilson and the Seahawks, the talk was that curious mix of desolation and pride that attends when a season simply ends. It is the virtue of this Seahawks team that in this most savage and bottom-line game — in which players can be cut more or less at a whim of management — they exude something like a genuine joy.“It’s been a lot of fun,” Wilson said afterward. “A joy ride.”Now he and his Houdini team recede into the distance. Alpha dog Newton and his Panthers are a game away from the Super Bowl.Email: powellm@nytimes.com A version of this article appears in print on January 18, 2016, on Page D1 of the New York edition with the headline: Artistry and Joy, in Victory and Defeat.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.See More »