By THE ASSOCIATED PRESSFEB. 2, 2016
CHARLOTTE, N.C. —  The three-time Nascar champion Tony Stewart was hospitalized Tuesday with a back injury, and Stewart-Haas Racing said the team was unsure of the extent of his injuries injuries. Next week he is expected in Daytona Beach, Fla., to prepare for his final season in Sprint Cup.Stewart, 44, was injured Sunday in an accident while he was riding an all-terrain vehicle on the West Coast, said Mike Arning, a spokesman for Stewart-Haas Racing. Stewart was being evaluated at an undisclosed hospital and was able to move all his extremities.Arning indicated that Stewart’s condition would not be updated again until Thursday. Stewart was in Arizona on Saturday night at the Barrett-Jackson car auction in Scottsdale and was interviewed on live television from the event.Stewart is retiring at the end of this Nascar season, and he was supposed to report next week to Daytona International Speedway to begin preparing for the Daytona 500, which takes place Feb. 21.Advertisement“We have received word from Stewart-Haas Racing of Tony Stewart’s accident and injury,” Nascar Chairman Brian France said in a statement. “On behalf of everyone at Nascar, I wish Tony a full recovery and look forward to seeing him back in our sport when he’s ready to return.”AdvertisementStewart, who turns 45 in May, missed a third of the 2013 season with a broken leg sustained in a sprint car accident. A year later, his car struck and killed a fellow driver, Kevin Ward Jr, at a dirt track in New York. Stewart was cleared of criminal wrongdoing but faces a civil suit filed by Ward’s family.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.Stewart spoke last month of his excitement over his final season and said he would probably return to racing in non-Nascar events upon his retirement. He has competed only in Sprint Cup races since Ward’s death in 2014.But Stewart also spoke of what he would like to accomplish in this final season, with a focus on winning his first Daytona 500, the sport’s crown jewel event. Stewart is 0-17 in the race and has come heartbreakingly close to winning it several times. It remains one of the few holes in a résumé that includes the three championships, 48 victories and more than $122 million in winnings.He goes into the year with a new crew chief — his third change since he won the title in 2011 — and hopes to find success on the track after three long years. The injury to his leg and Ward’s death took a toll on Stewart, and he has not won a race since 2013, before he was injured.Stewart was 28th in the final Sprint Cup standings last year, with three top-10 finishes and 24 laps led, both career lows.A version of this article appears in print on February 3, 2016, on Page B14 of the New York edition with the headline: Sports Briefing | Auto Racing; Stewart Hurt in Accident.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.