By PAT BORZIJUNE 11, 2016
MILWAUKEE — Mets manager Terry Collins believed. Rather than fret about Matt Harvey’s shaky outings in April and May that had elicited so much angst among Mets fans, Collins took Harvey’s back-to-back effective starts heading into Friday night as evidence the Dark Knight had emerged from his darkest period.Harvey turned in another strong effort on Friday, allowing one run on two hits in six innings on a steamy night, with eight strikeouts. But as in his previous two starts, the Mets provided little in the way of run support. The Mets managed one run with Harvey in the game and no more until a weird sequence in 11th, scratching one across to beat the Milwaukee Brewers for the second consecutive night, 2-1.Asdrubal Cabrera scored the winner when Brewers shortstop Jonathan Villar, with the bases loaded and one out, dropped Matt Reynolds’s liner. Instead of an inning-ending double play, which would have been the third time the Mets had loaded the bases and failed to score, Villar got only one out, tagging Kelly Johnson between first and second.Reynolds was as baffled as anyone by the play.“All I know is, I hit a line drive to short, and I wasn’t out,” he said. “Honestly, I thought it was a double play. I was just standing right there waiting for them to make a decision. I was just lucky it wasn’t a double play.”Advertisement“It’s tough to explain right now,” he added. “I’m still trying to figure out what happened.”Collins was willing to take the stroke of luck.“I’ve seen a lot of major league baseball games,” he said. “That might have been one of the wildest I’ve ever been involved in. You just take the win and go get ready for tomorrow. You don’t try to analyze that one.“Matty was good again. We’re certainly on the upside of that. That’s good to see.”Five Mets relievers combined to allow one hit over the final five innings, with Jeurys Familia closing for his 21st consecutive save.Get the big sports news, highlights and analysis from Times journalists, with distinctive takes on games and some behind-the-scenes surprises, delivered to your inbox every week.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.After scoring 11 runs over the last two games, a hopeful sign, the Mets’ offense struggled again on Friday. The first run came on a sixth-inning homer by Yoenis Cespedes, his 16th, ending a stretch, dating to May 23, of 52 at-bats without one. The Mets left the bases loaded in the fifth, while the game was still scoreless, and again in the ninth after the first three batters reached base. In Harvey’s last three starts, the Mets have scored only two runs while he was pitching.Harvey appeared especially sharp early, mixing his pitches while retiring the first six batters, four on swinging strikeouts.Advertisement“I feel much better,” Harvey said. “My fastball wasn’t coming out as great as it has been the last couple of starts, but I pretty much had everything else working, and was able to keep them off-balance.”The Brewers briefly appeared to have scored a run in the third on a quirky play that required two replay reviews, covering almost six minutes, to resolve.With Aaron Hill on second and two out, a Villar grounder struck Harvey in the foot and caromed toward the left side of the infield. Cabrera, the Mets’ shortstop, headed toward the middle but scrambled back in a change of direction to knock down the ball just short of the outfield grass. Villar slid home ahead of Cabrera’s throw, and the plate umpire Larry Vanover, the crew chief, emphatically called him safe.Collins challenged the call, which was reversed following a 3 minute 1 second deliberation. Then Milwaukee Manager Craig Counsell asked Vanover to review whether Mets catcher Kevin Plawecki had blocked the plate. Two minutes 49 seconds later, the out call stood, keeping the game scoreless.Johnson, in his first appearance since the Mets acquired him from Atlanta for the second consecutive season, doubled in the third. With a big secondary lead, Johnson couldn’t scramble back quickly enough on Harvey’s grounder up the middle. Villar tagged Johnson and threw to first for an inning-ending double play.The Mets loaded the bases in the fifth on two singles, Harvey’s sacrifice and an intentional walk to Curtis Granderson, who was passed despite his .091 average with runners in scoring position. Alejandro De Aza grounded out, stranding them all.The former Met Kirk Nieuwenhuis tripled and scored the game’s first run in the fifth. The lead lasted only three pitches into the sixth, when Cespedes homered to left-center. Nieuwenhuis stole Johnson’s bid for a go-ahead homer in the sixth with a leaping catch at the center-field wall.The Brewers put two on with Hansel Robles pitching in the seventh, but Cespedes in center and De Aza in left ran down fly balls on the warning track.AdvertisementIn the ninth, the Mets wasted a glorious opportunity, with Wilmer Flores and Johnson following Cabrera’s leadoff walk with singles, putting the go-ahead run 90 feet away with nobody out.With about 100 Mets fans near the third-base dugout chanting, “Let’s go, Mets!” (and the remaining Brewers fans at Miller Park booing), Milwaukee second baseman Scooter Gennett ran down Plawecki’s pop-up in shallow right, the runners holding. Pinch-hitter Neil Walker took a 1-2 curveball from Jeremy Jeffress for strike three, and Granderson grounded out to second.Mets reliever Jim Henderson walked two in the ninth, but Milwaukee couldn’t capitalize, leaving runners on second and third. In the 10th, Milwaukee’s Ramon Flores overslid third on a ball in the dirt and was tagged out, a call upheld on video review.A version of this article appears in print on June 11, 2016, on Page D4 of the New York edition with the headline: Harvey Surges as Mets’ Offense Sputters.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.