By AGENCE FRANCE-PRESSEJUNE 10, 2016
United States Coach Jurgen Klinsmann promised that his team would not sit back and play it safe while taking on Paraguay in Philadelphia on Saturday, needing only a tie to reach the quarterfinals of the Copa América Centenario.Klinsmann’s team needs only a point to ensure its place after a 4-0 rout of Costa Rica on Tuesday. But Klinsmann, whose job status faces a review by U.S. Soccer if the United States tumbles out of the tournament in the first round, said there was no chance that his team would play for a draw.“We don’t have the character to just sit back and let them come and hope for a counter,” Klinsmann told reporters Friday. “That’s not us. We have to be really involved in the game. We have to set the tone. We have to keep a high level of aggressiveness and keep the determination going from the first second of the game.”Klinsmann, meanwhile, said he was relishing the high-stakes nature of the occasion, confident that his players would respond to the challenge — just as they had done when they successfully negotiated a brutal group at the 2014 World Cup in Brazil.AdvertisementIn that tournament, the Americans defied expectations by advancing out of their group behind the eventual champion, Germany, and ahead of talented teams from Portugal and Ghana.“We knew when the draw came out it would go down to the wire, and that’s what we have now,” Klinsmann said. “I love that type of situation. This is already a knockout kind of game in a certain way.“You want your players to go through that, and go in there with a big chest and take the game to Paraguay and respect them with all the strengths they have, but also kind of showing them that we are able to play these kind of games,” he added.Get the big sports news, highlights and analysis from Times journalists, with distinctive takes on games and some behind-the-scenes surprises, delivered to your inbox every week.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.Klinsmann’s commitment to an aggressive game plan — he started the same lineup in the first two games, though he adjusted his formation after taking the lead against Costa Rica — was tempered by the attacking threat posed by Paraguay.“They have players that can hurt you in any second,” Klinsmann said.CHILE EDGES BOLIVIA Arturo Vidal scored his second goal of the game on a penalty kick in second-half stoppage time, and Chile kept alive its hopes of advancing in the Copa América with a 2-1 victory over Bolivia in Group D play in Foxborough, Mass.AdvertisementChile, the defending Copa América champion, ended a three-game losing streak. Bolivia has lost six straight and has allowed at least two goals in each of its past 12 games.Chile finished with 10 shots on goal to just one for Bolivia.Chile was awarded the penalty kick after Luis Gutiérrez was called for a hand ball.Vidal gave Chile a 1-0 lead in the first minute of the second half when he corralled a Bolivia turnover and executed a give-and-go with Mauricio Pinilla and slid a goal past Carlos Lampe. Bolivia tied it the 61st minute when Jhasmani Campos hooked a left-footed free kick just inside the post from 30 yards out. (AP)A version of this article appears in print on June 11, 2016, on Page D6 of the New York edition with the headline: Against Paraguay, U.S. Plans an Aggressive Strategy Early.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.