By CHRISTOPHER CLAREYNOV. 11, 2016
This year, it is Marin Cilic’s turn to push his limits in November.First come the ATP World Tour Finals in London, where Cilic is among the elite eight singles qualifiers.Then, less than a week later, comes the Davis Cup final, where Cilic and his Croatian teammates will play Argentina in a sold-out arena in Zagreb, Croatia.“The shine of that Davis Cup trophy will keep me going,” Cilic said with a weary laugh in an interview last week.It has already been a long, mood-shifting season for Cilic, full of delights and pathos.There have been stirring victories, including wins over the world’s top two players — Andy Murray and Novak Djokovic — in the past three months, and a Masters 1000 title in Cincinnati. There have been major letdowns, above all a five-set loss to Roger Federer in the quarterfinals of Wimbledon, where Cilic let Federer escape after holding three match points.AdvertisementThere was also a split in July with his fellow Croatian Goran Ivanisevic, the Wimbledon champion turned coach and mentor who helped the tall and rangy Cilic improve his serve and win his first and only Grand Slam singles title at the 2014 United States Open.AdvertisementCilic’s victory there provided a brief interruption to the Big Four processional that has characterized this era as Djokovic, Federer, Rafael Nadal and Murray have monopolized the major titles for years — with considerable help lately from Stan Wawrinka, who, like Murray, has won three.But Cilic, now 28, is at least on the board, and though he has not since made it past the semifinals at a major, he does possess the reassuring sense that he has what it takes.“Now I know if I’m playing my best tennis, I’m going to be able to win a Grand Slam,” he said. “Before it would always be the question, ‘If I’m playing my A game, is that going to be enough?’”Cilic’s second-half surge in 2016 has put him at a career-high No. 7 in the rankings. His new coach is Jonas Bjorkman, an upbeat former Swedish star who recently worked with Murray and had an explosive net game in his prime that makes him well qualified to add something valuable to the Cilic mix.At 6 feet 6 inches, Cilic has the wingspan and athleticism to do damage more consistently with his volleys, and that is part of their blueprint.“We all know Marin’s capacities when he plays his best tennis,” Bjorkman said in a telephone interview last week. “He’s proved that now in the last few months, beating both No. 1 and No. 2. That’s the natural quality he has.”Get the big sports news, highlights and analysis from Times journalists, with distinctive takes on games and some behind-the-scenes surprises, delivered to your inbox every week.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.Though Bjorkman plans to be in London for the World Tour Finals, he has not been able to work much in person with Cilic this autumn because of prior commitments. That should change in 2017, when Bjorkman plans to spend 18 weeks with him on the road while the assistant coach Ivan Cinkus continues to fill the gaps.Advertisement“I think the mix of Jonas and Ivan is going to be really, really good for me,” Cilic said. “Even though Jonas hasn’t been traveling with me much, we are in contact all the time, and with his ideas and his tactics, he was able to give me good directions and good advice.”The last man to win the World Tour Finals and the Davis Cup final back to back was Michael Stich of Germany in 1993. But many men have played in both, most recently Murray last year.Bjorkman did his double in 1997, his best season, when he reached the semifinals in the tour championships and then led a 5-0 sweep of the United States in the Davis Cup final at home in Goteborg, Sweden. He won all three of his matches, including the opener against Michael Chang.“I think I played nearly 160 matches that year, because I always played singles and doubles,” Bjorkman said. “After all that winning, you feel almost unbeatable, and life is great, and it’s easy to not think that it could be easy to hit the wall if you play too much.”Bjorkman said he regretted playing too heavy an early schedule in the following year, 1998, and planned to advise Cilic to exercise more restraint.However, no holding back is allowed at the moment, and Cilic was true to that mind-set as he beat Djokovic for the first time in 15 matches in the quarterfinals of the Paris Masters this month.Djokovic was not nearly at his best: His level was too inconsistent, his first serve too unreliable and his big-point confidence too shaky. But Cilic also took matters into his own hands on a relatively quick and low-bouncing court, attacking returns and hitting bigger than usual from the baseline.Just as important, he closed out the 6-4, 7-6 (2) victory after failing to convert on two match points with Djokovic serving at 5-6 in the second set. That could have been a cue to another Cilic collapse. Instead, Cilic took some deep breaths, resumed taking chances and dominated the tiebreaker to seal the upset.Advertisement“There is always unknown parts when you are going to face some big players,” Cilic said. “Am I able to bring my best tennis? Am I going to be good enough? All these questions, but you have to quiet them down — that voice in your head — and be able to fight through and push yourself. That’s most important.”In light of Cilic’s demanding schedule over the next two weeks, strong legs seem essential, too, along with a ruthless streak. Whatever happens in London, does Cilic really have the heart to keep long-suffering Argentina from winning its first Davis Cup yet again?“I hope so,” he said with a laugh. “We are a group of guys, so it doesn’t matter if I am the meanest. We have a few more in the team that can help. It’s all about the team.”A version of this article appears in print on November 12, 2016, on Page D6 of the New York edition with the headline: Season Is Almost Over, but Cilic’s Work Is About to Begin.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.