By THE ASSOCIATED PRESSNOV. 11, 2016
BOSTON — Isaiah Thomas scored 23 of his 29 points in the first half, Carmelo Anthony missed the second half after being ejected, and the Boston Celtics ended a three-game losing streak with a 115-87 victory over the Knicks on Friday night.Kelly Olynyk added 19 points and 7 rebounds.The Knicks have yet to post consecutive victories this season, and they played without Anthony after he was ejected when he picked up back-to-back technical fouls.Anthony was tossed by the referee Tony Brothers with 4 minutes 44 seconds left in the second quarter. Anthony received the first technical when he said something to Brothers after a loose-ball foul call. Brothers walked away, but Anthony trailed behind and kept talking. He was then hit with the second technical. Anthony finished with 12 points and 2 rebounds.“I was surprised,” guard Derrick Rose said. “He was still talking quietly. I didn’t get it. They have a history, I guess.”AdvertisementWithout Anthony, the Knicks had a difficult time finding an offensive flow. They never led in the game and trailed by as many 30 points in the fourth quarter. The Knicks have given up 100 or more points in seven of their eight games.AdvertisementBefore his ejection, Anthony was the Knicks’ most efficient player in the first half, shooting 5 of 8 from the field.Get the big sports news, highlights and analysis from Times journalists, with distinctive takes on games and some behind-the-scenes surprises, delivered to your inbox every week.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.Late in the fourth quarter, Brandon Jennings was also ejected after receiving consecutive technical fouls. The Knicks were called for six technicals in the game, and their 25 turnovers led to 27 points for the Celtics.Thomas, who earlier in the week said the Celtics were not playing with the toughness of years past, saw a change.“We played hard,” he said. “And when you play hard you give yourself a chance. We’ve got to figure out how to continue to do this and then get our swag back a little bit.”The Celtics entered Friday looking for a faster start after struggling to score points in the first quarter during their three-game skid.Brad Stevens made changes to his starting lineup in hopes of injecting some energy, going with Olynyk and Marcus Smart in place of Jaylen Brown and Tyler Zeller.Coming off an 8-point first quarter in their loss to Washington on Wednesday, Boston scored 31 in the opening 12 minutes. Smart had 8 points in the period, and Olynyk contributed 5 points and 2 assists.Stevens liked the progress but said there remained work to do, particularly on the glass, where his team was outrebounded 57 to 53. The Celtics’ top frontcourt players, Al Horford and Jae Crowder, were out with injuries.Advertisement“I’m just saying we have to get better,” Stevens said. “I know you don’t refind something and then it’s there to stay.” He added, “We need to defend with the same intensity at all times like we did tonight.”An Associated Press article on Nov. 12 about the Knicks’ 115-87 loss to the Boston Celtics, misstated, in some copies, the number of technical fouls called against the Knicks. It was six, not five.A version of this article appears in print on November 12, 2016, on Page D5 of the New York edition with the headline: Knicks Lose Anthony, and the Game.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.