By KEN BELSON and OGNIAN GEORGIEVNOV. 10, 2016
The president of boxing’s international federation was closely involved in guiding a $10 million loan to the organization, a transaction that ultimately led to such financial disarray that investigators from an auditing firm recommended that the group find a criminal lawyer, according to documents recently obtained by The New York Times.After The Times reported on the financial problems last week, the federation, based in Lausanne, Switzerland, and known by the acronym AIBA, released statements saying the loan was largely the work of the president’s former deputy, who was fired in 2015.But the new documents, including letters and emails obtained from former federation employees who do not believe that a full airing of the financial problems has occurred, show that the AIBA president, Ching-kuo Wu, spoke directly to a government minister in Azerbaijan about obtaining the loan, which was given by a company from that country and was spent on a boxing venture in the United States.Some former federation officials said that the loan coincided with an uptick in medals by Azerbaijani boxers, and they suspected that the loan was aimed at buying influence, successfully or not.AdvertisementThe loan was supposed to have been retired in 2013, but the Azerbaijan company has yet to be repaid. The confidential investigation done by the accounting firm PricewaterhouseCoopers showed that much of the loan was missing and was not properly accounted for on AIBA’s financial ledgers.AdvertisementIn one letter from August 2010, two months before the loan was secured, Mr. Wu wrote to Kamaladdin Heydarov, a high-ranking government official and the president of the Boxing Federation of Azerbaijan. Mr. Wu referred to a meeting with Mr. Heydarov in Baku one month earlier and said that “we have been waiting to receive any feedback from your banker located in Switzerland to finalize the investment agreement as soon as we can.”Get the big sports news, highlights and analysis from Times journalists, with distinctive takes on games and some behind-the-scenes surprises, delivered to your inbox every week.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.In an email from March 2010, Ho Kim, a South Korean who is the executive director of AIBA, told Mr. Wu that he had met with Mr. Heydarov, who would approve the loan, but that he “wants to do a big favor to you which later he will ask for repay back.” Mr. Kim added, “This is very obvious.”Mr. Kim, in an email to The Times, suggested his involvement in the loan derived from following Mr. Wu’s orders.“He is not the person to sign any contract without understanding the terms and conditions,” Mr. Kim said. “When the investment funds were sent to the U.S.A., he approved all transfers. He does not trust no one in regard to the finance matters.”In a statement, a federation spokesman, Nicolas Jomard, said that Mr. Wu “had a certain form of involvement” in the loan, but he did not elaborate. He said there was nothing unusual in Mr. Wu’s having discussions with Mr. Heydarov because he “necessarily has contacts with all the heads of national federations.”Although Mr. Jomard did not challenge the authenticity of the Aug. 10, 2010, letter, his statement said the federation was looking into whether it was sent without Mr. Wu’s authority.Still, there was another indication Mr. Wu was aware of the loan and the financial chaos it fed into.The loan was used to develop a set of matches run by an organization called the World Series of Boxing in North America. But by February 2012, the venture had lost millions of dollars, apparently consuming the $10 million that had been lent. Mr. Wu received a letter from Abe Lin, a longtime friend whom he hired to keep track of the finances at the venture, saying additional money, about $1.35 million, was needed to keep it afloat.Advertisement“Being the main financial person in charge, I attach all necessary documents for you to review,” Mr. Lin wrote. He signed off, “It would be much appreciated if the confirmation of these figures can be received at your earliest convenience.”A version of this article appears in print on November 11, 2016, on Page B14 of the New York edition with the headline: President of Federation Helped Guide Troubled Loan, Documents Indicate.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.