By DAVE CALDWELLNOV. 11, 2016
GREENBURGH, N.Y. — The Rangers used to have another player just like Michael Grabner. His name was Carl Hagelin.Like Grabner, Hagelin was a 185-pound left-handed-shooting winger who was exceptionally fast and was good at killing penalties.After a 2014-15 season in which they lost to the Tampa Bay Lightning in the Eastern Conference finals, the Rangers, pressed against the salary cap, traded Hagelin to the Anaheim Ducks.Hagelin played only 43 games for the Ducks before he was traded again in January, to the Pittsburgh Penguins, whom he helped win the Stanley Cup. The first team Pittsburgh beat in the playoffs was the Rangers, who decided they needed to become much faster.AdvertisementThe Rangers signed Grabner in July for two years and a reasonable $3.6 million because, in part, he had struggled last year in his only season in Toronto, scoring nine goals in 80 games. The year before that, he scored eight goals in 34 games for the Islanders in a season disrupted by injuries.But Grabner has had a resurgence this season, scoring a team-high seven goals in 14 games for the Rangers (10-4-0).“It’s just the way it goes,” Grabner, 29, said before the Rangers left for a four-game trip that will start Saturday in Calgary against the Flames. “It’s tough to score goals in the N.H.L., and I just take it as it comes. I’ve been on the other end the last couple of years, where I’d get chances and nothing would go in.“If you get chances, that’s the biggest thing. I’d have to look at my game a little bit if I didn’t get shots, or chances to score goals. When you get the chances, you hope they go in, but when they don’t, you try to keep working to get more.”Grabner, from Villach, Austria, was a first-round pick in the 2006 entry draft by the Vancouver Canucks, for whom he played only 20 games. In 2010, he was traded to Florida, then was claimed by the Islanders on waivers a few months later after the Panthers tried to send him to the minors.AdvertisementHe scored 34 goals in his first year with the Islanders and finished third in the voting for the Calder Trophy, given to the top rookie. In 2011, the Islanders signed Grabner to a five-year, $15 million contract. He scored only 56 goals in four seasons before he was traded to Toronto.Grabner’s acquisition was regarded as a bit of a flier for the Rangers, but Coach Alain Vigneault said, “Everything I see from Grabs is what I expected.”Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.“The speed, the penalty-killing, the good stick,” Vigneault said. “He’s a player that can intimidate the opposition with his speed. When he’s jumping and feeling good about himself, he’s a very effective player. That’s what we’ve seen so far, and that’s what I expect to see moving forward.”The Rangers were 26th in the N.H.L. at killing penalties last year after finishing sixth in Hagelin’s final season in New York. The team is now 12th. Grabner, who had a hat trick on Oct. 30 against the Lightning, has enabled the Rangers to become the highest-scoring team in the league. But he can also play defense.“It’s incredible,” said Ryan McDonagh, the Rangers’ captain and top defenseman. “I mean, you talk about not just the open-ice speed he has but, in practice, in D-zone coverage, he’s just so quick in his turns. He’s right on you — takes away time and space. You might think you have a second or two, and, boom, he’s right on you. Offensively, when you have the puck, you’re not even aware of the ability he has. It’s been a huge strength for us.”Grabner thrived on a line with Kevin Hayes and J. T. Miller, who are tied for the team lead with 13 points.“It revolves a little bit around his speed,” Miller said of Grabner. “But he goes to the tough areas, and a lot of the goals he scores are right around the net this year. He goes to those areas, and he makes it easier for his linemates to get open because he makes a lot of room.”At practice Thursday, Vigneault shuffled his lines in an effort to help the struggling forward Chris Kreider, and Grabner played with center Brandon Pirri and winger Jesper Fast.Pirri smiled when he said of Grabner: “He wants to go. That’s the strength of his game.”Pirri added: “Obviously, we’re a quick transition team, but with his speed, it pushes their D back, and it opens ice. If they don’t respect his speed, he’s going for a breakaway — he has two breakaways a game, it seems like. It’s weird, but he seems to know what he’s capable of, and he does it very well.”The road trip, which also includes stops in Edmonton, Vancouver and Columbus, is being regarded as the first true test of the season for the Rangers, who have played all but four games at Madison Square Garden. They are tied at the top of the Metropolitan Division with Pittsburgh (9-3-2), which also has 20 points.AdvertisementGrabner provides an edge that the Rangers have not had since Hagelin was here.“Speed for the opposition is a scary thing when you’re seeing that coming down the wing,” Vigneault said, adding of Grabner, “I’m very happy he decided to join our team this year.”A version of this article appears in print on November 12, 2016, on Page D6 of the New York edition with the headline: Newcomer Fits  Rangers’ Prototype for the Fast Track.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.