AdvertisementSupported byOn TennisBy Christopher ClareyAndy Murray and Novak Djokovic played their first matches against each other on indoor courts in early 2001, when they faced off in two European junior events that Murray, in a poor bit of foreshadowing, won in a hurry.“I think it’s amazing to think they’ve been playing each other since they were 13,” Judy Murray, Andy’s mother and childhood coach, once said.But the boyhood friends and rivals, now 29, have never been involved in a duel like the one that awaits them in London’s O2 Arena at next week’s ATP World Tour Finals. They have played for Masters 1000 titles and all four Grand Slam titles. They have played at the Olympics. But they have never been in a race to the wire for the year-end No. 1 ranking.It is a development that no tennis insider, not even Murray, would have thought plausible in June, when Djokovic secured his fourth straight Grand Slam singles title by finally winning the French Open, beating Murray for the 13th time in their last 15 matches.The focus at that stage was justifiably on whether Djokovic could pull off the calendar-year Grand Slam or even the Golden Slam by also winning the Olympic singles title. But by the time Djokovic and Murray returned to Paris last week for the indoor Masters 1000, the balance of power had shifted, and it was time for a red-hot Murray, who gained the No. 1 ranking on Monday.Murray, a deeply driven and still-grumbling Scot who can see doom clouds where others see beach weather, waited longer than any player after becoming No. 2 to rise to No. 1 — more than seven years.“I’m super happy for Andy, because I don’t think anyone else deserves it more at this stage, and I think a little variety at the top is good for the sport,” said Jonas Bjorkman, the former Swedish star who recently helped coach Murray.“I think Andy’s going to be the one now that everyone has to hunt, and I think that it’s good for Novak as well,” added Bjorkman, whose new pupil, Marin Cilic, will face Murray on Monday in their opening match of round-robin play. “I can imagine winning the French Open for him and being so dominant for so long, you’ve got to find new challenges and new goals. And now he can start hunting something again. I think it’s going to be very interesting.”Ivan Lendl returned as Murray’s coach in June, and Murray has clearly been the best player in the second half of the season. But even with the no-guff Lendl in his camp, he has had no shortage of curmudgeonly moments. There may never have been a No. 1 who was this openly self-critical.“Andy gets grumpy, but he is an unconditional competitor,” said Paul Annacone, Roger Federer’s former coach, who got to know Murray during his years as head coach for the British Lawn Tennis Association.That competitive streak goes way back. “When he was 5, I can very clearly remember him saying to me: ‘I’m fed up hitting balls. I want to play a match, a proper match,’ ” Judy Murray said.Twenty-four years later, Murray won Wimbledon and the Olympic gold medal in singles, and after losing in the quarterfinals at the United States Open and to Juan Martín del Potro in the Davis Cup, he has reeled off four straight tournament victories and arrived in London on a 19-match winning streak.That does not mean he will remain No. 1 for long. Murray has a 405-point lead in the rankings, but on Nov. 28 he will lose 275 points from last year’s Davis Cup final. So his net lead on Djokovic in the year-end chase is just 130 points.The last time the top ranking changed hands at the year-end championships was in 2001, when Lleyton Hewitt supplanted Gustavo Kuerten.There are a number of scenarios this year, but in broad-brush terms whoever has a better result in London will probably finish No. 1, although Djokovic could hurt his chances by advancing to the knockout rounds with a 1-2 record in round-robin play.That seems unlikely — though no longer unthinkable — in light of his combined 23-0 record against the three other players in his group: Milos Raonic, Gaël Monfils and Dominic Thiem. Murray, by contrast, will have to deal with the in-form Cilic, the reigning United States Open champion Stan Wawrinka and Kei Nishikori, who beat a weary Murray in the United States Open quarterfinals.Murray also risks being weary in London, despite his commitment to fitness and the size of his support team. But his strokes and self-belief are firmly in place, which does not appear to be the case for Djokovic.“It just shows you how much of an emotional game tennis is,” Cilic said of Djokovic before beating him for the first time last week in Paris. “It’s not only about hitting a good forehand or a good backhand. It’s about thinking right on the court and thinking smart and outplaying the opponent, and you have to have a fresh mind for that.”Annacone remains a devotee of the big picture.“I think Novak is in an adjustment period,” he said. “He has to figure out how to regain his point-for-point tenacity and his unrelenting desire and confidence. That’s not easy.“For Andy, I feel he has done a great job and should really sit back and enjoy it. It’s not his personality to do so, because he drives himself so hard. It will be a new landscape for him to manage. His talents are immense. He just has to get comfortable there and give himself a little mental latitude, so he doesn’t scrutinize himself so much. It’s hard to weigh how much, but that really saps energy.”Transforming Murray, fine company off court by many accounts, into an on-court ray of sunshine sounds like an even tougher task than beating him from the baseline.What is clear is that Murray and Djokovic, firmly on each other’s radars since age 13, have more in common than ever. With the birth of Murray’s daughter, Sophia, in February, he and Djokovic are both working fathers. They are also both on the ATP Player Council, sharing the same round tables and tour agenda. And they both know how it feels to be atop the pecking order.But only one of them will get to enjoy the feeling of finishing No. 1 this year, and it bears remembering that since those less-chronicled days in their very early teens, Murray has never beaten Djokovic indoors and still trails 10-24 in their tour-level matches.“I favor Andy to finish No. 1,” Annacone said. “But it is Novak, so don’t count out greatness.”Advertisement