By DAVE CALDWELLNOV. 11, 2016
WEST POINT, N.Y. — According to Edgar Allen Poe — the wide receiver from Tucson, not the macabre poet — a much brighter aura surrounds the Army football team this season, and not just because the Black Knights are finally winning more games than they lose.“It’s kind of an obvious shift,” Poe, a junior, said after a practice this week. “You can feel it, see it. We come down here, it feels like we’re actually Division I football players. My first year here, it wasn’t exactly the same way.”Army won its first three games and is 5-4 under its third-year head coach, Jeff Monken, entering an interesting game Saturday in San Antonio against slumping Notre Dame (3-6). Army first played Notre Dame in 1913 and once battled it for national titles, but the Black Knights have not beaten the Irish in 14 tries since 1958.Army has won more games this year than it has since 2010, when it finished 7-6 and made its only bowl appearance since 1996. The optimism has raised hopes for a bigger prize: Army has a chance to beat its archrival, Navy (6-2), for the first time since 2001. The teams meet Dec. 10 in Baltimore.Advertisement“You can tell just by the culture of the team” that things have changed, defensive back Rhyan England said. “It used to be just not as hardworking when I first got here. Now you can just kind of see everybody’s transformed. We understand we can win every single game. It’s just in not beating ourselves.”Monken, 49, who came to Army from Georgia Southern in 2014 and was once an assistant coach at Navy, does not like to think that the program has turned a corner because, as he said with a smile, “There’s a lot of corners to turn, and the corners keep showing up.”AdvertisementAlthough the Black Knights won only two of 12 games last year in his second season, they lost seven by a touchdown or less. Monken chose to view that as progress, believing that despite some built-in disadvantages — Army’s offensive line, for example, is almost 40 pounds lighter than Notre Dame’s will be on Saturday — his team was more physical, precise and resourceful than when the Black Knights were 4-8 in his first season.“It’s difficult at every school, but certainly here,” Monken said. “We’re not as physically big and tall and long and heavy as teams we play. There are a lot of teams we play that are faster than us, more athletic than us. It’s getting these guys to maximize their potential and be the very best we can be.”Army opened this season by beating Temple, Rice and Texas-El Paso. The Black Knights routed UTEP, 66-14, only six days after the Army sophomore cornerback Brandon Jackson was killed in a one-car accident about 20 miles from campus.Twenty busloads of cadets attended Jackson’s funeral in Queens two days after the UTEP game, and his locker still contains his uniform and equipment. Players wear wristbands with his jersey number, 28, or write it on their arms.“We know he’s with us,” said the team captain Andrew King, a senior linebacker from Queens Village. “We’re going out there playing for our brothers, playing for Brandon. He’s definitely missed as a player. But it’s just added motivation to take advantage of every day that’s granted to you. Don’t take it for granted.”Get the big sports news, highlights and analysis from Times journalists, with distinctive takes on games and some behind-the-scenes surprises, delivered to your inbox every week.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.Army lost, 31-12, to Air Force, its other rival among the service academies, last Saturday at Michie Stadium, and it knows that Notre Dame is eager to stop a triple-option offense after Navy used a similar attack last week to outlast the Fighting Irish, 28-27, in Jacksonville, Fla.AdvertisementBut this is Army’s best chance to beat Notre Dame for the first time in 58 years, and another opportunity to inch closer to only its second winning record in the past 20. Poe said he had been asked almost daily by his classmates if this would be the year Army finally beat Navy, to whom it has also lost 14 in a row. But for now, only Notre Dame looms in his sights.“We missed out on a couple of opportunities,” Poe said, “but I think we’ve still got a lot left in the tank for these last couple of games. We’re just focused on this next game. I’m more focused on beating Notre Dame than on Navy or who we’re going to play in a bowl game.”Monken said that he still considered the program to be a work in progress but that he was pleased his team was no longer surprised when it won.“I’m proud of these guys,” he said. “I’m proud of the effort they put in. I’m proud of the fact that even though we’ve lost three games in the last five, nobody’s panicking.”The most important thing in his team’s control, he said, is executing its own game plan.“And when we do,” Monken continued, “we play pretty good.”A version of this article appears in print on November 12, 2016, on Page D2 of the New York edition with the headline: At Army, Wins Are No Longer a Jolt to the System.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.