By THE ASSOCIATED PRESSAPRIL 22, 2017
Al Horford had 18 points and 8 rebounds, Isaiah Thomas scored 16 points, and the top-seeded Boston Celtics beat the Bulls, 104-87, on Friday night in Chicago after dropping the first two games of their opening-round series at home.The Celtics pulled away after a 20-point lead shrank to 1 early in the third quarter and put themselves in position to tie a series that was in danger of slipping away from them. Game 4 is Sunday in Chicago.Dwyane Wade scored 18 for Chicago. Jimmy Butler had 14 points on 7-of-21 shooting, and the Bulls’ offense simply did not click the way it had been, with Rajon Rondo out indefinitely with a broken right thumb. Chicago shot about 39 percent and committed 18 turnovers.“We’re not going to put this all on missing Rondo, because he might not show up,” Wade said. “It sounds like he’s going to be out for a while. We need to come out as a team and figure out how to be better.”AdvertisementThomas, grieving the death of his sister in a car accident last week, rejoined the team after spending time with his family in Tacoma, Wash. He scored 8 points in the third quarter, helping the Celtics regain control.AdvertisementJae Crowder finished with 16 points. Avery Bradley scored 15 and hit four of Boston’s 17 3-pointers.“We weren’t coming here hoping to get a win,” Bradley said. “We knew we were coming here to win both games.”The Celtics led by 18 after hitting 7 of 11 3-pointers in the first quarter and were up, 37-17, early in the second before the Bulls jumped back into it.The Celtics’ lead was down to 44-43 early in the third when Thomas hit Horford for an alley-oop dunk and nailed back-to-back 3-pointers. Boston maintained a comfortable edge after that.WESTBROOK TRIPLE-DOUBLES AGAIN Russell Westbrook scored 32 points in a triple-double, and the Oklahoma City Thunder held off the Houston Rockets, 115-113, cutting their deficit to two games to one in the first-round Western Conference playoff series.James Harden scored 44 points for Houston, but just before time expired, he missed a 3-point attempt that could have won the game.Westbrook also had 13 rebounds and 11 assists. It was his second straight triple-double and the seventh playoff triple-double of his career. Taj Gibson added 20 points, and Andre Roberson and Victor Oladipo each scored 12 for the Thunder, who shot 55 percent from the field.AdvertisementThe Thunder squandered a double-digit lead in the second half of Game 2, and barely hung on this time. They will host Game 4 on Sunday.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.Lou Williams scored 22 points for the Rockets, and Ryan Anderson added 18.The Thunder led, 65-58, at halftime behind 62.2 percent shooting. Westbrook had 14 points, 8 assists and 7 rebounds at the break, and he had more offensive help than in the previous two games.Houston scored the first 9 points of the second half, including 6 from Harden, to go up by 67-65.The Thunder regained momentum, and back-to-back 3-pointers by Roberson and Alex Abrines put the Thunder ahead, 86-76, with 3 minutes 30 seconds to play in the third quarter. Oklahoma City took a 93-83 lead into the fourth.Houston closed the gap through the final period. Harden was fouled with 8.8 seconds left, and he made two free throws to cut Oklahoma City’s lead to 114-113. Westbrook went to the line with 8.4 seconds to play and missed one of his two free throws, giving the Rockets a chance before Harden’s final miss.CLIPPERS GAIN AN EDGE Chris Paul scored 34 points, and the Los Angeles Clippers rallied for a 111-106 victory over the Utah Jazz, taking a two-games-to-one lead in the first-round playoff series.The Jazz led for most of the game before Paul took over in the fourth quarter and powered a 15-0 run that gave the Clippers a 103-96 lead with 2:09 remaining. Utah never led again.The win negated a spectacular night from Gordon Hayward, who scored a career-high 40 points. But Paul simply dominated the fourth quarter, scoring 9 straight points himself during the run and getting wherever he wanted on the floor. He iced the game with a pair of free throws with 5.3 seconds remaining and finished with seven rebounds and 10 assists.DeAndre Jordan had 17 points and 13 rebounds for the Clippers, who played without the injured Blake Griffin in the second half.RONDO OUT WITH INJURY Rajon Rondo is out indefinitely with a broken right thumb, just when everything seemed to be going well for the Chicago Bulls.AdvertisementThe team announced the injury on Friday, hours before the Bulls hosted the Boston Celtics in Game 3 of their first-round playoff series. Chicago won the first two games in Boston.Rondo’s play has been a big reason that the Bulls are threatening to become the first eighth seed to sweep a top seed.CHUNK OF NETS UP FOR SALE The Nets’ owner, Mikhail D. Prokhorov, told the Russian news media that he was selling a 49 percent stake in the club. In December, Prokhorov announced his intention to sell a minority stake. The Nets went 20-62 this season, the worst record in the N.B.A.A version of this article appears in print on April 22, 2017, on Page D5 of the New York edition with the headline: The Celtics Recover Against The Bulls.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.