By TYLER KEPNERJULY 9, 2017
MIAMI — In a sea of squiggles on the autographed baseballs in the World Team clubhouse here Sunday, one name — and just one name — stood out: Amed, with the A shaped almost like a star. It was the signature of Amed Rosario, the shortstop who offers hope for the lackluster Mets. No last name required.The autograph was not to be confused with Rosario’s personal logo, a stylized “AR” he wore on a T-shirt in the clubhouse before batting third at the Futures Game. That logo appeared on the shirt above an outline of Rosario’s face and beard. Perhaps the beard could become his trademark, like Jacob deGrom’s long, wavy hair.For that to happen, though, the Mets must summon Rosario and his star power to the majors. He is hitting .327 with seven home runs and 16 stolen bases at Class AAA Las Vegas, but the Mets have stuck with the veterans Jose Reyes and Asdrubal Cabrera at shortstop. Their season may be too far gone for a rookie to save them, anyway.“He said he’s 100 percent ready,” said Tomas Nido, a Class AA Mets catcher who interpreted for Rosario. “But it’s whenever God’s ready.”AdvertisementRosario, 21, keeps in regular touch with Reyes. Both are from the Dominican Republic, and Reyes has tried to prepare Rosario for his promotion.Advertisement“He just tells him to be patient and his time’s going to get there, and not to focus on what can happen, just to focus on the moment right there,” Nido said. “Because when it comes, he’s going to get to enjoy it.”Two years ago, Michael Conforto represented the Mets at the Futures Game in Cincinnati. He was in the majors by the end of the month and is now a first-time All-Star. The Mets’ players understand that Rosario will be similarly pivotal for the long term.“He’s going to be the future shortstop for this ball club,” Reyes said earlier this season. “Everybody expects him to be here soon — sooner than later. I’m looking forward to that, too, because the guy can play.”Reyes, a switch-hitter, said he was a different kind of player from Rosario, who bats right-handed and is two inches taller than Reyes, at 6 feet 2. Reyes was more of a base-stealing threat — he is the last major leaguer to swipe at least 75 in a season (78, in 2007) — but praised Rosario’s calm demeanor.“Great kid, always happy,” Reyes said. “Always the same, you know? I like that from people, to be the same every day. Not come in one day, say hello, and then two days later, don’t say anything. I don’t like that. He’s on the same level every day.”Rosario, who struck out twice on Sunday, said it was not awkward to have his friend and idol still blocking his path to Citi Field.“Not really, because that’s his mentor and he’s happy to know that the person who he looks up to and mentors him is still playing,” Nido said, interpreting for Rosario. “Whenever his time is, he’s going to be ready.”AdvertisementRosario’s double-play partner on Sunday was Yoan Moncada, the Cuban second baseman who was traded from the Boston Red Sox to the Chicago White Sox in the Chris Sale deal last December. Moncada, 22, played briefly for Boston last season but has spent all of this year with Class AAA Charlotte, hitting .282 with 11 homers and 16 steals.Get the big sports news, highlights and analysis from Times journalists, with distinctive takes on games and some behind-the-scenes surprises, delivered to your inbox every week.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.“This is a process,” Moncada said through an interpreter. “When the team makes that call, I’ll be ready.”Moncada grounded out in his first at-bat against Brent Honeywell, a Tampa Bay prospect with a screwball who leads the minors in strikeouts. In his second at-bat, Moncada took a 100-mile-an-hour fastball for strike three from Michael Kopech, who came with him in the Sale trade and is pitching at Class AA.A fast-rising Yankees prospect, Domingo Acevedo, is also gaining attention for his velocity. Acevedo, 23, has pitched at Class A Tampa, Class AA Trenton and Class AAA Scranton/Wilkes-Barre this season, with 107 strikeouts in 99 innings and a 3.09 earned run average.Acevedo, whose first season was 2013, said he did not throw hard initially. But he has grown into his 6-foot-7 frame — adding 62 pounds as a professional, to 250 — and his fastball has responded. He has thrown 100 m.p.h. this season and peaked at 103 m.p.h. in low Class A two years ago.The Yankees’ Aroldis Chapman has thrown 105 m.p.h., a figure he tattooed on his left arm. Acevedo said he has no such plans to commemorate his 103.“You have to understand you’re not going to always throw at that speed,” Acevedo said through an interpreter. “I prefer to keep it in my heart.”Acevedo came out throwing fastballs in the fourth inning Sunday, but the United States prospects battered him for four hits and three runs on their way to a 7-6 victory.A version of this article appears in print on July 11, 2017, on Page B9 of the New York edition with the headline: Mets’ Shortstop of the Future Displays Pizazz and Patience.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.