By JAMES WAGNERJULY 8, 2017
ST. LOUIS — Even in a season of oddities and injuries, the Mets’ announcement before Saturday’s game against the St. Louis Cardinals might rank near the top.Outfielder Michael Conforto, the Mets’ lone All-Star, who had been out since June 28 with a bruised left hand, returned from the 10-day disabled list as expected. To make room for Conforto on the 25-man roster, the backup outfielder Brandon Nimmo was sent to the 10-day D.L. with a partly collapsed lung.Wait, what?“It sounds a lot more serious than it probably is,” said Nimmo, 24, who was sporting his usual smile as he spoke to reporters at his locker inside Busch Stadium.Hours later, Nimmo paced in the dugout as the Mets lost, 4-1, and dropped to 39-46 with their fourth loss in five games.AdvertisementMets starter Zack Wheeler got back on track after three rough outings and a short stint on the disabled list. He allowed two runs and struck out five over six innings.AdvertisementWheeler showed better command with his off-speed pitches, an area in which the Mets had wanted to see improvement after his time away with tendinitis in his right biceps.Wheeler said a small change in his delivery — not bringing his hands over his head in his windup — was the difference.“It was just a better tempo today,” Wheeler said. “I think it helped me out off-speed-wise and command-wise, too.”But solid starting pitching was not enough to topple the Cardinals.Mets outfielder Jay Bruce, who is hitting home runs at the best rate of his career, launched his 23rd of the season in the seventh inning off Cardinals starter Adam Wainwright. But it was the Mets’ only significant hit as Wainwright limited them to five over six and two-thirds innings.With the Mets trailing by a run in the seventh, reliever Fernando Salas’s rough season continued. He coughed up a run-scoring single by the Cardinals’ Stephen Piscotty and loaded the bases before Manager Terry Collins pulled him. Salas, a key contributor last fall, had his E.R.A. jump to 6.44.Get the big sports news, highlights and analysis from Times journalists, with distinctive takes on games and some behind-the-scenes surprises, delivered to your inbox every week.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.Paul DeJong, the Cardinals’ rookie shortstop, collected four hits, including a leadoff home run in the third. His third double of the game, in the eighth, added a run.“We haven’t been able to stop the bleeding,” Collins said of the Mets’ leaky bullpen.Conforto, who hopes to play in Tuesday’s All-Star Game, did not play Saturday. Nimmo could only watch.AdvertisementWhile Nimmo felt better on Saturday, his injury was serious enough to send him to a hospital on Friday.Nimmo said he felt some tightness in his back and some shortness of breath after Tuesday’s game. Nimmo, who had been filling in ably for Conforto and Curtis Granderson in center field, had gone 3 for 4 in that game.The odd feeling in his chest lasted only 20 minutes, and he chalked it up to the wear and tear of playing.When the feeling returned over the next few days, Nimmo mentioned it to the Mets’ athletic trainers before Friday’s game. The doctor at Busch Stadium examined Nimmo and sent him to a hospital for more tests.“I was honestly trying to get back to pinch-hit for whatever situation, and they said it was a collapsed lung,” Nimmo said. “I was taken aback, too.”Nimmo said he could not pinpoint a cause, and neither could the doctors. Doctors told the team that it could happen to certain athletes, Collins said.Nimmo said, “I just think it’s kind of a freak accident, and hoping that I can get back soon.”Nimmo spent Friday evening at the hospital, and he said his doctors were encouraged.“It’s obviously already healed — if not, air would still be leaking into my chest cavity,” he said.Collins said Nimmo was set to undergo follow-up tests on Sunday.Nimmo had planned to fly to Nashville with his fiancée for the All-Star break, which begins after Sunday’s game. But because he is not allowed to fly, he said, he hopes to hitch a ride instead with his teammate Steven Matz, who lives there in the off-season. The drive from St. Louis takes four and a half hours.Advertisement“If you can be thankful about this situation, I’m thankful that it’s not more severe,” Nimmo said.A version of this article appears in print on July 9, 2017, on Page SP4 of the New York edition with the headline: As Injury Carousel Spins, the Mets Keep Reeling.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.