By DAVID WALDSTEINJULY 8, 2017
WIMBLEDON, England — Sam Querrey and Jo-Wilfried Tsonga finished off a full day of work in 4 minutes 14 seconds on Saturday. That was all the time needed to decide their third-round Wimbledon match, which had been suspended after 2 hours 53 minutes the night before.When they returned on Saturday, Tsonga, seeded 12th, was serving in the 12th game of the fifth set, aiming for a 6-6 tie. But Querrey, the 24th seed, broke him for a 6-2, 3-6, 7-6 (5), 1-6, 7-5 win.“It was anticlimactic,” Querrey said, “but I will take the one game like that over anything else.”The two-day, seesaw match provided some insight into how suspensions are handled at Wimbledon.As darkness began to envelop the grounds on Friday, it grew increasingly clear — with visibility growing increasingly unclear — that the match was in danger of being interrupted. So after Querrey held his serve to take a 6-5 lead, Mark Darby, the tournament supervisor, went to the players as they sat in their chairs and told them, in a leading way, that they could decide what to do.AdvertisementThe fans booed at the sight of Darby and chanted during the courtside consultation: “Play! Play! Play!” Querrey offered to play one more game, which would have either won the match for him or allowed Tsonga the chance to leave the court on an even footing.AdvertisementDarby said, “If you both want to keep going, go for it.”When Querrey asked Tsonga what he preferred, Tsonga replied, “It’s tough.” Everyone knew that meant it was time to go home for the night.Since the players had agreed, Darby was satisfied. Had there been a disagreement, he would have made the unpopular decision for them.“The supervisor will kind of step in and actually kind of try to be the bad guy and say, ‘We’re not going to play,’” Querrey said. “I don’t think he wants to put it on one of the players, or either of the players, to make that decision.”It was not the first time this had happened to these two. Three years ago at Wimbledon — one of the few tournaments without lights — they were forced to suspend play and come back the next day for a fifth set, which Tsonga won, 14-12.On Saturday, after Tsonga hit the final ball of the match out wide, he expended some of his unused energy by whacking the ball into the stands in frustration. He was not happy with the way he had handled his four-plus minutes on court.“If I come and win my game,” he said, “we continue.”Querrey, who will play Kevin Anderson in the fourth round, said he had warmed up on a practice court for about 20 minutes and then for five more with Tsonga before the match, giving him a little less than 30 minutes of court time for the day. He said he did not need to practice again after the brief game against Tsonga.“I don’t want to go through the whole routine of starting and stopping again,” he said. “I played enough tennis.”AdvertisementAngelique Kerber spent much longer on the court Saturday. The top women’s seed, she was in dire trouble, down a set and a break to the American Shelby Rogers, who is ranked 70th in the world. But Kerber rallied to win, 4-6, 7-6 (2), 6-4.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.The match hinged on a single long rally, with Rogers serving at 4-3 and 30-30. Kerber made two impressive saves on wide balls to either side and then put away a winner at the net.She went on to break Rogers in that game and then really turned on the pressure in their tiebreaker, pounding the ball on her groundstrokes as she discovered what she described as inner determination.“It was important that I found it because without this, I don’t know if I would be in the next round right now,” Kerber said.She will face Garbiñe Muguruza, a former Wimbledon finalist and French Open champion, in the next round. Muguruza, the No. 14 seed, beat Sorana Cirstea, 6-2, 6-2, on Saturday.Ninth-seeded Agnieszka Radwanska came from behind to beat 19th-seeded Timea Bacsinszky, 3-6, 6-4, 6-1, and will face seventh-seeded Svetlana Kuznetsova in the fourth round.On the men’s side, second-seeded Novak Djokovic shrugged off an early break by Ernests Gulbis to win their third-round match, 6-4, 6-1, 7-6 (2). Djokovic has lost only 19 games this tournament, and the BBC commentator Boris Becker, Djokovic’s former coach, said on air that he had noticed a return of his former pupil’s passion.“He’s right,” Djokovic said.He added: “I’ve been feeling better on the court in the last couple of months. But especially on the grass court this season so far, every match that I’ve played, I felt very comfortable.”A three-time Wimbledon champion, Djokovic will play Adrian Mannarino, who upset 15th-seeded Gaël Monfils in a gripping, all-French third-round match, 7-6 (3), 4-6, 5-7, 6-3, 6-2.AdvertisementRoger Federer, the No. 3 seed, who is seeking a record-breaking eighth Wimbledon championship, beat Mischa Zverev, the 27th seed, by 7-6 (3), 6-4, 6-4 after a difficult opening set.Federer gained a couple of days to recover from a head cold that had been bothering him. He will play Grigor Dimitrov, the No. 13 seed, in the round of 16 on Monday.“I had more problems with my cold than my opponents,” Federer said after Saturday’s match, his third straight without dropping a set.Milos Raonic, the big-serving No. 6 seed, beat 25th-seeded Albert Ramos-Viñolas, by 7-6 (3), 6-4, 7-5 to set up an intriguing fourth-round encounter with 10th-seeded Alexander Zverev, the lanky, 20-year-old German who ousted the little-known Austrian qualifier Sebastian Ofner, 6-4, 6-4, 6-2.The Associated Press contributed to this report.A version of this article appears in print on July 9, 2017, on Page SP7 of the New York edition with the headline: Querrey Dispatches Tsonga After an Overnight Delay.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.