AdvertisementSupported byBy Ben RothenbergWIMBLEDON, England — After winning her third-round match Saturday at Wimbledon, Agnieszka Radwanska described the player she had beaten on Centre Court.“She’s a really tricky opponent; she can do everything on court,” Radwanska said of Timea Bacsinszky. “You can expect everything: playing aggressive, and then also slices, mixing it up, all the things.”It sounded as if it were a description of Radwanska herself, a player who has more options than a blender for how to slice and dice her way to victory. Radwanska, 28, is perennially in the top 10 and was the runner-up to Serena Williams at Wimbledon in a three-set final in 2012. But she has struggled to record wins this season and has an 11-10 record.For various reasons, four of the top five at the end of last season have not been able to replicate their winning ways this year, including Radwanska, who finished last season at No. 3. Angelique Kerber, who finished at No. 1, and Dominika Cibulkova, who finished at No. 5, have been struggling this year. Serena Williams, who ended last season at No. 2, stopped playing after the Australian Open because of her pregnancy.Radwanska’s struggles have been manifold this year after she made changes in the off-season. She switched her racket and tried to build muscle through strength training, but it only made her feel uncomfortable on the court.“I lost a little of my timing and my feeling,” Radwanska said. “It didn’t really work that good, and I was really feeling slow.”Other ailments have also hampered her, including a persistent injury between two toes on her right foot, and several viral illnesses. Had she not wanted to maintain her streak of 45 consecutive appearances at Grand Slam events, she might have taken time off.Radwanska, who has slipped to No. 10 in the world, entered Wimbledon, her favorite tournament, with low expectations, although she is seeded ninth. She said she was surprised to have battled through tough three-setters in her second and third rounds to improve her career record here to 42-11.“I’m surprised I’m fit enough to be able to play that second-round three-hour match, and then have the speedy recovery to play another three-setter,” she said. “That’s something I’m so happy about, and now maybe I will find my rhythm after these couple months that weren’t great. Maybe here, this is going to be the tournament that is going to change everything.”Radwanska, of Poland, will face seventh-seeded Svetlana Kuznetsova of Russia in the fourth round on Monday morning on Court No. 3.Radwanska does not follow the typical blueprint for grass-court success, which relies on powerful shots, especially the serve. With a fastest serve of 102 miles per hour, Radwanska ranks 66th among the 76 women who have played singles on a court that tracks speeds.“Of course there are so many players that are really strong — bombing it, actually, especially on the serve,” Radwanska said. “But I’m always trying to find my rhythm, and trying to get my opponents off rhythm, mixing up everything wherever I can, using my body and my timing. That’s the only thing I can do.”While a major title, elusive as yet, remains her goal, Radwanska’s set of skills makes her the tour’s undisputed champion in another category: stunning shots. Since 2014, she has won 12 of the 36 Shot of the Month contests held by the WTA. She has also swept Shot of the Year every year since 2013.“I’m so happy to see those kinds of shots and to win those kinds of things,” Radwanska said. “The other girls can do those tricky shots, too. Tennis can be so entertaining from so many different people.”Radwanska knows more of those shots may be required if she is to persevere in an era when women’s tennis is skewing younger and stronger and is also rife with opportunities for breakthroughs, like Jelena Ostapenko’s stunning French Open title last month.“Especially in women’s tennis, everything can happen and everything is so open,” Radwanska said. “We can see a lot of great young, up-and-coming players, and they behave like they have so much experience.”The drive of the younger players as they compete for titles makes it harder to remain in the top 10 all the time, Radwanska said, but every Grand Slam provides motivation “to do better and better and try your best.”She added: “I think tennis is kind of like a drug. You want to have more; you want to do more. I’m still not sick of it. If I’m not playing, I’m watching tennis, and I’m always checking the scores. It’s all my life; I just want to do it until the body says no more. And it’s not, yet.”Advertisement