By MIKE VORKUNOVJULY 8, 2017
Tim Hardaway Jr.’s second act in New York can now begin. The Atlanta Hawks chose not to match the Knicks’ offer sheet for Hardaway on Saturday, said his agent, Mark Bartelstein, allowing him to rejoin the organization that drafted him.The deal gives the Knicks a young, talented guard, although at the inflated price of $71 million over four years. The Knicks made an expensive offer to Hardaway to deter Atlanta from matching it.While the Knicks succeeded in claiming a restricted free agent, it appeared the Nets were not so fortunate. The Washington Wizards will keep small forward Otto Porter Jr. after matching the Nets’ four-year, $106 million offer ahead of their Saturday night deadline, The Washington Post reported, citing an unnamed source.This would be the third time in two years that the Nets had offered a deal to a restricted free agent only to watch his original team reclaim him. They missed on guards Allen Crabbe and Tyler Johnson last summer.Porter, 24, would be returning to a team that won 49 games last season and appeared to be emerging as a contender in the Eastern Conference — instead of joining the Nets, who had the worst record (20-62) in the N.B.A.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.The Knicks took Hardaway with the 24th overall pick in the 2013 N.B.A. draft but dealt him away after two seasons. He is returning less than two weeks after the departure of Phil Jackson, the team president who traded him away in 2015.The Knicks renounced their rights to Derrick Rose to open salary-cap room for Hardaway, bringing Hardaway full circle. They had traded him for Jerian Grant and then sent Grant to Chicago as part of the deal for Rose.Hardaway is expected to make the Knicks younger, more athletic and more fluid. The Knicks can start him next to Courtney Lee, who signed a $50 million deal last summer, with each player moving between shooting guard and small forward.The combination of Hardaway and Lee could also increase the Knicks’ determination to work out a deal that would send Carmelo Anthony elsewhere. Lee and Hardaway are strong shooters from the perimeter who could help the Knicks shift further away from Jackson’s favored triangle offense and reduce the need to rely on Anthony’s outside shooting.An article in some editions last Sunday about deals made with N.B.A. restricted free agents misspelled, in some copies, the given name of a player the Nets tried to sign last summer. He is Allen Crabbe, not Allan.A version of this article appears in print on July 9, 2017, on Page SP6 of the New York edition with the headline: It’s Official: Hardaway Returns to Knicks.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.