
Extra Bases By                     
 TYLER KEPNER
 
JULY 8, 2017
The four-day All-Star break, which begins on Monday, represents the unofficial start of the trading season. Last summer, Drew Pomeranz pitched in the All-Star Game at his home ballpark in San Diego and was dealt to Boston before his next game.Pomeranz, like so many other players, also has the Oakland Athletics on his career résumé. The low-budget A’s operate in a constant state of motion, shuffling veterans in an effort to compete with richer teams. By the nonwaiver trading deadline on July 31, they could shed a few more players, like starter Sonny Gray, reliever Ryan Madson and infielder Jed Lowrie.In a way, though, Oakland’s transition began on June 24 when three of its players — Franklin Barreto, Jaycob Brugman and Matt Olson — hit their first major league home run. The last team to have a game like that was the Kansas City Packers of the Federal League (a league that competed with the majors) in 1914.Barreto and Olson have since returned to the minors, but their promotions, like those of Brugman, catcher Bruce Maxwell, third baseman Matt Chapman and the now-injured infielder Chad Pinder, signal a new direction for Oakland, whose lineup had usually been filled by place holders.Advertisement“All these guys have played in our system, and there’s a lot of pride playing for the Oakland A’s,” Manager Bob Melvin said. “It’s a group of guys that have played together for a while and won together. We’ve seen them in spring. All of them have had success, and it’s their time right now.”AdvertisementThe A’s are enduring their third losing season in a row after reaching the playoffs from 2012 through 2014. Their slide coincided with the trade of the star third baseman Josh Donaldson to Toronto before the 2015 season, in a deal for Barreto and a fellow infielder, Brett Lawrie, and pitchers Kendall Graveman and Sean Nolin.“We knew he was a big prospect when we traded for him, but he was so young, he was still going to have his time to play in the minors,” Olson said of Barreto. “I think once everybody finally laid eyes on him playing, you were definitely wowed by what he could do.”Barreto, indeed, has turned out to be the prize of the deal. Lawrie and Nolin are gone now, and Graveman is on the disabled list with a shoulder strain.At the time of the deal, Barreto was just 18 and had played shortstop for only a few years. A scout persuaded him to switch from center field at age 15, and his defense has improved significantly since the trade, Barreto said. He made 88 errors in his first three professional seasons — two in Toronto’s system, one in Oakland’s — but just 15 at two levels last year.“I always have real confidence in my bat; I always have a good mind-set when I’m hitting,” Barreto said through an interpreter in a recent interview. “My defense was something I’ve worked hard on the last few years.”Barreto — a career .291 hitter in the minors, with an .803 on-base plus slugging percentage — said that when he was a boy in Venezuela, his favorite player was Miguel Cabrera, who made his debut with the Marlins in 2003. Barreto, who was 7 then, said Cabrera’s slugging had inspired him.“His bat, his offensive skills and his attitude, just the way he goes about his game,” Barreto said. “I’ve been close to him but never had a chance to meet him.”AdvertisementIn his early major league cameo, at least, Barreto emulated his role model. Cabrera also homered in his debut for his first major league hit — in his case, a game-ending home run in Miami. While Barreto’s first homer came on the road against the Chicago White Sox, his first at home was also a game-winner.That game, last Tuesday at the Coliseum, began with Barreto in a slump and ended in a joyous scrum with his teammates at home plate. Barreto, who started that game with two hits in his previous 25 at-bats, pulled a high fly ball that just cleared the left-field fence.Barreto lost his starting job late last week when shortstop Marcus Semien, who had a broken wrist, returned from the disabled list. But an infield spot should open up soon if the A’s trade Lowrie, a 10-year veteran who is having his best full season and could help a contender like the Milwaukee Brewers. (The Brewers need a starter and could also target Gray, who would be reunited with his pitching coach from Vanderbilt, Derek Johnson.)In any case, Barreto will most likely be with the A’s in September when they visit Detroit, where he would have the chance to meet Cabrera, the Tigers’ first baseman. He might also seek out a Tigers coach, Omar Vizquel, a fellow Venezuela native. Barreto said that as he learned to play shortstop, he studied and came to appreciate the work of Vizquel, who won 11 Gold Gloves at the position.“I always thought of myself as a center fielder,” Barreto said, “but when I moved over, looking at his defense, I’ve tried to base my play on what he did.”A difference of 1.2 seconds might not seem like much, but for Robbie Ray of the Arizona Diamondbacks, it has made a big difference. After his start at Dodger Stadium on Thursday, Ray was averaging 11.97 strikeouts per nine innings, ranking second in the National League to Washington’s Max Scherzer. Ray also ranked second last season — but everything else is different.He is an All-Star now, and his 2.97 E.R.A. is a drastic improvement over last season’s 4.90. He is using his curveball more, and he said he was working faster. Such a problem would seem easy to fix — Major League Baseball regularly implores players to quicken their pace — but Ray explained why he used to take more time.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.“The biggest thing is you think a little bit too much,” he said. “It’s just a long time to walk down the mound, get the ball from the catcher, get back on the mound, think about what you’re going to throw. And instead of doing that, I just stay up on the mound. I mean, the catcher’s got a good arm. He can throw it back to me wherever I’m at.”According to FanGraphs, Ray averaged 22.9 seconds between pitches last season, ranking him 48th among 73 qualified starters. His average this season is 21.7 seconds, a slight improvement that nonetheless vaulted him to 15th out of 74 pitchers through Thursday.AdvertisementWhen Lance McCullers Jr. of the Houston Astros was growing up in Tampa, Fla., he befriended a star pitcher from a nearby high school: Jose Fernandez, who had just defected from Cuba. They trained together every summer, and both became first-round draft picks.Fernandez died in a boating accident in September in Miami, where he had played for the Marlins, and McCullers began writing Fernandez’s No. 16 in the dirt behind the mound before every start. On Tuesday, he may get a chance to pitch in the All-Star Game from the mound where Fernandez did his best work.McCullers will be a first-time All-Star at Marlins Park, where he pitched six shutout innings this season while wearing a glove inscribed with Fernandez’s name and a special pair of cleats in his honor. McCullers had been hoping for the chance to return.“When I came into the season, I definitely did a couple of things, from the glove to the cleats to some other stuff I’m doing — and I’m going to do — to keep his memory alive throughout the season,” McCullers said. “I did really well when I started there, but it was very emotional for me. And one of my goals was to be healthy and pitch well enough to make it back down there for the All-Star Game.”Fernandez made two All-Star teams, pitching in the 2013 game at Citi Field and last year in San Diego.In some ways, John D’Acquisto was like so many current pitchers, immersed in a culture that values velocity above all else. When he joined the San Diego Padres in 1977, at age 25, he knew only one way to throw.“Randy Jones and Rollie Fingers got in my ear,” D’Acquisto said the other day, referring to star veteran teammates. “They said: ‘Johnny, quit trying to throw the ball through a carwash without getting it wet. You don’t need to throw your best — save it for the strikeout.’ And I go, ‘Oh, O.K.,’ but the only way I could throw with control was hard. If I took something off, I was all over the place because it wasn’t in my muscle memory to throw easy. I had to go all out, all the time.”D’Acquisto did change his style, just a bit, and the next season was the best of his 10 in the majors. Mainly, he is remembered for a fastball that regularly neared 100 miles an hour — rare for his era but common now, a phenomenon that has changed the game.Advertisement“For worse,” D’Acquisto said, “because a lot of guys that are great pitchers that have a 90-mile-an-hour fastball and a great curveball, slider and changeup aren’t getting looked at. And they can win games because they’re masters of what they do. The older guys that are in the game now that can throw like that, they’re really getting left behind.”Then again, D’Acquisto does not pine for the way things were. His career illustrates the danger of overusing young pitchers. In a three-season stretch from age 19 to 21, D’Acquisto threw 681 ⅔ innings; he said he once followed a 15-inning outing with one that went 14. After working 215 innings for the San Francisco Giants at age 22, he had serious elbow surgery the next year and never approached that total again.“There were no pitch counts,” said D’Acquisto, who now works for Major League Baseball as a field timing coordinator and a headset replay technician in Phoenix. “There was no throwing 100 pitches and going to sit down. I was a No. 1 draft pick. They wanted me to pitch, and they just said, ‘Let the kid pitch.’”Had he pitched today, D’Acquisto added, “I probably would have lasted a lot longer and been very successful, knowing that I only had to go six or seven innings.”“Either that, or I would have been put into the bullpen,” he continued. “Because of the fastball, they would have probably put me at the end, as a closer. That’s where I would have had my successes, and probably gotten to the Hall of Fame.”As it happens, D’Acquisto will soon visit Cooperstown, N.Y., for the first time since the 1970s. He has written a memoir — “Fastball John,” with Dave Jordan — and will speak at the museum’s Bullpen Theater on July 19 as part of the Hall of Fame’s summer author series.D’Acquisto said he hoped fans would be enlightened and entertained by his stories, including an elevator brawl with Bob Gibson and the time he reneged on a free-agent deal with the Yankees owner George Steinbrenner.“I’m a journeyman; I’m no big superstar,” D’Acquisto said. “Why did I want to tell my story? Well, my story’s pretty interesting.”A version of this article appears in print on July 9, 2017, on Page SP2 of the New York edition with the headline: An Early Start for an A’s Makeover.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.See More »