AdvertisementSupported byBy James WagnerWith spring training just over a month away, the Mets still possess a surplus of outfielders despite their efforts to trade one. Yet General Manager Sandy Alderson has not ruled out the possibility of holding on to all of them, he said on Thursday, including Jay Bruce and Curtis Granderson.Alderson’s comments, made during a lunch with reporters at Citi Field, were perhaps a bit of posturing for rival teams, considering the competitive nature of trade talks. He did admit that playing time could be an issue for all outfielders in that scenario, while also noting that the free-agent and trade markets for some players were “slow at best, and nonexistent at worst.”But Alderson said he did not see it as a problem to enter spring training with all the outfielders, including Yoenis Cespedes, Juan Lagares and Michael Conforto. During the season, however, “there will definitely be a squeeze on somebody, but that’s the decision we’ll have to make,” he added.When the Mets traded for Bruce on Aug. 1, they were in desperate need of offense, as several key players were injured. Bruce, owed $13 million in 2017, was also insurance in case Cespedes did not return to the Mets.But the Mets re-signed Cespedes to a four-year, $110 million deal in late November. To clear the outfield logjam, and perhaps to address some other needs, the Mets fielded offers, specifically for Bruce and Granderson, each of whom has one year left on his contract. But no deals have been reached.Bruce, who will turn 30 in April, struggled early with the Mets before finishing with a flourish, smashing hits over the final two weeks to help the Mets reach the National League wild-card game. Granderson, who will turn 36 in March and who is owed $15 million this season, rebounded from a rough first half and finished with 30 home runs, second on the Mets to Cespedes, and a team-high 74 walks.Granderson would probably have more to offer the Mets than Bruce would in 2017. He can fit in various places in the lineup because of his higher on-base percentage; he can play center field, which the Mets will need him to play often; and he has been a team leader for years. Bruce is more limited defensively (he is a corner outfielder) and in offensive versatility (he is a power hitter who draws few walks), and he has a partial no-trade clause that he can use to block trades to eight teams of his choice.Alderson suggested that the Mets might have an easier time trading an outfielder in spring training, when current free agents like Jose Bautista, Mark Trumbo, Michael Saunders and others will probably be off the market.“And keep in mind, we have a number of players coming off of injury,” Alderson said, “so to the extent that we carry an extra outfielder or infielder into spring training isn’t such a bad idea.”Another reason for the Mets to trade an outfielder like Bruce or Granderson would be to trim the payroll, now at an estimated $149 million, closer to the target of $135 million to $140 million. Alderson said on Thursday that the current payroll was “tolerable” and that he preferred not to include cash in a potential trade. “But what we’ve done is constantly monitored the market and had lots of conversations,” he said. “The bottom line right now is there is more supply than demand.”INSIDE PITCHIn response to recent comments by Wally Backman, the former Class AAA Las Vegas manager, to the New Jersey newspaper The Record that he was being blackballed by Sandy Alderson, Alderson said he had not done so, and he complimented Backman for his work as a longtime minor league manager for the Mets. “The fact that Wally or anybody else is not working for the New York Mets any longer is no reason to prevent Wally or anyone else from being gainfully employed elsewhere,” Alderson said. Backman, the second baseman on the Mets’ World Series-winning 1986 team, spent seven years managing Mets farm teams before being dismissed after the 2016 season. Backman will manage in Mexico this year. “I haven’t gotten a single call from a club or had a conversation with anybody external about Wally,” Alderson said, “unless there is some aura that exists.”Advertisement