AdvertisementSupported by76ers 98, Knicks 97By Mike VorkunovPHILADELPHIA — The Knicks have suffered many welts over the last few weeks, most of them self-inflicted. They have lost nine of their last 10 games. Derrick Rose, their star guard, disappeared and skipped a game, casting the organization as clown princes of the N.B.A. again. Their season, once filled with optimism and buoyed by a winning record, appears to be at a crossroads.Still, despite each slight, and indignity, and losing streak, the Knicks have been upbeat and reserved, directing most of their disgust at their shoddy defense. But Wednesday night, in a downbeat locker room, a pall clearly hung over the team.Coach Jeff Hornacek, normally able to display a smile and a sunny disposition, was glum. In a month that every pillar of the team signaled as important, the Knicks had suffered one defeat too stinging to wax away. They lost to the woebegone, process-driven Philadelphia 76ers, who in recent seasons have recently served as the laughingstocks of the league.As the final buzzer sounded, T. J. McConnell’s shot fell through the hoop, giving the Sixers a 98-97 victory. The Knicks had taken a 17-point lead in the second quarter and blown it. They had a 10-point buffer with 2 minutes 29 seconds left in the fourth, and it evaporated.Derrick Rose, in his return from a one-game departure, hit an acrobatic reverse layup with 34.5 seconds left, the last of his 25 points, to put the Knicks up by 3. But they failed to score again, with Kristaps Porzingis air-balling a wide-open 3-point attempt with six seconds left, setting up McConnell’s scrambling winner.“This is embarrassing,” Courtney Lee said. “The way we keep losing games, there’s no excuses. It’s us.”The agitation was clear in his voice. The Knicks’ season is at a breaking point. Just hours earlier, in an empty Wells Fargo Center on Wednesday morning, when the latest letdown for the Knicks was still hours away, Carmelo Anthony had assessed the problem in front of him.After two chaotic and surreal days, the Knicks had returned to what felt like normalcy. Their primary concern was once again the games, which have been a problem of a different order. It is a situation that Anthony is familiar with; he has experienced enough to recognize the warning signs of a year tipping sideways when he sees them.“I’ve seen this happen before,” he said. “I’ve seen it go down quickly. I don’t think this is the situation, but we definitely have to start playing better basketball as a whole, as a team.”If it was a plea, it went unanswered. As the arena erupted in glee in the aftermath of McConnell’s shot, the Knicks were left to ponder where their season has gone. Once they were 16-13; they now stand at 17-22. The return of Rose, back and starting after missing a game and heading to Chicago on Monday without telling the organization, did not save them. Anthony had 28 points, including 15 in the third quarter to spur a run that gave the Knicks an 11-point lead, but he did not score in the fourth.The past few dismal weeks have left the Knicks in a discordant place. They are still just three games out of a playoff spot in the middling Eastern Conference but also appear to be at risk of fracturing. Worries about Rose have dominated the headlines, but the team’s problems lie deeper than the concerns over an erratic point guard.Anthony has had his problems, too. Although he is surrounded by more talent now than he has been in recent years, he entered Wednesday night with his shooting percentage at its lowest since his rookie season. He was ejected on Monday for a third time this season — a career high — after he was irked by what he saw as noncalls on three straight possessions.Anthony vowed that he would not be thrown out of a game again this year, but he also acknowledged that nerves have been on edge for the Knicks lately.“It’s a little tense around here the past couple of days,” he said before facing the Sixers. “You can’t play basketball that way.”Rose’s return, at least, was a start toward calming the atmosphere around the Knicks. But it is the whole team that is trying to find its way after a dispiriting loss. The Knicks must deal with the fallout of a loss to another foe near the bottom of the conference. A win over the 76ers could have been a Band-Aid, but that possibility disappeared with McConnell’s shot.“This is going to be a tough month for us,” Porzingis said. “It already is tough. It’s now going to show if we can get out of this or not — if we have that type of mind-set and we all lock in.”Advertisement