

 Michael Powell
 

SPORTS OF THE TIMES
SEPT. 21, 2017
The record-setting 5,694th home run of the 2017 season soared over the right-center-field fence in Toronto earlier this week. And the talk afterward among coaches and players centered on launch angles and physics and miraculous epiphanies about the virtue of pulling the baseball.Haven’t we seen this show before?I wandered the nation writing on national politics in 1998, and each night I tuned in to watch Sammy Sosa and Mark McGwire wallop balls into the farthest reaches of St. Louis and Wrigley. Oh, baby, those balls never came down.McGwire and Sosa had big bats and biceps that would have made Popeye blush, and they obliterated the single-season home run record. Please, no questions about chemical helpers. This was physics. Greatness was happening.It was a steroidal farce.I appreciate that baseball players and officials have taken big strides to clean up doping in their sport. And I dig transcendent achievement in athletics. But my every reflex argues against too quickly taking this home run explosion at face value.AdvertisementBaseball writers whom I much respect offer learned exegeses on revolutionary batting techniques and the physics of hitting a baseball. A wonky subset has concentrated on the baseball itself, speculating that it is souped up. The theorists in this group bounce the ball, cut it open and rub their hands over the seams like members of a cargo cult.Most nod to the possibility of steroids, if only to wave it off as improbable. Testing and tough penalties, they say, argue against a revival.O.K., maybe, but not really.Such arguments require that we ignore lived memory, not to mention experience gleaned from other sports. Track, cycling, tennis, swimming, the biathlon and downhill skiing: These sports have antidoping regimens even tougher than baseball’s — a track athlete can face a four-year ban for a first offense — and have made genuine strides.Yet a determined subset of athletes in these sports get their hands on performance-enhancing drugs and evade testing regimens. Are we to believe that a major league second baseman will opt to remain a teetotaler if 10 more home runs could turn him into an $18-million-per-year star?I called an investigator with wide experience in the world of doping. “Am I being unfair to ask?’’ I began. His laughter cut me off. There are testosterone creams, he said, that disappear without a trace. There are drugs like growth factor 1 for which there are no reliable tests.AdvertisementThis is not to deny a march of reform. In the 1990s, the Lords of Baseball could not have been more complicit in the steroid era had Commissioner Bud Selig kept a bottle of Stanozolol on his desk. That changed. Baseball players and owners embraced reform. Testing procedures began and then grew tougher, and the players union eventually agreed to add blood testing, which is needed to find evidence of human growth hormone.The players and owners deserve applause.Yet let me play skunk at the garden party. Baseball catches just a handful of reprobates each year. And most are using Brezhnev-era steroids. A Mets relief pitcher, Jenrry Mejia, pulled off a bonehead trifecta last year, being nabbed for the third time in 18 months for use of a crude anabolic steroid.Baseball also catches a tiny handful of players using more sophisticated drugs, including peptides and H.G.H. The biggest haul of players nabbed for using more advanced drugs came in the Biogenesis scandal of 2013, which netted more than a dozen players, including the bionic Alex Rodriguez.For the most part, they were tripped up by paper evidence, not drug tests. Are we to assume that baseball players, faced with the possibility of absurd riches, now refuse to delve into this modern world of drugs?I’ll put no names to suspicions. Many baseball players perform clean and deserve not to get a raised eyebrow from the likes of me. Players have career years, along with chiropractors who unlock their hips. Sometimes their launch angles really are NASA-ready.But this explosion of home runs is suspicion-inducing. In ancient times, which is to say the 2014 season, 11 players hit 30 or more home runs. This season, 32 players are projected to clear the 30-home run mark. In 2014, a scrappy bunch of Kansas City Royals battled into the World Series. They had just three players who broke into double figures with home runs.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.This year, the Royals are a less formidable team, and they have four players with at least 20 home runs; the team leader has already hit 37. Eight Yankees have hit more than 10 home runs, and two have smacked more than 30. The broken-down Mets have 10 players in double figures this year.Many point to physics, as though baseball were suddenly thick with budding Albert Einsteins. Batters and coaches have discovered launch angles, which is to say the upper cut, and concentrate on pulling the ball. As if it never occurred to earlier generations of stars — Willie Mays, Henry Aaron, Ted Williams and Willie Stargell — to take an upper cut? As for pulling the ball, McCovey Cove in San Francisco is so named because Willie McCovey, that old long-ball hitter, poled home run after home run straight down the line and over right-field fences.Let me indulge my inner wonk. I took a dozen of this year’s top home run hitters and went to Fangraphs.com and checked spray charts, which show where their home runs landed. If players have begun pulling the ball relentlessly, we might expect to see a dramatic increase in home runs hit to their power side.AdvertisementYet most had hit the same percentage of home runs to different corners of stadiums as in years past. They have simply hit more of them.Some speculate that coaches and pitchers have become enraptured with the fastball and that big men now throw too many of the 98 m.p.h. variety. When batters connect, that ball travels a long way.Alas, in 2014 writers and coaches relied on this same phenomenon to help explain why batters hit so few home runs that year. Sports Illustrated headlined a 2014 story “The Case of the Disappearing Slugger.” It speculated that we would see many more hitters returning to batting styles that put an emphasis on smarts and using all fields.A year earlier Bleacher Report had argued the home run drought was proof that the door had closed on the steroid era.Arguably, baseball’s current state is consistent with doping’s history, which is to say athletes become more careful after their peers are caught.Track offers a good example. The 1980s and 1990s were the Wild West era of doping, and records fell with startling regularity. A crackdown followed, stars were caught and banned, and questionable records remained in place for years.The men’s 400-meter record held up for 16 years until it was broken last year. More startling, Marita Koch, an East German woman whose nation engaged in state-run doping, has held the women’s record in the 400-meter run since 1985.In other words, athletes who chose to dope and their handlers carefully seek out that narrow band between chemical advantage and exposure. And the results are less noticeable.AdvertisementIt is at least plausible baseball has traveled this route. The early users shot and ingested, and records fell. Then the sport’s greatest stars began to use, and like Icarus, they flew too close to the sun. Barry Bonds, who was directly linked to a doping scandal, slammed 73 home runs in 2001, breaking McGwire’s record from 1998.That ostentatious display arguably led to the exposure of the steroid era. If players are using now, they are likely to be doing so more discreetly.I confess I’m no fan of these home run effusions, whether driven by steroid or technique. It’s a dullard’s game, strikeouts, power and little else. If we’re to live in this era of massive power, however, let’s at least seek an honest reckoning.The Sports of The Times column on Friday, about the history of performance-enhancing drug use among professional baseball players, misidentified the city where a record-setting home run was hit this season. It is Toronto, not Kansas City.Follow Michael Powell on Twitter: @powellnyt.A version of this article appears in print on September 22, 2017, on Page B8 of the New York edition with the headline: The Home Run Explosion Is Not Exactly Beyond Suspicion.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.See More »