By ANDY KENTMARCH 25, 2016
Roger Federer’s comeback from knee surgery will have to wait until the Monte Carlo Masters in two weeks. Federer, the former world No. 1, withdrew Friday from the Miami Open in Key Biscayne, Fla., because of a stomach virus.Federer, who is ranked No. 3 and was seeded third, pulled out hours before he was to face the former world No. 4 Juan Martín del Potro in the second round.It was to be Federer’s first action since he lost to top-ranked Novak Djokovic in the semifinals of the Australian Open, after which he twisted his left knee and tore his meniscus at home in Switzerland. He had arthroscopic surgery the next day.“I feel bad for the tournament and the fans, as I have rarely ever had to withdraw at such short notice,” Federer said in a statement. “I have not felt great for a few days and unfortunately it got worse in the last 24 hours. I was really excited to have my comeback in Miami, but I am in no condition to play. I tried to warm up this morning, but it was clear that I could not compete.”AdvertisementMEN’S MIAMI RESULTS The five-time champion Novak Djokovic, the No. 1 seed, won his opening match by beating Kyle Edmund, 6-3, 6-3.AdvertisementThe 18-year-old American Taylor Fritz held two set points in the opening set but lost to No. 8-seeded David Ferrer, 7-6 (6), 6-1.Seventh-seeded Tomas Berdych defeated Rajeev Ram in a walkover.Tenth-seeded Richard Gasquet defeated Albert Ramos-Vinolas, 6-4, 6-4.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.Marin Cilic, the 11th seed, beat Dusan Lajovic, 6-4, 6-1. Horacio Zeballos, who replaced Roger Federer, defeated Juan Martín del Potro, 6-4, 6-4. (AP)VENUS WILLIAMS OUT EARLY In women’s play, No. 10 Venus Williams was beaten by the qualifier Elena Vesnina, 6-0, 6-7 (5), 6-2. It was the earliest exit for Williams in 17 appearances at Key Biscayne. (AP)MORE WOMEN’S RESULTS The Australian Open champion Angelique Kerber, the No. 2 seed, bounced back after two early tournament exits, winning her second-round match against Barbora Strycova, 6-1, 6-1.Fourth-seeded Garbiñe Muguruza outlasted Dominica Cibulkova, 6-7 (3), 6-3, 7-5, in a match that lasted nearly three hours.The No. 7 seed Belinda Bencic conceded defeat because of an injury. (REUTERS)A version of this article appears in print on March 26, 2016, on Page D7 of the New York edition with the headline: Federer, Citing Illness, Withdraws in Florida .  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.