By THE ASSOCIATED PRESSMARCH 25, 2016
Rory McIlroy had to go 20 holes. Jason Day played only six. Both advanced Friday to the round of 16 in the World Golf Championships match-play event in Austin, Tex.Day was all square in his match when Paul Casey withdrew because of a stomach illness that had been bothering him the last two days. Day had been likely to advance, but the short day at Austin Country Club allowed him extra rest for his back and for the weekend ahead.Day has played only 31 holes in three days.“If I can make it all the way through Sunday, that means I’m playing 72 holes on the weekend, which is a lot of golf,” Day said.Phil Mickelson also had a short day and was headed home. Patrick Reed holed out for an eagle on No. 10 to go 7 up, and Mickelson did well to get to the 14th hole before Reed closed him out, 5 and 4. Reed has not trailed in a match all week.AdvertisementMcIlroy was in one of the four winner-take-all matches between undefeated players in their groups, and it was a struggle from the start against Kevin Na. McIlroy, the defending champion, did not take the lead until the 15th hole, then gave it right back, and both golfers missed birdie putts on 18 to halve their match.AdvertisementIt ended on No. 2, the second extra hole, when Na hooked his tee shot into a hazard and McIlroy holed a 6-foot putt for the win. He has not lost in 10 straight matches, dating to his victory last year at Harding Park in San Francisco.Chris Kirk and Branden Grace had an easy time winning their matches to finish 2-1 in their group. Byeong-Hun An, who won the BMW PGA Championship at Wentworth last year, lost a chance to win his group when Rickie Fowler birdied the last hole to halve the match. That sent An into a playoff with Scott Piercy, who won the 18th hole to beat Jason Dufner. An landed his approach 4 feet from the cup on the first playoff hole to advance.Zach Johnson, who has been the most dominant player this week in Austin, finally played the last three holes — but only for practice. He had an easy time against Shane Lowry, who faced elimination regardless of the outcome, and beat him, 4 and 3.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.OTHER NEWS FROM AUSTIN Bill Haas and Adam Scott did not halve a hole after No. 7. Haas won the last two holes with birdie to advance with a 1-up victory.Brandt Snedeker rallied from an early deficit to beat Charl Schwartzel and win his group.Brooks Koepka lost his match but won his group when Billy Horschel failed to beat Jaco van Zyl.Rafa Cabrera-Bello of Spain halved his match to advance.Ryan Moore beat Lee Westwood to win his group.Daniel Berger withdrew before teeing off on his final round because of a left wrist injury suffered on the 18th hole the previous day.PUERTO RICAN LEADS AT HOME Rafael Campos held on to the lead in front of his home fans in the PGA Tour’s Puerto Rico Open in Rio Grande, shooting a one-under-par 71 in windy conditions.Campos, 27, had a nine-under 135 total at Coco Beach for a one-stroke lead. One of two players to play in all nine editions of the event, he opened with a 64 on Thursday.AdvertisementHe is the first Puerto Rican to lead a PGA Tour event since the 1979 Tallahassee Open, when Chi Chi Rodriguez won his eighth and final title.A version of this article appears in print on March 26, 2016, on Page D5 of the New York edition with the headline: McIlroy Advances With a 10th Straight Win .  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.