By BILLY WITZMARCH 25, 2016
GUATEMALA CITY —  The United States traveled here to face a fragile opponent, intent on using its two games against Guatemala in a five-day span to quickly clinch a berth in the next round of World Cup qualifying.Instead, it left with many more questions after a disjointed, disconcerting 2-0 loss to Guatemala that raised more questions about where the United States was headed under Coach Jurgen Klinsmann.Though the defeat could quickly be forgotten with a bounce-back performance against Guatemala on Tuesday in Columbus, Ohio, there were a number of disturbing signs, mainly that the United States looked just as it did last fall — unable to string passes together, lacking in ideas about how to break down the Guatemala defense and caught being inattentive on Guatemala’s two goals.In the sixth minute, Rafael Morales beat Mix Diskerud to a corner kick and nodded off Diskerud and past goalkeeper Tim Howard to put Guatemala ahead, 1-0.AdvertisementIn the 15th minute, Guatemalan goalkeeper Paulo Motta sent a low, screaming goal kick down the middle of the field. Michael Bradley pulled back from it near the center circle, then it skipped twice, splitting the center backs Omar Gonzalez and Michael Orozco and landing at the feet of the predatory forward Carlos Ruiz, who slid the ball past Howard and into the net.AdvertisementIt was the 60th career international goal for Ruiz, who will miss the return leg because of a legal matter in Guatemala that prohibits him from leaving the country.In the second half, Motta thwarted the Americans, making point-blank saves on Clint Dempsey and Alejandro Bedoya. When Dempsey was all alone near the penalty spot, he ripped a shot right at Motta, who made a save that soon had the crowd chanting Motta’s name. In the 82nd minute, Motta stonewalled a shot on a breakaway by Jozy Altidore.Emboldened in the second half, Guatemala played with a swagger it had not dared exhibit earlier, flicking deft back-heel passes to escape trouble. Marco Poppa slipped a pass between Bradley’s legs, and the crowd delighted in the nutmeg.Bradley let his frustration show, clipping Ruiz near midfield to earn a yellow card.When the final whistle blew, Guatemala had its first victory over the United States since 1988, ending a 21-game winless streak.Get the big sports news, highlights and analysis from Times journalists, with distinctive takes on games and some behind-the-scenes surprises, delivered to your inbox every week.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.U.S. TIES IN OLYMPIC QUALIFIER Luis Gil scored in the fifth minute, and the United States held on for a 1-1 tie against Colombia in Barranquilla on Friday in the opener of a two-leg playoff for the final berth in the men’s soccer tournament at the Rio Games.In a matchup of under-23 teams, Colombia had 76 percent of the possession in the first half but did not break through until Juan Quintero tied the score with a penalty kick in the 68th.The second leg of the total-goals series is Tuesday in Frisco, Tex. The United States is in danger of failing to qualify for consecutive Olympics for the first time since 1960-68. It was forced into the playoff because it lost to Honduras in October in the semifinal round of regional qualifying for North America, Central America and the Caribbean.AdvertisementOn the United States’ goal, Gil took a pass from Will Trapp and played the ball to Mario Rodriguez, who dribbled to the end line. Rodriguez muscled off Davinson Sánchez and cut the ball back to Gil, who scored with a right-footed shot from just past the penalty area. (AP)COMEBACK WIN FOR FRANCE France recovered from a Dutch rally to beat the Netherlands, 3-2, in an exhibition, showing flashes of the attacking flair that will make it a serious contender at the European Championship it hosts later this year.The Netherlands recovered from a two-goal deficit before Blaise Matuidi, the French captain, slotted in the winner in the 88th minute, two minutes after the substitute Ibrahim Afellay had tied the score.The match, an emotionally charged affair at Amsterdam Arena, was preceded by a minute’s silence for victims of the Brussels bombings. It was halted in the 14th minute to pay tribute to Johan Cruyff with a minute’s applause — a day after Cruyff, a star for Ajax, Barcelona and the Netherlands, died of cancer at age 68.The moving tribute to the Netherlands’ greatest player came just after Olivier Giroud had pounced on the ball from a corner and fired it in to put the French up by 2-0.As the players stood still and applauded, the crowd rose and clapped, with some unfurling a giant banner showing a photo of Cruyff, his arms spread wide, wearing the Netherlands’ orange shirt with No. 14 on his back.Elsewhere in an exhibition featuring two teams bound for Euro 2016, Ireland beat Switzerland, 1-0, in Dublin, while Slovakia managed only a goalless draw with visiting Latvia. (AP)A version of this article appears in print on March 26, 2016, on Page D5 of the New York edition with the headline: Guatemala Stuns the U.S. in a Qualifier.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.