By ANDREW KEHMARCH 26, 2016
LeBron James peeled his body off a courtside chair early Saturday and ambled onto the court at Madison Square Garden. The arena was quiet as the Cleveland Cavaliers began to warm up for their morning shootaround. James grabbed a ball and flung up a few midrange jump shots.“If I miss a couple jumpers early, my next 10 are going to be in that blue,” James said to his teammate Channing Frye, gesturing to the paint.Frye did not miss a beat.“If I miss a couple jumpers, I’ll be sitting on the side,” he said, and the players laughed.But James, Frye and the Cavaliers had no such problems when they encountered the Knicks that night. There was no need to resort to Plan B. They surged to a 17-point first-quarter lead and did not falter, thrashing the Knicks, 107-93, before an impassive sellout crowd.AdvertisementTwo nights after a surprising loss to the Nets, the Cavaliers (52-21) were back on track to establishing their playoff mind-set. Two nights after a surprising win over the Chicago Bulls, the Knicks (30-44) plunged back to their forlorn reality.James recorded a triple-double, producing 27 points, 11 rebounds, 10 assists, 2 blocked shots and a steal. Kevin Love contributed 28 points and 12 rebounds for the Cavaliers, who played without Kyrie Irving, who sat out to rest. Carmelo Anthony led the Knicks with 28 points — 23 in the second half — and 9 rebounds.Cleveland Coach Tyronn Lue said of James, “He is getting stronger as the season winds down, and that is a big plus for us.”It was a game James was eager to play. At the morning shootaround, he said he enjoyed being at the Garden and facing Anthony, a close friend. Their relationship had been in the spotlight since the website Bleacher Report published an article on Wednesday about the players’ ties. James was quoted as saying he would like to play on the same team as Anthony, Dwyane Wade and Chris Paul before their careers were over.On Saturday, when a reporter began to remark that he thought Anthony’s assists-per-game average could be a career high for him, James interjected with the exact number, as if to emphasize their attachment. James praised Anthony’s skills and unselfish play this season. But he declined to pass judgment on the sad state of the Knicks.Advertisement“Anytime I comment on somebody else’s situation,” James said, “it gets blown out of proportion. I just want my good friend to be healthy and to play the game he loves and be happy about playing the game he loves.”Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.James was far less cordial to Anthony and the Knicks on the court. Three minutes into Saturday’s game, James swished his first shot, a 3-pointer, from in front of the Cavaliers’ bench. Two minutes later, he stole the ball from Kristaps Porzingis and dashed the length of the court for a layup. James notched his sixth assist of the game with 1 minute 58 seconds left in the first quarter.As the final seconds ticked off the clock in the opening period, James moved to the left and drained a fallaway jumper from 20 feet. He took a seat on the bench, finally, with 8 points, 6 assists and 4 rebounds after just one quarter.The Cavaliers had a 24-point lead at halftime. The Knicks woke up during the third quarter, scoring 40 points, but their inability to defend kept the deficit at 17 heading into the final period. The Knicks showed signs of life again in the fourth, but they could not get closer than 10 points.“It’s definitely fun,” Anthony said about squaring off against James. “I wish I could have won, but it’s definitely fun.”The outcome, the one-sidedness of it, could have been expected. James and the Cavaliers had bigger goals than beating the Knicks. They are the top team in the Eastern Conference and hope to return to the N.B.A. finals.“I believe in what we have, and I know we can win a championship with the group we have, and I’m confident in my ability to lead this group,” said James, who acknowledged he was shifting his focus to the postseason. “My whole mind-set is getting these guys ready for the long run, and I think we have enough — no, I don’t think; I know we have enough. We just got to go out and do it.”James seemed ready. With seconds remaining in the third quarter, he made a lacerating left-handed drive to the basket and finished a crushing two-handed dunk over Lou Amundson. The crowd let out a unified, guttural noise. It was the loudest the building would get all night.Bopping on his toes, James turned and looked toward Amundson, who was tottering away. James stared a second too long, perhaps, as a referee issued him a technical foul.After the game, Anthony said he was happy about James’s success.A version of this article appears in print on March 27, 2016, on Page SP7 of the New York edition with the headline: Cavaliers, and Reality, Crash Down on the Knicks .  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.