By THE ASSOCIATED PRESSMARCH 25, 2016
SYRACUSE —  There were still about nine minutes left in the third period when the mob of youngsters began gathering outside the St. John’s IceCaps’ locker-room door.John Scott had just skated off after picking up a 10-minute misconduct for playing a minor role in a scuffle, and the children were tripping over themselves in hopes of catching a glimpse of the unlikeliest most valuable player in an N.H.L. All-Star Game.“I think I saw him!” someone said with a gasp, peering through the dimly lit maze of iron supports beneath the dusty stands of War Memorial Arena before a security guard shooed them away. The scene was no different the night before, when extra security guards were called in for crowd control.This is what Scott’s life has become in the aftermath of the hand-wringing over whether, as a bit-playing journeyman enforcer, he was worthy of being deemed an All-Star after being voted in by fans. A 6-foot-8 gentle giant, Scott has become an overnight sensation, earning admiration from fans and fellow players for standing his ground in the face of doubt and criticism.Advertisement“It’s almost like a movie,” Scott said, reflecting on the past two months. “Honestly, no one could ever script this would happen.”AdvertisementYet there is a movie in the works, which is also something Scott could never have envisioned.“I’m a superlucky guy with all that’s happened,” he said.If that sounds odd, it is no surprise. One moment in January, Scott was trying on his personalized pair of All-Star gloves in Arizona. The next, the Coyotes traded Scott to Montreal, and the Canadiens immediately shipped him off to the American Hockey League’s most remote outpost, St. John’s, Newfoundland and Labrador. That is 1,000 miles from Montreal and more than 3,000 from Phoenix.A few weeks later, Scott, 33, was being hoisted on his teammates’ shoulders amid fans chanting “M-V-P!” after he captained the N.H.L.’s Pacific Division team to an All-Star title in Nashville.All of this began as the most difficult time in Scott’s career, in which a low point occurred when he said an N.H.L. official questioned whether his daughters would be proud of him playing in the game. And it ended with Scott winning everyone’s hearts.“I get letters from people, and it really touches you, and sometimes it chokes me up,” Scott said. “It’s like, ‘I watched you in the All-Star Game and you were an inspiration, and I just want to thank you for turning my life around.’ ”Scott has not missed a beat in St. John’s, a small provincial capital that is as close to Ireland as it is to Minnesota, where Scott broke into the N.H.L. with the Wild in 2008-9.“As soon as I got there, everybody was super friendly,” he said of St. John’s. “I walk down the street, and it’s: ‘Hey, John. Congrats. Hey, we’ll meet you for a beer later.’ It’s so fun. I love that city.”Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.Scott also quickly adapted to his new team. He has had two goals and two assists in 21 games through last weekend and plays a regular shift, including a role on the power play. He can also double as a defenseman, as happened Sunday when Brett Lernout was ejected in the first period.Advertisement“It’s not an easy situation for him, but he’s making the most of it,” said Sylvain Lefebvre, the IceCaps coach. “He’s a big brother, as he should be in the locker room. And the guys enjoy being around him. That’s a big tribute to him.”Scott is a physical player, but he does not go out of his way to get into fights. He will not, however, hesitate to get in the middle of a scuffle if it means protecting a teammate.On Sunday, shortly before he picked up his 10-minute major, a scuffle erupted, and Scott matched up with the only Syracuse player without a partner — the 5-9 defenseman Matt Taormina.Taormina looked up and made a joke, and Scott responded by hugging him. Taormina reached up and playfully gave Scott a face wash with his glove, which prompted a smile from Scott and a cheer from the crowd.Scott has never pretended to be anything more than a role player. He has earned a professional paycheck because he has an intimidating on-ice presence. He has just five goals and 11 points to go along with 542 penalty minutes in 285 N.H.L. games.What many do not know about him is that he earned an engineering degree at Michigan Technological University, and many of his current and former teammates regard him as one of the game’s funniest characters.The St. John’s road trip through Central New York allowed Scott to reunite with his wife, Danielle, who had made the drive from Michigan with their children, including their newborn twins, Sofia and Estelle. Danielle Scott was amazed to see how fans were drawn to her husband.“We were down at breakfast, and some guy was talking to him,” she said. “I was like, ‘Was that one of your coaches?’ And he said, ‘No, it’s just everybody recognizes me wherever I go.’ ”She added: “It’s just funny. What ended up being one of our hardest moments turns into the greatest beyond what we ever could have expected.”We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.