By THE ASSOCIATED PRESSMARCH 27, 2016
RALEIGH, N.C. —  Cal Clutterbuck came up big in the clutch once again for the Islanders.After tying the game in the third period, Clutterbuck scored a deflected goal with 13.8 seconds left in overtime to lift the Islanders past the Carolina Hurricanes, 4-3, on Saturday night. In the past month, he also has two winning goals in the final 1 minute 40 seconds of regulation — the only player in the N.H.L. with more than one this season.“He’s got such a good release, and he’s got a great shot, and he can score goals if you give him some time,” his teammate Kyle Okposo said. “He’s been playing really well for us all year, scoring some big goals.”Nikolay Kulemin had a goal and an assist, and Okposo also scored for the Islanders, who have won two of three over a four-day span.Jean-Francois Berube made 33 saves for the Islanders — including two in the final minute of the third period — while Eddie Lack stopped 27 shots for Carolina in a matchup of desperate Metropolitan Division teams.AdvertisementClutterbuck took a pass from Brock Nelson and unleashed an end-over-end shot from between the circles that clipped off the chest of the rookie defenseman Jaccob Slavin and got past Lack.Advertisement“It kind of rolled, and I kind of pushed it out right,” Clutterbuck said, adding, “I was just trying to hit it and get it to the net somehow.”Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.One night after allowing a season-high seven goals in a loss at Tampa Bay, the Islanders gave up three in the second period to let a two-goal lead slip away. Victor Rask, Jeff Skinner and Jeff McClement each scored during the second-period flurry for Carolina.But with Clutterbuck’s latest late-game heroics, the Hurricanes have lost six of seven and cannot afford to give any points away in their long-shot push for a playoff spot.“We’re in games; we’re right there,” said Jordan Staal, a Hurricanes forward. “Unfortunate endings. I thought we battled pretty hard.”The victory helped the Islanders cling to the first wild-card spot in the Eastern Conference. They are 3-5-2 since their win at Pittsburgh on March 8, when goalie Jaroslav Halak sustained a lower-body injury that will keep him out for at least three more weeks.“We’ve just got to keep winning games,” Okposo said. “We’re looking at this as a mini-playoff series.”We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.