AdvertisementSupported byOklahoma 80, Oregon 68 | West RegionalBy Karen CrouseANAHEIM, Calif. — With five seconds left in the first half of the West Regional final, the Oklahoma senior guard Buddy Hield put up a shot from a spot midway between the halfcourt line and the 3-point arc. The ball slipped through the net to give the Sooners an 18-point halftime lead.As the Oklahoma fans in the Honda Center crowd erupted in cheers, Hield locked eyes with a Duke fan seated in the second row behind the Sooners’ bench. That fan, the Lakers star Kobe Bryant, nodded his approval and offered a salute, which Hield would later describe as one of the coolest moments in an afternoon with enough highlights to overload his memory bank.Playing in front of his childhood idol, Bryant, and for Oklahoma’s first berth in the N.C.A.A. tournament semifinals since 2002, Hield finished with a game-high 37 points on 13-of-20 shooting to lead the second-seeded Sooners to an 80-68 victory over the top-seeded Oregon Ducks.Three of Hield’s first four baskets were 3-pointers, setting the tone for the game. Behind Hield’s 8-for-13 showing, the Sooners made 50 percent of their 24 3-point attempts. The cumulative effect of Hield’s long-range target practice on the Ducks was devastating.“Tried our best to corral him and keep him out of open areas, but he made a lot of tough shots,” said the senior forward Elgin Cook, who led the Ducks with 24 points but could think only of all the shots Hield had made with Cook in his face.The Ducks, who finished with a program-record 31 victories against 8 losses, had more turnovers (12) than assists (10) and shot 37.9 percent from the field. In the first 20 minutes, the Sooners scored 12 points off turnovers and had 15 second-chance points while outrebounding the Ducks by 23-10.“Just a very disappointing first half,” Oregon Coach Dana Altman said. “I’m not sure if it was just the energy that was produced by them hitting 3s, but they just did a tremendous job on the boards.”Hield, a player-of-the-year contender, had three offensive rebounds in the first half. His teammate Isaiah Cousins had all five of his defensive rebounds before the break. Hield, Cousins, Jordan Woodard and Ryan Spangler were making their 104th consecutive start, and their familiarity bred a cohesion that the Ducks could not steal or block. In the fourth minute, Spangler missed a hook, and before he could grab the rebound, Hield swooped in for the put-back dunk.Hield’s night could have been better. He requested the box score after the postgame news conference, looked at it and frowned. “I got six turnovers,” he said.Hield’s long-range accuracy and joyful mien have invited comparisons to the Golden State Warriors’ Stephen Curry, but his childhood model was Bryant, whose career is winding down as Hield’s stock in June’s N.B.A. draft steadily rises. It is not by chance that Hield shares a jersey number (24) with Bryant, who will retire at the end of this season. “He’s one of the reasons,” said Hield, who added that he also wanted to refer to the 242 area code of his native Bahamas.Hield, 22, said that growing up in Freeport, he had studied Bryant’s crossover moves, his fallaway jumper and the myriad other ways he created space to score. In the Oregon locker room afterward, the Ducks compared Hield to Bryant, which mortified Hield. “I’m far away from him,” he said. “I just make shots.”But this much is true: If not for Bryant, there might not be a Buddy Buckets, one of the nicknames Hield has acquired during his four years at Oklahoma (Buddy Love and his favorite, Buddy Fresh, are others).“Just watching him made me believe and helped to motivate me,” Hield said of Bryant. “If it wasn’t for him, I probably wouldn’t be playing basketball at the competitive level.”Hield had met Bryant at a basketball camp but said he was reluctant to renew their acquaintance when he spotted him at Honda Center on Thursday night after the Sooners’ round-of-16 victory against Texas A&M. He described himself as “anxious” and said: “My heart was pounding. I was like, What if he doesn’t remember me?”Hield need not have worried. Bryant, 37, who bypassed college for the N.B.A., called Hield over, and they exchanged pleasantries before Bryant returned to his seat to watch the second half of Duke’s loss to Oregon. Bryant mentioned to Hield that he lived near the arena and would try to attend Saturday’s game. Hield said he became aware that Bryant was in the building when he saw a horde of people hold up their camera phones and start taking pictures.“You don’t get that every day, having Kobe Bryant watch you,” Hield said, adding, “Anybody who knows me, they know I’m a Kobe Bryant fanatic.” From his spot in front of the Oregon bench, Altman had one of the worst vantage points in the arena to behold Hield’s brilliance. “The guy gets 37 on you, that’s something,” he said, adding, “Every time I felt like we were getting ready to do something, he would jump up and make a shot.”Advertisement