AdvertisementSupported byNorth Carolina 101, Indiana 86 | East RegionalBy Zach SchonbrunPHILADELPHIA — It might well be the most fearsome college basketball team in the country, but in the vulnerable moments before tipoff, North Carolina relies on a routine of flying elbows and gyroscopic hips.The Tar Heels like to dance. In the tunnel, they form their huddle and turn it into an impromptu dance-off, with two players twirling in the center and the rest clapping and laughing.“We try to stay loose,” the sophomore forward Justin Jackson said.They were loose on Friday night, hailing points against fifth-seeded Indiana at Wells Fargo Center in a statement game. The first half approached flawlessness. The second left no doubt, ending with a 101-86 win.North Carolina, the top seed in the N.C.A.A. tournament’s East Regional, will face Notre Dame on Sunday in the Tar Heels’ first regional final appearance since 2012. Marcus Paige led the Tar Heels with 21 points, while Brice Johnson added 20 and Kennedy Meeks had 15.Paige’s six 3-pointers tied North Carolina’s team record for the most in an N.C.A.A. tournament game.“When we knock down shots, we’re tough,” he said.Indiana Coach Tom Crean agreed.“If they play like that, even remotely close to that, then they’re going to be very, very hard to beat,” he said.The pregame talk was heavy on history because these two programs had made a lot of it. Indiana and North Carolina are among the sport’s titans.Each owns five national titles, and they have 26 Final Four appearances between them, so it seemed a bit strange that such iconic programs had met only 13 times before. Their last meeting was in another N.C.A.A. tournament regional semifinal, in 1984, the last collegiate game for Michael Jordan. The Hoosiers won, just as they had done three years earlier, in a national title game played in Philadelphia.Still, much of the history was lost on the millennials who were playing Friday night.“Ten years ago my guys thought Michael Jordan invented the game,” North Carolina’s coach, Roy Williams, joked on Thursday. “Now they don’t even know who Michael Jordan is, if it weren’t for the Hanes commercials.”North Carolina attacked the paint on almost every possession, putting the ball in the wide hands of Meeks, Johnson and Isaiah Hicks. In the second half, the Tar Heels quickly put Indiana in foul trouble. The Hoosiers picked up eight fouls in the first five minutes.Success for Indiana is all relative, but the Hoosier faithful was undoubtedly antsy this past fall for more N.C.A.A. tournament success, given that the team had tumbled out of the tournament in the first round last season after missing it altogether in 2014. There was pressure on Crean to redirect a program that had dealt with several disconcerting off-court problems. And when the team lost by 20 at Duke on Dec. 2, its third loss in five games, the chorus of critics grew louder still.Looking back, Crean considered the Duke game a watershed moment for the team. The Hoosiers won the next 12 in a row en route to claiming a 13th Big Ten title.“What we learned from that game was we need to be more aggressive,” Crean said Thursday.On Friday, Indiana played without Robert Johnson, the team’s fifth-leading scorer, who has an ankle injury. But it is hard to know how Johnson could have helped against North Carolina’s shooters, who came out blazing from far away. The team that likes to play in the paint drained its first seven 3-point attempts.No one was hotter than Paige, who scored 12 of North Carolina’s first 14 points in the opening minutes by going 4 for 4 from 3-point range. With Paige’s torrid start, the Tar Heels shot 62.1 percent from the field in the first half, taking a 52-41 lead into the break.“When you’ve got guys like that with a team like North Carolina, it’s a tough train to stop,” Indiana’s Max Bielfeldt said.Indiana, trying to reach its first regional final since 2002, struggled to contend with North Carolina’s size and athleticism. Indiana is an excellent 3-point shooting team, but the Hoosiers opened just 4 of 12 from deep. Meanwhile, North Carolina’s many weapons wore down Indiana’s defense.Five players scored in double figures, and the Tar Heels finished with 11 3-pointers and never ceded the lead.As a result, they have a chance to write more history.Advertisement