AdvertisementSupported byWarriors 108, Cavaliers 97 | Golden State leads series, 3-1By Scott CacciolaCLEVELAND — The questions buzzed around Stephen Curry and Klay Thompson like tiny insects. Where was their familiar form? Why were they missing so many shots? Curry and Thompson, the star backcourt of the Golden State Warriors, did what they could to evade all the noise in the hours before Game 4 of the N.B.A. finals on Friday night.But deep down, they knew that they would need to perform.Both players delivered as the Warriors defeated the Cleveland Cavaliers, 108-97, at Quicken Loans Arena to put themselves on the cusp of another championship. Golden State seized a three-games-to-one lead in the series and can claim its second straight title — a fitting final act in a history-making season — when it hosts Game 5 on Monday night.Curry finished with 38 points while shooting 7 of 13 from 3-point range. Thompson added 25 points, and the Warriors sank 17 3-pointers over all.“I think we just got back to enjoying the process and the challenge of winning playoff games,” Curry said.Kyrie Irving had 34 points for the Cavaliers, and LeBron James finished an assist shy of a triple-double with 25 points, 13 rebounds and 9 assists.“I’ve already told our guys that Game 5 will be the hardest game of the series,” Warriors Coach Steve Kerr said. “We have to understand that this series is not over.”Behind Irving and James, the Cavaliers took an 8-point lead early in the third quarter. But the Warriors responded. Andre Iguodala moonlighted from his assignment as James’s primary defender to hit a 3-pointer that tied the score, and Curry then gave the Warriors the lead with another. Golden State went to the fourth quarter up by 2.With painstaking precision, the Warriors built on their lead, possession by possession. Shaun Livingston, the team’s backup point guard, sank a runner. Curry slithered free for a layup. When Harrison Barnes buried a 3-pointer, the lead was 9. The crowd fell silent. The Cavaliers’ offense had imploded like a rusty muffler.“We had our chances,” James said.As the final minutes ticked away, the setting felt tense. Curry and James even started barking at each other.“That’s just normal basketball talk,” Curry said. “I wanted a foul, and he didn’t think he fouled. There’s nothing to that.”Through the first three games of the series, Curry averaged 16 points — 14.1 points below his season average — while shooting 43.6 percent from the field and 40 percent from 3-point range. His struggles invited a host of concerns about his health (he sprained his right knee in the first round of the playoffs) and his play (which had suffered). The spotlight was bright. Draymond Green went so far as to say that Curry had been the victim of “slander” in recent days.“He’s in a situation few go through,” Iguodala said.On Friday, Curry worked for space against waves of defenders, finding slivers of daylight where none had seemed to exist. With 54.4 seconds left and Cleveland still somehow threatening, Curry hopscotched past a double-team for a give-and-go layup that pushed the lead back to 9.Cavaliers Coach Tyronn Lue expects his team to play with resolve in Game 5.“If you don’t think you can win,” he said, “don’t get on the plane.”It was the first tightly contested game in a series full of blowouts. After the Warriors won Games 1 and 2 by a combined 48 points, the Cavaliers returned home to win Game 3 by 30 — a result unforeseen by pretty much everyone, including at least half of the participants.“We came in here and, for whatever reason, we thought, O.K., we’ve got this,” Kerr said. “And they kicked us in the teeth, obviously. For whatever reason, our team’s personality — and it’s been this way for two years — is that we can’t stand prosperity. We start winning, and then we let our guard down. I thought we did that the other night.”Lue made a bold move before Game 4, opting to start Richard Jefferson instead of Kevin Love, who was activated after missing Game 3 with a concussion. It was most likely a dilemma for Lue, who had unearthed a winning formula in Game 3 — without Love — by going small.About an hour before Game 4, the Cavaliers announced that Love would be “active and available.” It was later revealed that he would come off the bench for the first time since April 2010, at the end of his second season with the Minnesota Timberwolves. Love was productive in a limited role, finishing with 11 points in 25 minutes.The arena pulsed with energy from the very start. With fireworks popping and flames shooting from various parts of the monstrous scoreboard at Quicken Loans Arena, James cut through the pregame din to deliver a message to Irving as they embraced minutes before the tip.“Be special,” James said.Bodies toppled over one another. Limbs went flying. Legs got entangled. And that was just the first couple of minutes. Curry got lost on defense, and Irving made a 3-pointer.For the Warriors, it was an eclectic combination of foul trouble, odd lineups and loud noises, the combination of which was jarring — even for a team that had been so dominant this season.Kerr sought solutions, or at least sparks. James Michael McAdoo, a second-year forward, came off the bench for his first action since Game 3 of the Western Conference semifinals. Against the Cavaliers, he twisted past a defender for a dunk, helping the Warriors to a 29-28 lead at the end of the first quarter.Curry continued to search for some semblance of his rhythm. Early in the second quarter, a loose ball popped out to him in the left corner. Curry turned and fired in a nanosecond: swish. But then, a few minutes later, Curry drove for a layup but found resistance at the rim in the form of Irving, who leapt and batted the ball away.“I thought Steph was in a little bit of a hurry,” Kerr said. “He wanted so badly to break out that I thought he took some tough ones.”The Cavaliers leaned on their balance to take a 55-50 lead into the locker room. Before the Warriors cleared the floor, though, Luke Walton, one of Kerr’s assistants, was assessed a technical foul for arguing with the officials.It was shaping up as that kind of night for both teams: nothing easy and nothing for certain, not until the bitter end.Advertisement