By PAT BORZIJUNE 10, 2016
MILWAUKEE — Curtis Granderson leads off for the Mets despite a poor on-base percentage because Manager Terry Collins feels he has no better option. Granderson’s .094 average with runners in scoring position entering Thursday night makes dropping him lower in the order problematic as well.But Granderson does provide power at the top of the lineup, and he delivered again Thursday at Miller Park. He cracked his fifth leadoff homer of the season, then doubled and scored in the third, accounting for the first two Mets runs in a 5-2 victory over the Milwaukee Brewers.Bartolo Colon (5-3) allowed one run on eight hits over seven innings for his first victory since May 23.Granderson arrived here batting .203, with a .300 on-base percentage. He has 25 walks in 57 games, well behind last year’s pace, when he drew a career-high 91. But as Collins looked around the Mets’ clubhouse, no acceptable substitute jumped out.Advertisement“When he’s in the right state, he gets on base,” Collins said of Granderson. “You look at what he did last year, getting on base, he was incredible for us. Yeah, he got off to a slow start. There are a few of us that are off to a slow start. I just think he’s the guy. I think he’s going to come on.”AdvertisementOn Thursday Granderson homered on Jimmy Nelson’s fifth pitch for his 16th career leadoff homer as a Met, tying Jose Reyes’s club record.“I was looking for something hopefully around the middle of the plate to drive,” Granderson said. “I’m not exactly sure where the pitch was, but I know it was a strike.”In the third Granderson doubled and scored on a single by Yoenis Cespedes, who followed up his three-hit night in Pittsburgh on Wednesday with singles in his first two at-bats.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.Nelson drilled Granderson in the right knee with two on in the fourth, but the Mets could not score, with Michael Conforto popping up to short to leave the bases loaded.Colon took a shutout to the seventh, when Milwaukee’s Ramon Flores singled in a run with two out. The Mets loaded the bases again in the eighth. With Milwaukee playing the infield halfway, Kevin Plawecki grounded a two-run single through the hole into left.Jeurys Familia picked up his 20th save in 20 chances without any of his recent drama, retiring the side in the ninth and getting two strikeouts, both called.“The best sinker I’ve seen him have all year,” Collins said. “From the side, it looked like it was sinking 10 or 12 inches, easy. That’s the guy we know.”The Mets already have enough injuries, and Neil Walker feared he joined the list in the seventh when he took a one-hop smash from Hernan Perez off his chest. The impact left Walker doubled over and struggling for breath. He left in the ninth for a pinch-hitter. Walker said a doctor examined him, but did not recommend X-rays.“I feel O.K. now, but I was a little lightheaded and didn’t feel quite right for a few minutes,” Walker said.AdvertisementINSIDE PITCHJUAN LAGARES (partially torn left thumb ligament) took early batting practice and pronounced himself ready to play. “I can do everything,” he said. But first, TERRY COLLINS said he needed to see if Lagares could close his glove on a fly ball. Lagares came on in the eighth as a defensive replacement, and doubled and scored in the ninth. … The newly acquired KELLY JOHNSON was expected to arrive Thursday night, and Collins said there was a good chance he would start Friday.A version of this article appears in print on June 10, 2016, on Page B11 of the New York edition with the headline: Baseball; Leadoff Homer by Granderson Sparks a Mets’ Victory.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.