By DAVE ANDERSONJUNE 10, 2016
This article originally appeared in The New York Times on Nov. 17, 2002.DEER LAKE, Pa. — Turn off Highway 61 and drive up a winding two-lane road through woods with yellow and red leaves.“It’s on both sides of the road halfway up the hill,” a neighbor had said. “You can’t miss it.”And here it is: Muhammad Ali’s training camp during the last decade of his boxing career. If dozens of Revolutionary War inns brag that “George Washington slept here,” this 80-bed compound of 18 buildings, most of them log cabins, is surely a historic American landmark because Muhammad Ali not only slept here, he also lived here and trained here in the Blue Mountains a few miles west of Allentown.“He’d spar right over there,” George Dillman was saying Thursday in the gym cabin as he pulled down a small white screen. “Then he’d sit here and watch fight films of Jack Johnson while he ate a half-gallon of vanilla ice cream.”AdvertisementDillman, an internationally famous black-belt karate instructor in nearby Reading, befriended Ali in 1972 when Ali bought the land from a local mink-farm proprietor and began building his training camp, cabin by cabin.AdvertisementDillman purchased the five-acre camp from Ali in 1997. He said he paid $114,000 and invested another $400,000 in remodeling the cabins. Ali’s white mosque and three cabins are now the Butterfly and Bee Bed and Breakfast.“You know, like Bundini used to shout, ‘Float like a butterfly, sting like a bee!’ ” Dillman said, referring to Drew Brown, Ali’s assistant trainer. “Ali prayed in that mosque three times a day. We’ve had martial-arts camps here. We’ve even had two weddings, people who wanted to be married where Ali trained.”Dillman now has the camp for sale. Guernsey’s auction house in New York is the real-estate agent. The initial asking price is $5 million.“Somebody asked me, ‘What makes it worth $5 million?’ ” Dillman said, “and I said: ‘What made Mark McGwire’s 70th home run ball worth $3 million? What made Ali’s robe that he wore once into the ring worth $135,000?’ This was Muhammad Ali’s training camp. This was where he trained. Imagine a kid being able to sleep in Ali’s bed.”Ali slept in his personal cabin, not far from the outdoor fireplace where his entourage would build a fire and rouse him from his nap with an “Ali! Ali!” chant.“Bundini,” Dillman said, “would be out here shouting, ‘George Chuvalo is going to whup you!’ or ‘Floyd Patterson is going to whup you!’ and eventually Ali would come out and yell: ‘No, he ain’t! No, he ain’t!’ ”Ali and the others ate in the big cabin with a long table and a kitchen where his mother and his Aunt Coretta cooked for everybody.“Aunt Coretta put up a sign: ‘Don’t ask what’s in the food. Eat it or leave,’ ” Dillman said. “She made great stews, but she got tired of the hangers-on peering into the pot and saying, ‘I don’t eat carrots’ or ‘I don’t eat onions.’ After a while, they learned not to say anything. You’d see them pushing aside the carrots or the onions on their plates, but they didn’t dare say anything to Aunt Coretta.”AdvertisementAli built a firebell that he would ring in the morning to wake everybody up for his roadwork.“But it wasn’t all laughs,” Dillman said. “His first few years here, I often ran with him in the morning. After his roadwork one day, he was depressed. He was standing on what was just a dirt road then, talking to me about how he was going to pull out of the second Joe Frazier fight in 1974 — here’s a photo my wife, Kimberly, happened to take that day.”In the small snapshot, now under the glass top on Dillman’s desk, Ali appears discouraged.“Ali was saying: ‘You see any people around here? People don’t hang out with losers,’ ” Dillman said. “He had lost to Ken Norton, got his jaw broken, and even though he decisioned Norton in a rematch, nobody was coming here to see him. I told him: ‘Get your attitude up. After you beat Frazier, the people will be back.’ ”Ali decisioned Frazier, then knocked out George Foreman in Zaire to regain the heavyweight title. And the people were back.All around the camp, names painted on boulders honor Ali’s trainer, Angelo Dundee, and champions like Frazier, Foreman, Sugar Ray Robinson, Joe Louis, Jack Dempsey, Jack Johnson, Rocky Marciano, Larry Holmes, Gene Tunney, Jersey Joe Walcott, Floyd Patterson, Jerry Quarry, Archie Moore, Willie Pep, Rocky Graziano, Kid Gavilan.“Ali’s father painted all those names on the boulders,” Dillman said. “His father and mother came here often. Elvis Presley came here too. Arrived here at 4 in the morning. Frank Sinatra was here. So were Sammy Davis Jr., Andy Warhol, Sylvester Stallone. They just wanted to see Muhammad Ali. Everybody came here to see him.”Elvis hasn’t been seen here since, but Bundini’s ghost has.“Up in that cabin,” Dillman said, pointing across the road, “that’s where Bundini slept. Ever since he died several years ago, you hear stories. Some people say they’ve seen Bundini’s ghost around the cabin up there. Others say it seems like somebody else is in that cabin.”And if Bundini’s ghost is around here, maybe someday Muhammad Ali’s ghost will be here too. Just the possibility is worth $5 million.A version of this article appears in print on June 11, 2016, on Page F10 of the New York edition with the headline: A Champion’s Retreat.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.