AdvertisementSupported byBy Dave AndersonThis article originally appeared in The New York Times on Oct. 2, 1975.MANILA — In the most brutal confrontation of their five-year rivalry, Muhammad Ali retained the world heavyweight boxing championship today when Joe Frazier’s manager, Eddie Futch, surrendered from the corner moments before the bell was to ring for the 15th round.Frazier, dominating the middle rounds with the fury of his youth, had been battered by the champion throughout the three rounds prior to Futch’s merciful decision.“I stopped it,” Futch explained, “because Joe was starting to get hit with too many clean shots. He couldn’t see out of his right eye. He couldn’t see the left hands coming.”Ali was far ahead on the scoreboards of the three officials. Using the 5-point must scoring system, referee Carlos Padilla Jr. had the champion ahead, 66-60. Judge Alfredo Quiazon had it 67-62 and Judge Larry Nadayag had it 66-62. On a rounds basis, Quiazon had Ali ahead 8-3, with three even. The others each had it 8-4-2.Ali’s victory was recorded as a knockout in the 14th round since the bell had not rung for the final round.“My guy sucked it up,” said Ali’s trainer, Angelo Dundee. “When he looked completely out of gas, he put on another gas tank. I thought we were in front. My guy was hitting him better shots.”Futch believed that Frazier was ahead, which only added to the humanity of his decision to surrender.“Joe had two bad rounds in a row,” Futch said, “Even with three minutes to go, he was going downhill. And that opened up the possibility in that situation that he could’ve been seriously hurt.”Wearing dark glasses to hide his puffed eyes, especially his right eye, Frazier agreed with Futch.“I didn’t want to be stopped, I wanted to go on,” Frazier said, “but I’d never go against Eddie.”Frazier dismissed questions about retirement, saying, “I’m not thinking that way now.” But the weary champion indicated that the “Thrilla in Manila” might have been his last fight.“You may have seen the last of Ali,” the champion said. “I want to get out of it. I’m tired and on top. What you saw tonight was next to death. He’s the toughest man in the world.”Ali attempted to register the early knockout he had predicted while dominating the early rounds. But then Frazier, in his relentless attack, smashed and slowed the 33-year-old champion. They resembled two old bull moose who had to stand and slam each other because they couldn’t get away from each other.Through the middle rounds, Frazier took command. On the two scorecards of The New York Times, the 31-year-old challenger won eight of the first 11 rounds. But then Ali searched for the knockout punch that would assure the retention of the title.Moving on weary legs, Ali began to measure Frazier in the 12th with a flurry of punches to Frazier’s face, which resembled a squashed chocolate marshmallow. In the 13th, the champion quickly knocked out Frazier’s mouthpiece with a long left hook, then landed a left-right combination.Frazier was shaken now, wobbling on his stumpy legs, but his heart kept him going. But then Ali’s straight right hand sent Frazier stumbling backward to the center of the ring, but somehow the former champion kept his feet. His mouthpiece gone, Frazier kept spitting blood as he resumed his assault moments before the bell.In the 14th round Frazier hopped out quickly but Ali shook him with a hard right, then jolted him with several left-right combinations before the bell and Frazier stumbled to his corner.Moments later, Futch waved his surrender to the referee. On the stool in his corner, Frazier appeared exhausted. He didn’t protest.Unlike their first two fights, Ali-Frazier III maintained a level of boxing violence seldom seen. During their 1971 classic, Frazier earned a 15-round unanimous decision and undisputed possession of the title with a relentless assault as Ali often clowned. In their 12-round nontitle bout early last year, Ali’s holding tactics detracted from his unanimous decision.But from the opening bell in the Philippine Coliseum, the estimated crowd of 25,000, including President Ferdinand Marcos and his wife, realized that Ali had not come to dance.At the bell, Ali came out, hands high in a semipeekaboo. He stood flat-footed rather than dancing, as if looking for the early knockout he had predicted. Frazier, in contrast, moved in aggressively, trying to unload his left hook, but the champion tied him up effectively in two clinches.Ali landed a left-right combination, then jarred Frazier with a left hook that sent him against the ropes. Ali also landed a hard right hand before the bell.In the second round, Ali remained flat-footed, using his pawing jab to keep Frazier at bay. When he cupped his left glove around Frazier’s head, the referee warned the champion. Ali then landed a hard right to the head that shook Frazier, then landed two more as Frazier kept coming in.Ali covered up against the ropes, then easily pushed Frazier away, displaying complete control of the tempo. But suddenly, Frazier landed a hard left hook to Ali’s jaw before the bell.Before the third round, Ali bowed and blew kisses to President Marcos and his wife. Ali then taunted Frazier with his pawing jab, using his six-inch advantage in reach to keep Frazier away. Ali landed a series of hard punches to the head, but Frazier burrowed through them to land a left.Ali covered up against the ropes, and when Frazier stepped back, Ali waved his right glove at Frazier, as if inviting him to return. Ali was talking to Frazier now, then burst out of his cocoon with a flurry of lefts and rights in a toe-to-toe exchange that had the spectators in a frenzy.But in the fourth round Ali’s tempo slowed as Frazier’s increased. By the fifth round, a chant of “Frazier, Frazier” filled the round arena. As the struggle continued, the crowd sounded as if it favored Frazier, one of the few times that Ali hasn’t converted the live audience into cheering for him.Ali, at 224 ½ pounds at last Saturday’s weigh-in, had been the 9-to-5 betting favorite in the United States, but he was a 6-to-5 choice here. Frazier had weighed 214 ½ at the ceremonial weigh-in.Ali’s won-lost record is 49-2 with 34 knockouts. He has lost only to Frazier in 1971 and to Ken Norton, who broke Ali’s jaw in winning a 12-round decision that Ali later reversed. Frazier’s record is now 32-3, losing to Ali twice and being dethroned as champion by George Foreman in 1973.In the decades to come, Ali and Frazier will be remembered as two of boxing’s classic rivals through 42 rounds. As memorable as their first two fights were in Madison Square Garden, their masterpiece developed halfway around the world from where their rivalry began.slide showAdvertisement