AdvertisementSupported byBy Robert LipsyteThis article originally appeared in The New York Times on Feb. 26, 1964.MIAMI BEACH — Incredibly, the loudmouthed, bragging, insulting youngster had been telling the truth all along. Cassius Clay won the world heavyweight title tonight when a bleeding Sonny Liston, his left shoulder injured, was unable to answer the bell for the seventh round.Immediately after he had been announced as the new heavyweight champion of the world, Clay yelled to the newsmen covering the fight: “Eat your words.” Only three of 46 sportswriters covering the fight had picked him to win.A crowd of 8,297, on its feet through the early rounds at Convention Hall, sat stunned during the one-minute rest period between the sixth and seventh rounds. Only Clay seemed to know what had happened; he threw up his hands and danced a little jig in the center of the ring.The victory was scored as a technical knockout in the seventh round, one round less than Clay had predicted. Liston seemingly had injured the shoulder in the first round while swinging and missing with jabs and hooks at the elusive 22-year-old. The fight was Clay’s from the start. The tall, swift youngster, his hands carelessly low, backed away from Liston’s jabs, circled around Liston’s dangerous left hook and opened a nasty gash under Liston’s left eye.He never let Liston tie him up for short, brutal body punches, and although he faltered several times, he refused to allow himself to be cornered. His long left jab kept bouncing off Liston’s face. From the beginning, it was hard to believe.The men had moved briskly into combat, Liston stalking, moving flat-footedly forward. He fell short with two jabs, brushed Clay back with a grazing right to the stomach and landed a solid right to the stomach. The crowd leaned forward for the imminent destruction of the young poet.But he hadn’t lied. All those interminable refrains of “float like a butterfly, sting like a bee” had been more than foolish songs. The kid was floating. He leaned back from Liston’s jabs and hooks, backed into the ropes, then spun out and away. He moved clockwise around Liston, taunting that terrible left hook, his hands still low.Then he stung late in the first round, sticking his left in Liston’s face and following with a quick barrage to Liston’s head. They continued for long seconds after the bell, unable to hear the inadequate ring above the roar of the crowd. It must have been somewhere in that round that Liston’s shoulder was hurt.[Jack Nilan, Liston’s manager, said at the hospital that the former champion had hurt the shoulder during training, The Associated Press reported. He said Liston did not spar Feb. 3, 4, 5 and 14 because of the injury. Asked why he hadn’t postponed the fight, Nilan said, “We thought we could get away with it.”]Liston strained forward with overeager hooks that struck only air. For a moment, in the second round, Liston pummeled Clay against the ropes, but again, Cassius spun out and away.Then the young man began to rumble as he had promised. His quick left jabs penetrated Liston’s defenses, and he followed with right hands. He leaned forward as he fired rights and lefts at Liston’s expressionless face. Liston began to bleed from a crescent-shaped cut high on the left cheekbone.Like a bull hurt and maddened by the picadors’ lances, Liston charged forward. The heavy muscles worked under his smooth, broad back as he virtually hurled his 218 pounds at the dodging, bobbing, dancing Clay.His heavy arms swiped forward and he threw illegal backhand punches in his bearlike lunges. Once, Clay leaned the wrong way and Liston tagged him with a long left. Cassius was staggered, but Liston was hurt and tired. He could not move in to press his advantage.And now, a strange murmur began to ripple through the half-empty arena and people on blue metal chairs began to look at one another. Something like human electricity danced and flowed as the spectators suddenly realized that even if Cassius lost, he was no fraud. His style was unorthodox, but …There was little action in the fourth, as Cassius continued to circle. Once, he opened his eyes wide as a Liston jab fell short, and it seemed as if he were mocking the heavy-footed hunter. As it turned out, Cassius could barely see.He began complaining to Angelo Dundee, his trainer, at the end of the round. Something had gotten into his eyes, from Liston’s glove, from the sponge, somewhere. But he went out for the fifth anyway, and all Dundee could do was shout, “Stay away from him, stay away.”Clay tried to stay away. Sensing something, Liston bulled forward, slamming Cassius with a left hook in the nose and lefts and rights to the body. Blinking furiously, Clay kept circling away. He never hit back.Both fighters were sluggish in the fifth round, breathing heavily. Liston’s face was still impassive, but the grooves along his forehead seemed deeper, and the snorting breaths through his nose harsher.He seemed even more tired in the sixth as Clay’s eyes cleared and the younger man bore in, then leapt away, jabbing and hooking and landing a solid right to Liston’s jaw. Clay’s jabs were slipping through at will now, bouncing off that rocklike face, opening the cut under the left eye.Liston walked heavily back to his corner at the end of the sixth. He did not sit down immediately. Then as Liston did sit down, Clay came dancing out to the center of the ring, waving his arms, all alone. It seemed like a long time before Drew (Bundini) Brown, his assistant trainer, was hugging him and Dundee was dancing up and down, and Jack Nilan, Liston’s adviser, was wrapping yards of tape around the former champion’s left shoulder.“I just can’t go back,” a Liston aide reported Sonny to have said.And then the crowd was cheering and booing, which is something like laughing and crying because it was the wildest thing they had ever seen.lt didn’t make sense. For weeks Clay had played the fool and been tagged at will by unworthy sparring partners. This morning, at the weigh-in, he had acted bizarre and disturbed.And tonight, he had been cool and fast and without fear. Until the knockout, the officials had had the fight a draw. Referee Carney Felix had scored the six rounds 57-57 on the 10-point-must system. Judge Bill Lovitt scored it 58-56 for Liston, and Judge Gus Jacobsen 58-56 for Clay.But points didn’t really matter after all. Poetry and youth and joy had triumphed over the 8-1 odds. And until it had happened (and perhaps until they can look it up) people laughed at the thought that a night like this could happen.The crowd cheered lustily at 9:59 p.m. when Cassius came jogging down the aisle toward the ring, his face impassive, wearing a hip-length terry-cloth white robe on which was emblazoned The Lip. Nobody even snickered, for everyone knew Clay was a braggart, not to be taken seriously.He leapt through the ropes in a sudden motion, then waited in the ring for six minutes before Liston started down the aisle, shadowboxing in a corner of the ring. He did not talk or shout. Liston, in a long, white robe, glared out from a white hood and climbed heavily through the ropes.“Wipe my face off, hey, wipe my face off,” said Clay to Dundee. The trainer was staring at the implacable Liston, and didn’t hear Clay until he had repeated himself.Both men stood in their corners serenely as the inevitable parade of notables — Rocky Marciano, Sugar Ray Robinson, et al. — shook their gloved hands. Sonny, in white trunks, a black stripe and his name across a thigh, seemed malevolent and invincible. Clay, in white trunks with red piping, seemed only big.Earlier, rumors had swept Convention Hall that Cassius was not going to show, that the thin line of hysteria he had trod during the morning weigh-in had become full-scale fear.But even as the rumor mounted (that he was in a plane, en route to Mexico), Cassius was standing quietly in a far corner of the arena. He was waiting for his brother, Rudolph Valentino Clay, to make his professional debut.Few people noticed him. He was dressed in a tightfitting black tropical suit and wore a black bow tie on his ruffled, white dress shirt. Clay was surrounded by aides — Brown; Archie Robinson, his personal secretary; and Dundee. Dundee was carrying a blue suitcase and Bundini kept a hand on Clay’s back, as if he might have to restrain him at any moment.But Clay hardly moved. Despite his height (6 feet 3 inches) he often had to stand on tip toe to watch the action in the far-off ring. Once, when Rudy floored his opponent, Chip Johnson of Naples, Fla., in the second round, Clay shouted some encouragement. Otherwise he was silent.Even during the one-minute rest periods between rounds, Cassius stared at the ring. His face seemed tense and alert, but his body was unmoving. At the end of the four-round bout, when it was announced that Rudy had won, Cassius turned abruptly, without saying a word, and followed a phalanx of Miami policemen with flashy gun butts out of the arena and into his dressing room.Once there, at about 9:15 p.m., he was re-examined by Dr. Robbins.At the weigh-in, Dr. Robbins had said that Clay’s pulse rate was around 120, more than double his norm of 54. Forty-five minutes before the fight, Clay’s pulse was 64, the same as Liston’s. Sonny had arrived at the hall a few minutes after 8 p.m. and gone to his dressing room to rest.slide showAdvertisement