By CHRISTOPHER CLAREYJUNE 9, 2016
PARIS — The first concern was whether Franck Cammas would be able to keep his foot.Cammas, who is France’s most successful sailor in recent years, had just had a gruesome training accident, falling off a catamaran into the waters of Quiberon Bay in northwestern France and getting struck by the yacht’s rudder.Bertrand Pacé, a veteran America’s Cup sailor who is part of Cammas’s team, was driving the chase boat that rescued Cammas from the Atlantic Ocean.“When I put him on board, I thought he was going to lose his foot, truly, because it was broken very low, very close to the ankle,” Pacé said in an interview last week. “I was afraid that the tendons and the nerves had been cut, because the foot was really detached.”Despite the severity of the wound, there was virtually no blood. “That’s because the water was cold, and when the water is cold, there’s a reflex in which the blood vessels close,” Pacé said.AdvertisementBut on that frightening day in November, Cammas would soon be reassured. When the paramedics on shore cut away his shoe, he still had feeling in the sole of his right foot. The risk of infection was real, but he said the artery and primary tendons were intact.“In the midst of my bad luck, I had some good luck,” Cammas said. “And what I wanted most of all was to get on the operating table as fast as possible. The helicopter thankfully came quickly.”Because of the injury, his 2016 Olympic campaign was over. But his 2017 America’s Cup campaign was still a possibility, and last month — after months of rehabilitation — he returned to competition with Groupama Team France in the Louis Vuitton America’s Cup World Series in New York.This weekend, he will be back at he helm for the world series event in Chicago, part of the preliminaries for the main event next year in Bermuda.“I really had to be patient this winter and work hard physically to try to get my capacities back enough that I could get back on board and compete,” he said.AdvertisementIn the old-model America’s Cup, with its stately monohull yachts, mobility would not have been much of an issue for a helmsman. But this new age of high-speed maneuvers in foiling catamarans is much more physically demanding and athletic.“It’s true that I still have a little bit of pain when I jump and move around the netting, but I don’t think about it much when I’m sailing,” Cammas said. “I’ve lost some agility, but the netting absorbs some of the shock and now I’m getting my confidence back in terms of pushing off with my foot. What’s clear is that if I have to go the Alps and hike, I will not be as good as I was before.”He still cannot run normally, but Cammas, a small and intense 43-year-old,  is back to road cycling and is putting in long hours in an attempt to make Team France a factor in the America’s Cup.Underestimating Cammas does not seem wise. He has been a success at every level and in all manner of yachts, beginning with France’s Solitaire du Figaro, which he won at 24, and continuing when he won the 2011-12 edition of the grueling, prestigious round-the-world Volvo Ocean Race in his first attempt. That was with Groupama in a Volvo Open 70, a sturdy monohull with a canting keel.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.But Cammas has above all earned his reputation by winning major prizes in multihulls. He claimed the Jules Verne Trophy in 2010 after circumnavigating the planet with his crew in the maxi-trimaran Groupama 3 in a record 48 days, seven hours and 44 minutes.Later that year he sailed Groupama 3 on his own to win the prestigious Route du Rhum, and 2010 was also the year that Larry Ellison’s BMW Oracle Team won a particularly litigious edition of the America’s Cup in a 90-foot trimaran over the Swiss defender Alinghi.Depending on one’s perspective, Cammas deserves some of the credit or blame for the direction of the modern Cup. Oracle’s leadership — including the skipper Russell Coutts, the helmsman Jimmy Spithill and the owner Larry Ellison — did not have much multihull experience, so they hired Cammas as an advisor and a benchmark.“He played a big role when we won our first Cup,” Spithill said. “We did some training with him and his offshore trimaran, so we go way back.”Now, in a sense, Oracle has returned the favor by cutting costs and the size of the catamarans for this America’s Cup in an attempt to help commercially funded teams like Team France take part.AdvertisementThe changes, made last year, resulted in one of the Cup’s mainstays, the Italian challenger Luna Rossa, withdrawing from the competition. But Cammas and his team were able to move forward, and a Japanese challenger also entered the competition.“I’d like to believe they did it for me, but I don’t think so,” Cammas said. “But they did want more teams and to open it up to countries that didn’t have the money to do it at the previous level, countries that had the technical knowledge and the motivation but not necessarily the budget. Ten years ago, the budgets were very, very high in the Cup.”By some estimates, Ellison’s and BMW Oracle’s unsuccessful 2007 campaign in Valencia, Spain, cost close to $200 million. Cammas says Team France’s budget for this campaign is 28 million euros, or nearly $32 million, which is probably the smallest budget of the five challengers for the Cup held by Oracle.“It’s never comfortable,” Cammas said. “But I think a business plan for this America’s Cup of less than 30 million is something you can make work commercially. I feel it was indispensable to have this rule change so the America’s Cup was not only a competition for billionaires.”The event’s links with the spectacularly wealthy have also been part of its appeal since it began in 1851, and Ellison, a self-made man but very much a billionaire, still controls it today.Still, Cammas and the French — long ahead of the curve in the multihull world — are at least back on the water and in the game, even if they are now playing catch up in more ways than one.“My accident was a bad one, no doubt,” Cammas said. “But it’s clear that it could have been quite a bit worse.”A version of this special report appears in print on June 10, 2016, in The International New York Times.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.See More »