AdvertisementSupported byBy Mike VorkunovLike many Americans, Carmelo Anthony watched the results of the presidential election come in Tuesday night and early into the next morning. By the time the result had been determined, Anthony’s son had already fallen asleep. It left Anthony with what he said was a difficult task Wednesday morning: explaining to his 9-year-old son that Donald J. Trump had been elected.The election of Trump has caused anxiety for many members of minority groups after a campaign in which he used harsh and racially charged language.At Anthony’s locker in Madison Square Garden after Wednesday night’s victory over the Nets, the player reflected on his reaction to the election results, which had already spurred protests across the country.“Now is our responsibility as men and women to take it into our hands and be role models and be our own leaders, at this point, regardless of who is the commander in chief,” he said. “I think we have more of a responsibility now, especially with the youth, kind of educating them.“I’ve talked to youth. I’ve talked to kids today and this morning, my family, you can just hear the nervousness. They’re afraid. They don’t know what to think. People don’t know what to do at this point. I think it’s up to us as individuals to lead and everybody leads in their own way.”Anthony said he struggled to frame the results of the election and their meaning to his son, Kiyan.“This is a conversation that we’re all going to have to have with our kids,” he said. “What is that conversation? That’s the scary part for me — what is that conversation?”Anthony became more vocal this year about social activism, particularly regarding the shootings of black men by police officers.Asked about Trump’s rhetoric, Anthony chose to be circumspect.“I’m a big believer in worry about the things you can control, and we as people have to worry about the things that we can control,” he said. “We can’t control what’s going to happen, but that doesn’t mean we have to stop.”Joakim Noah, Anthony’s teammate, posted on Twitter what appeared to be his reaction to the election at 11:15 p.m. Tuesday, simply writing, “How!!!!!”That, he said on Wednesday, summed up the entirety of his thoughts.“I think it’s pretty obvious where I stand,” Noah said.Noah and Anthony were not the only N.B.A. figures to share their thoughts on the election on Wednesday. Before Golden State’s game against the visiting Dallas Mavericks, Warriors Coach Steve Kerr expressed his disappointment in the result to The Associated Press.Kerr said Trump regularly used “racist, misogynist, insulting words” during his campaign. “The whole process has left all of us feeling disgusted and disappointed,” Kerr said. “I thought we were better than this.”The Warriors had a team meeting Wednesday to discuss the election result, and forward David West had sharper words after the team’s shootaround.“The guy who got elected, it’s not just the fact he got elected, but people voted for him,” West said, according to the A.P. “That’s the disheartening thing.”West, who is black, added: “The message was loud and clear last night. I don’t think there’s any room to sort of not face the obvious truth. He speaks for the majority of the people in this nation, his attitudes about black people, about Muslim people, about women, about just about every sort of political group you can name. Folks agree with his positions, and you can’t deny that because folks voted for him.”LeBron James, who will visit the White House with the Cleveland Cavaliers on Thursday, the same day Trump will visit to meet with President Obama, reacted with an Instagram post on Wednesday morning.James, who campaigned for Hillary Clinton in recent days, shared a video post with the song “Alright” by Kendrick Lamar.In the post’s caption, he wrote: “As I woke up today looking and searching for answers on what has happened this song hit it right on the head! If we continue the faith (as hard as it may be to do so) we will BE ALRIGHT!! Parents and leaders of our children please let them know they can still change the world for the better!”Advertisement