By REBECCA R. RUIZNOV. 10, 2016
The Justice Department announced on Thursday the 21st conviction in its world soccer corruption case focused on FIFA, the sport’s governing body, and affiliated regional soccer organizations. With 42 defendants publicly charged to date, the conviction marked a halfway point.The latest conviction was of Rafael Esquivel, the former president of Venezuela’s soccer federation and a top South American soccer official. He pleaded guilty on Thursday morning in federal court in Brooklyn to seven counts of racketeering conspiracy, wire fraud conspiracy and money laundering conspiracy. Mr. Esquivel faces a sentence of up to 140 years.Mr. Esquivel, 70, admitted that in the nearly three decades that he led Venezuela’s soccer federation, he had collected millions of dollars in bribe payments related to the sale of media and marketing rights to soccer tournaments, including notable South American competitions like the Copa Libertadores and the Copa América. Those bribes were routed to accounts he controlled at banks in the United States, he said.As part of his plea deal, Mr. Esquivel promised to pay more than $16 million to the United States government. That amount, the highest pledged by any convicted soccer official to date, adds to the roughly $200 million promised to the government by an array of business executives and soccer officials who have reached plea agreements with the Justice Department. (FIFA, a nonprofit association based in Switzerland, has asked for a portion of those forfeited funds.)Get the big sports news, highlights and analysis from Times journalists, with distinctive takes on games and some behind-the-scenes surprises, delivered to your inbox every week.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.Contributing to Mr. Esquivel’s worth are real estate holdings in the United States, including several rental properties in Hialeah, Fla. Tenants there were addressing monthly payments to him as recently as last year.AdvertisementMr. Esquivel was among seven men arrested in Zurich in May 2015, when the United States announced its case.AdvertisementAfter nine months in a Swiss jail, he arrived in the United States early this year and was ultimately released on bail to live in the Miami area, where he is expected to remain until he is sentenced.A lawyer for Mr. Esquivel, David I. Goldstein, declined to comment on Thursday.No date for Mr. Esquivel’s sentencing was set. No defendant in the case, including those who entered pleas as early as 2013, has been sentenced yet.Of the 21 other men charged in the case but not convicted, four have pleaded not guilty in federal court in Brooklyn, while 17 others remain abroad, in countries including Trinidad and Tobago and Uruguay.A version of this article appears in print on November 11, 2016, on Page B11 of the New York edition with the headline: Venezuelan Soccer Official Pleads Guilty in FIFA Case.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.