
On Soccer By                     
RORY SMITH

NOV. 9, 2016
NORTHAMPTON, England — No sooner had the final whistle blown than the public-address system crackled to life. Most fans were already out of their seats, donning hats and gloves, preparing to head out into the night, steeling themselves to face the bitter cold and the driving rain.Over the previous 90 minutes, a Northampton Town team composed largely of reserves had played out a 1-1 draw with West Ham United’s under-21 squad in the group stage of the Checkatrade Trophy. It had been entertaining enough, but essentially meaningless: Both teams had been eliminated from the competition before the match had started. There was, in a very literal sense, nothing to play for.Indeed, the most noteworthy thing about the occasion was the crowd: Only 762 people had made it to Sixfields, Northampton’s neat, compact stadium. It was the lowest attendance the club had ever managed for a competitive game. A second possible record, though, was on the way.“According to the rules of the competition,” the announcer said, as everyone else’s thoughts turned to home and to warmth, “we will now go to penalties to decide which team wins the bonus point.”AdvertisementSome in the crowd laughed. Others, presumably feeling the cold a little more, audibly groaned. A small group of children welcomed the prospect of unexpected bonus drama — or a passable facsimile of it — with a high-pitched cheer, delighted to be present for what may have been the most pointless penalty shootout ever conducted.AdvertisementFifteen minutes later, West Ham’s young players had won — John-Joe O’Toole sent the decisive spot kick for Northampton sailing over the bar, if you must know — and claimed the much vaunted but entirely futile bonus point.Instead of consoling O’Toole, Northampton’s players walked straight down the tunnel. Instead of racing to their goalkeeper to celebrate, West Ham’s milled about near the center circle, apparently unsure for 30 seconds of the score, or if they had won.There was no cheer from their 189 traveling supporters, no devastated 1,000-yard stares from the home fans. Within two minutes, the stadium was empty. Immediately, with a clunk, off went the lights. With that, Northampton Town and West Ham waved goodbye to the group stage of the Checkatrade Trophy, English soccer’s least-loved competition.It was not always like this. There was a time — just a few months ago, in fact — when this tournament was not an object of ridicule and scorn, when it occupied a curious but cherished niche in England’s soccer firmament.Then, it was known as the Johnstone’s Paint Trophy, contested by the 48 clubs in League One and League Two, the third and fourth tiers of the English soccer system, and it was, to many, an antidote to the cash-fueled carousel of the Premier League.Divided into southern and northern sections, with the winners meeting in the final at Wembley, the competition offered the prospect of a day in the sun to clubs that spend their lives in the shadows. Since its inaugural edition in 1983, it has allowed hundreds of thousands of supporters who are likely never to see their teams contest an F.A. Cup or League Cup final, much less play in Europe or fight for the Premier League title, to see their clubs lift a trophy at Wembley, the national stadium.Last season, Barnsley beat Oxford United in front of almost 60,000 people. “That is what you play for,” said Paul Heckingbottom, the Barnsley manager, after his team’s 3-2 win. “We will be having a celebration tonight.”AdvertisementThe stark contrast with the disinterest this season is easily explained. This summer, the English Football League announced that a number of teams from the Premier League and the second-tier Championship would be invited to enter under-21 squads into an expanded version of the competition.The idea, according to the E.F.L.’s chief executive, Shaun Harvey, was not only to inject a little Premier League glamour into the tournament, but to give promising players at larger clubs a taste of competitive senior soccer. This was, Harvey said, a chance to right one of the major flaws in the academy system, to help England nurture more young talent.“The new format is intended to rejuvenate this competition and also assist the development of the very best young players in English football,” Harvey said.The response, however, has hardly been positive. A host of Premier League teams did not even apply to enter; many of the tournament’s traditional constituents vocally resented what they saw as the strong arm of the Premier League’s clubs, voracious collectors of young players, annexing a tournament to solve a problem of their own making.Get the big sports news, highlights and analysis from Times journalists, with distinctive takes on games and some behind-the-scenes surprises, delivered to your inbox every week.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.“We vigorously opposed the changes,” said Steve Hamer, chairman of Bristol Rovers. “It passed, 60 to 40, or so. I think people saw the absurdity of the prize money on offer.”That resentment has filtered through to the fans. As well as a record low at Northampton on Tuesday night, only 698 turned up at the Bet365 Stadium to see Stoke City’s under-21s beat Bury, and only 547 were at Molineux for Wolverhampton’s win against Accrington Stanley. Middlesbrough won the night, though, with a crowd of just 308 people for its game against Shrewsbury Town.Even the teams themselves seem uncertain. Rob Page, the Northampton manager, insisted that the extra matches were a good chance for some of his fringe players to “show me they deserve a place in the first team,” though he had previously acknowledged that he would name only five regulars against West Ham because the rules say “we have to.” Naming a weakened team can be punished by a fine of 5,000 pounds (about $6,235).Page’s counterpart at Mansfield Town F.C., Adam Murray, suggested he “did not agree with the principles” of the tournament, having advised his players during one game not to make tackles, for fear that they might pick up injuries.AdvertisementBristol Rovers demonstrated a clear disdain for the competition by naming a lineup that included the club’s first-choice goalkeeper, so as not to attract a punishment, but then substituting him after two minutes. Bradford City had done the same in a previous round.The view from the other side of the debate, however, is different. “Maybe we put more into it than Northampton did,” said Terry Westley, the coach of West Ham’s under-21s. “It tells me where we are in terms of our development, and it tells the players what level they should be playing at if they have to go out on loan. I think it’s a very good thing.”He does not suggest it is perfect — the timing of matches, during international breaks, means his brightest prospects could miss games while they are away with their national teams — but he is convinced that it has been a valuable learning experience.His team, he said, has conceded “a lot of goals to set pieces”; that is something to work on. His players will benefit from having to play “three games in a week,” too, “something that professionals have to be able to do.”Even that penalty shootout — meaningless though it was — presumably teaches a valuable lesson. To keep count of the score, for a start.A version of this article appears in print on November 10, 2016, on Page B11 of the New York edition with the headline: Once-Charming Trophy Loses Its Luster and Its Fans.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.See More »