By THE ASSOCIATED PRESSNOV. 9, 2016
MIAMI — Dwyane Wade’s former locker in the Miami Heat dressing room is empty. Dozens of photos of him still adorn walls all over the arena, including a giant one that every Heat player passes on their way to the court. And every championship banner that hangs from the rafters is there largely because of his work.For 13 years, American Airlines Arena was his house.For a moment or two on Thursday night, it will be again.Wade is returning to Miami as an opponent for the first time, as the Chicago Bulls — his new team — visit Thursday for the only time this season. The building will be jammed, the game will air on national television and the Heat will pay tribute with a highlight video that is certain to elicit some long, loud cheering from fans who never wanted to see him leave.“It’ll probably be emotional for me,” Heat Coach Erik Spoelstra said. “And then we’ll get to competition, and that’s ultimately what it’s all about.”AdvertisementWade’s entire N.B.A. history before July was spent with Miami, where he was an All-Star 12 times in 13 years. Drafted fifth over all in 2003, Wade wound up pairing with Shaquille O’Neal to help deliver Miami’s first title in 2006. He then helped lure LeBron James and Chris Bosh to the Heat for what became four trips to the N.B.A. finals — and two more titles — in four seasons.AdvertisementJames left in 2014, shortly before Bosh got a $118 million contract from Miami. That deal left the Heat somewhat limited in what they could pay Wade, and they almost lost him in 2015 before striking a one-year deal for $20 million.No such agreement came last summer, and Wade left.“I’m not wishing nothing bad on that organization,” Wade said Monday in Chicago, his comments reported by ESPN. “I have nothing but love for everybody in that organization. And I want them to be successful, just as we all say, just not when they play the Bulls. But besides that, I want them to be successful.”Get the big sports news, highlights and analysis from Times journalists, with distinctive takes on games and some behind-the-scenes surprises, delivered to your inbox every week.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.The Heat put considerable work into the tribute videos that air when former star players return to Miami for the first time, and Wade’s will receive the same treatment. James became very emotional when he saw his tribute, and Mario Chalmers — the starting point guard on Miami’s 2012 and 2013 title teams — said he was moved by what the Heat did to commemorate his return after a trade to Memphis last year.“It’s going to be very emotional, that I can say,” Chalmers said. “With me coming back, I had mixed feelings. The fans welcomed me back, everybody at the arena welcomed me back, but I still had a sour taste in my mouth from how the trade went down.” He added, “I’m pretty sure D-Wade’s going to feel the same way.”Wade is Miami’s career leader in virtually every major statistical category, so far ahead of everyone else on many of those lists that he is virtually assured of being all over the team record book for decades to come. His 525th game in Miami comes with great anticipation; on the secondary resale market, a seat in the highest row of the arena is selling for $41. The same seat for a game last week went for $6.Wade has stayed in touch with many around the Heat, with the exception of the team’s president, Pat Riley. Wade was not sure if they would cross paths this time.He has remained extremely close with Udonis Haslem, with whom he shared captaincy in Miami for many years. Wade has been in contact with Spoelstra, and he continues to check in on some of his former teammates as well.Advertisement“There’s no bad blood between him and this organization,” Haslem said. “He’s had a great, great career here. He’s had so much success — we’ve had so much success. For whatever reason, the time came where we separated.”Wade has said many times since deciding to play for his hometown Bulls that he will forever be appreciative of his time with the Heat and their fans. He will want to win Thursday very badly, and for the first time in 14 years, the 20,000 fans will want to see him lose.“He’ll handle it fine,” Spoelstra said. “He’s as good as anybody I’ve ever been around at compartmentalizing and knowing when to keep emotions where they need to be.”A version of this article appears in print on November 10, 2016, on Page B11 of the New York edition with the headline: An Unusual Sight in Miami: Dwyane Wade in a Road Uniform.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.