AdvertisementSupported byBy Billy Witz and James WagnerSCOTTSDALE, Ariz. — The seventh game of the World Series was compelling theater with late lead changes, debatable managers’ decisions and a brief rain delay adding to the drama of a winner-take-all, extra-inning game for the championship.There were probably few who minded that it took 4 hours 28 minutes.But the game — with its pitching changes, lengthy commercial breaks and time-consuming confabs on the mound — symbolized a problem for Major League Baseball throughout the season: the pace of play.Believing that the length of games was turning young fans away from the game, Commissioner Rob Manfred made shortening the time of games a priority in his first season. It largely worked in 2015 as seven minutes were shaved off the length of the average game, winnowing it down to three hours.But there was some backsliding this season. The average length of games increased to 3:04 in 2016, and the number of teams that averaged less than three hours dwindled from 10 to two.In the playoffs, the pace slowed even further. The average length of a World Series game was 3:42 (including a 1-0 win in Game 3 by the Cleveland Indians that took 3:33 to complete). When the Los Angeles Dodgers beat the Washington Nationals in a National League division series, the five games took an average of 4:01 to complete. The finale lasted 4:32.“Pace of play is one of those topics that’s going to be a constant, ongoing, year-after-year challenge for us,” Manfred said Wednesday during the general managers’ meetings. “I really mean this. I think our players’ hearts are in the right place, but because we play 162 times in 183 days, it’s easy to lose focus on that issue and I think we lost a little bit of focus this year.”Two years ago, M.L.B. implemented a time clock on pitchers to complete their warm-up tosses — 2 minutes 20 seconds for locally televised games; 2:45 for nationally televised games. It also allowed managers to remain in the dugout when deciding to use a replay challenge rather than walking onto the field.At the meetings, the general managers discussed issues that included relief pitcher trends, strikeout trends and pace of play, said Dan Halem, M.L.B.’s chief legal officer. An agenda was being developed for next month’s winter meetings, and any recommendations that would require union approval would be forwarded to Halem, who handles negotiations with the players. Manfred indicated that limiting mound visits could be an option.“They’re not sitting on one idea and it’s either make-or-break there,” San Francisco General Manager Bobby Evans said. “The game is ever-changing — how the games are played or how they’re approached is different today than it was 10 years ago or five years ago. So it’s always in baseball’s interest to keep an open mind and look at new ideas.”Evans was asked how Giants fans, known for their high level of engagement, viewed the team’s lethargic pace (their games averaged 3:10 this season).“That’s why we have some of the best concessions of anybody,” Evans said.MEDICAL PLAN When San Diego Padres General Manager A. J. Preller was suspended last summer for withholding medical information on players he traded to the Boston Red Sox and the Miami Marlins, it gave a further push to M.L.B.’s move to standardize how medical records are maintained.“I think it’s imperative,” said Michael Hill, the Marlins’ president of baseball operations. “The expectation is that you’re getting information so you’re making informed decisions.”Farhan Zaidi, the general manager of the Dodgers, added: “That’s not really an area in most people’s minds that teams should be trying to glean a competitive advantage. It almost seems like it should be a fundamental, standard, regulated part of the industry. I don’t think the variability is as much as it used to be, but getting to the point where that’s not even a question should be the ultimate goal.”INQUIRY ON FAMILIA Manfred said M.L.B. is gathering information surrounding Jeurys Familia’s arrest in connection to a reported domestic violence incident, but that it is usually difficult for the league to complete its own investigation before the criminal process is done.Familia, the Mets’ closer, was arrested last week in Fort Lee, N.J. An unidentified person sustained a scratch to the chest and a bruise to the right cheek, according to a complaint. Familia was scheduled to appear in court in Fort Lee on Thursday.“We’re in the off-season and we’re going to try to proceed at the pace to make sure we have all the facts before we try and make a discipline decision,” Manfred said.ELECTION UNCERTAINTIES Manfred said he would need to hear more about President-elect Donald Trump’s policies to determine whether they could impact baseball. As for baseball’s bridge-building efforts in Cuba and plans to consider Mexico City as an expansion site, Manfred said: “I haven’t heard anything with respect to Cuba issues that would suggest there is going to be any change. I think we’re all familiar with the things he said about Mexico. I think we need to wait and see what actually happens.”METS MULL COACHING STAFF Mets General Manager Sandy Alderson said the team was not ready to announce the state of the team’s coaching staff. One possibility could be the addition of a coach to provide instruction to the Mets’ catchers, an area Alderson believes can be upgraded next season by in-house improvement. Yankees General Manager Brian Cashman said that Adam Warren, who spent the last two months of the season in the bullpen after he was reacquired from the Chicago Cubs, would be considered a starter when the team reports to spring training.Advertisement