By VICTOR MATHERNOV. 8, 2016
Night after night, in good games and bad games, in wins and losses, Stephen Curry made 3s.Sometimes he made 10. Sometimes he made just two or three. Once he made a dozen. But from November 2014 to last Saturday, he always made at least one. His 157-game regular-season streak of 3-pointers is the N.B.A. record. (It is 196 games, if you include playoffs.)But on Saturday night against the Lakers, the steak ended. Curry fired up 10 3-pointers, but none went in, and the Warriors lost by 20.You might have expected Curry to bounce back in his next game. Did he ever.Not only did Curry make a 3-pointer against the New Orleans Pelicans to start another streak, he hit more 3s than any other player has in a single N.B.A. game, 13, breaking the record of 12 shared by Kobe Bryant, Donyell Marshall and Curry himself.He ended the game 13 for 17 on 3-point attempts, a .765 percentage, higher than any of the players who made 12. The Warriors won, 116-106.AdvertisementLast season, Curry made 402 3s, shattering his own record of 286 set the season before. Curry has four of the top seven 3-point-shooting seasons in N.B.A. history.Here’s a look at the 13 record-setting 3s from Monday night:First quarter1. Despite his struggles on Saturday, it did not take Curry long to fire up a 3. In transition, five minutes into the game, Kevin Durant passed to Curry at the 3-point line. Buddy Hield of the Pelicans was focused on getting back on defense, so Curry was open. A swish.2. Behind the line, Curry faked a pass, then shot over Solomon Hill.3. Curry got the ball near the baseline off a turnover, but Terrence Jones was in attendance. Curry let him jump past, then took a step to the right and hit the shot.Second quarter4. Curry jumped on a fumbled pass and benefited from the confusion to grab an open shot.5. Getting a pass from Draymond Green, who was acting as point guard, Curry had E’Twaun Moore’s hand in his face but made the shot anyway while falling backward off balance.Advertisement6. Curry dribbled between two defenders, Hield and Tim Frazier, then fired away while leaning forward. A seemingly low-percentage shot for a mortal was good for Curry.Third quarter7. With Frazier’s hand in his face, Curry again calmly took a step to his left and hit.8. Once again, Curry benefited from a dropped pass and fired quickly before Anthony Davis could get in the way.Get the big sports news, highlights and analysis from Times journalists, with distinctive takes on games and some behind-the-scenes surprises, delivered to your inbox every week.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.9. A pick by Durant did not quite free Curry when Langston Galloway got up on him. It didn’t matter. Three more points.10. Curry waited for Hield to jump up and past him, then sank it.Fourth quarter11. The first of three rapid-fire 3s that broke the record. Andre Iguodala with the assist.12. Thirty-nine seconds later, the record was tied despite Frazier’s hand in Curry’s face.13. With 2 minutes 23 seconds left, 31 seconds later, the record-breaker, with both Hill and Moore defending. The shot also put the Warriors up by 12 in a game that had been fairly close most of the way.Curry smiled and pumped his fist after the 13th bucket. He took just one more shot in the game, a 2, and missed it. (His 2-point shooting on the night was 3 for 9.)The 3-point shot has been steadily increasing since it was introduced to the N.B.A. in 1979-80. That year, teams averaged 0.8 3s a game. This year so far, they have been averaging 8.7.“That’s a pretty cool record to have,” Curry told Agence France-Presse after the win. “It probably won’t last too long, the way guys shoot in this league. But to have the 3-point record is pretty special.”We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.