AdvertisementSupported byClemson Coach Dabo Swinney said quarterback Deshaun Watson, tailback Wayne Gallman and receivers Mike Williams and Artavis Scott, all juniors, would head to the N.F.L. after this season.Swinney said that the four players would graduate in December and indicated this season would be their last. The four will be honored during Senior Day on Saturday, when the No. 3 Tigers face Pittsburgh.Watson, a Heisman Trophy candidate, is expected to be among the first quarterbacks taken in next year’s N.F.L. draft. Williams, at 6 feet 3, is also considered a first-rounder.Last year, Watson became the first player in the Football Bowl Subdivision to throw for more than 4,000 yards and rush for more than 1,000.Gallman and Scott are also expected to be drafted.Alexandre Burrows scored twice in the third period to help Vancouver end a nine-game losing streak with a 5-3 victory over the Rangers at Madison Square Garden.Henrik Sedin and Sven Baertschi each had a goal and an assist, and Loui Eriksson also scored for the Canucks, who were 0-8-1, with eight straight regulation losses, after opening the season with four wins.Bo Horvat had two assists, and Jacob Markstrom finished with 23 saves.Rick Nash, Pavel Buchnevich and Mika Zibanejad scored for the Rangers, who had won five straight while scoring at least five goals in each game. Buchnevich also had two assists.Antti Raanta stopped 20 shots, though he left for 6 minutes 19 seconds in the third period after being run into by the Canucks’ Markus Granlund. The Rangers’ regular goaltender, Henrik Lundqvist, made four saves on six shots while filling in.DEVILS 3, HURRICANES 2 P. A. Parenteau and Taylor Hall scored in a shootout, and the Devils rallied to defeat Carolina in Newark.Parenteau and the rookie Nick Lappin scored in regulation for the Devils, who beat the Hurricanes for the second time in three days. Cory Schneider had 31 saves, including an outstanding glove stop on Sebastian Aho with 1:48 left in the third period.First baseman Anthony Rizzo and right fielder Jason Heyward of the World Series champion Chicago Cubs have won Gold Glove Awards, which are presented for fielding excellence.The San Francisco Giants’ Buster Posey was picked at catcher in the National League, ending the eight-year reign of the St. Louis Cardinals’ Yadier Molina. Posey was joined by two Giants teammates, shortstop Brandon Crawford and second baseman Joe Panik.Colorado Rockies third baseman Nolan Arenado won for the fourth consecutive year, and Arizona Diamondbacks pitcher Zack Greinke earned his third straight Gold Glove. Other winners in the N.L. were Atlanta Braves center fielder Ender Inciarte and Pittsburgh Pirates left fielder Starling Marte.Shortstop Francisco Lindor from the American League champion Cleveland Indians was a first-time winner, along with Texas Rangers first baseman Mitch Moreland, Detroit Tigers second baseman Ian Kinsler, Yankees left fielder Brett Gardner and Boston Red Sox right fielder Mookie Betts.Kansas City Royals catcher Salvador Perez won his fourth Gold Glove in a row, Houston Astros pitcher Dallas Keuchel took his third straight, and Tampa Bay Rays center fielder Kevin Kiermaier repeated from last year.Rangers third baseman Adrian Beltre won his fifth Gold Glove.Brook Lopez scored 26 points, and the Nets kept Minnesota winless on the road with a 119-110 victory.The Nets shot 55.3 percent from the field and had eight players with at least 9 points, a surprisingly easy offensive performance against a young Timberwolves team that has yet to grasp Coach Tom Thibodeau’s defensive schemes.Trevor Booker added 15 points and Sean Kilpatrick had 14 for the Nets.PACER FINED FOR KICKING BALL Indiana forward Paul George was fined $15,000 by the N.B.A. for kicking a ball that then flew into the stands during a home victory over the Chicago Bulls on Saturday night.Advertisement