By JAMES WAGNERAPRIL 22, 2017
The clearest illustration of the battered state of the Mets’ roster came in the bottom of the seventh inning on Friday. The Mets were tied with the Washington Nationals, and Matt Harvey, whose start was moved up a day because of Jacob deGrom’s stiff neck, was done after 108 pitches.On a normal day, perhaps his spot in the lineup would have fallen to Michael Conforto or Wilmer Flores. But with a five-man bench reduced to one healthy player, the backup catcher Kevin Plawecki, Manager Terry Collins turned to another pitcher, Zack Wheeler, to pinch-hit for Harvey. Yoenis Cespedes tried to get loose to pinch-hit, but his leg did not respond well enough.Wheeler doubled into the right-field corner, much to the delight of his teammates in the dugout. But the Mets did not score that inning, and they stumbled when Jeurys Familia walked in the winning run in the 11th inning, resulting in a 4-3 loss.“It was an all-hands-on-deck situation,” said Wheeler, who, along with Robert Gsellman, had his cleats on beginning in the fourth inning.AdvertisementHarvey provided seven solid innings, his lone mistakes coming on home runs by Bryce Harper and Jose Lobaton. Harper entered the game 1 for 26 in his career against Harvey but got the better of him on a first-inning fastball over the plate.AdvertisementA Mets lineup without Cespedes, Asdrubal Cabrera and Lucas Duda eked out three runs against Tanner Roark, the Nationals’ starter. Conforto, who started in left field in Cespedes’s place, and Curtis Granderson each hit solo home runs.“It’s definitely not fun,” deGrom said of all the team’s injuries sustained this week. Since the start of Wednesday’s game, six Mets players have sustained injuries. That total did not include Brandon Nimmo, Steven Matz and Seth Lugo, who have been on the disabled list since the beginning of the season.DeGrom was supposed to start Friday night in the opening game of the series, but he woke up with a stiff neck on Thursday, and it had not improved enough a day later for him to start. So Harvey took the mound on regular rest instead.DeGrom was expected to start on Saturday, and if he was not ready, Sean Gilmartin would start, Collins said.“I hadn’t had any problems with my neck, and then randomly woke up and had a hard time turning it to the left,” deGrom said before Friday’s game. “If I was left-handed, I think I could pitch today.”Cespedes left Thursday’s game early with what was originally described as a left hamstring cramp. He underwent a magnetic resonance imaging examination on Friday, and Collins said the injury was “not serious, but it wasn’t a cramp.”Get the big sports news, highlights and analysis from Times journalists, with distinctive takes on games and some behind-the-scenes surprises, delivered to your inbox every week.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.Collins said that Cespedes would most likely miss the series against the Nationals, which, coupled with Monday’s off day, would give him four days to recuperate.Advertisement“We can afford to lose Ces for this series, as big as it is, as opposed to losing him for the next three and a half or four weeks,” Collins said. “If he strains that hamstring even more, we don’t know how long he’ll be out.”Cespedes, however, was not Collins’s only concern Friday. The manager spent about 10 minutes in his pregame news conference running through the team’s long list of ailments.There was Cabrera, the Mets’ shortstop, who did not play Friday because he was also dealing with hamstring discomfort, although Collins described his injury as less serious than that of Cespedes.Collins said he noticed something was bothering Cabrera this week, but Cabrera insisted he was fine. Later, when Collins learned that Cabrera’s leg was not right, he told him what he has repeated to players over and over: “I can afford to lose you for a day, maybe two, but I’m not losing you for three or four weeks.”Collins offered to move Cabrera to third base for a game to ease the load on his legs, but Cabrera opted for a day off to recover. So Jose Reyes started at shortstop on Friday, and T. J. Rivera, called up from Las Vegas in the afternoon, started at third.There was also catcher Travis d’Arnaud, scratched from Friday’s lineup because he still had trouble throwing the ball because of a sore wrist. D’Arnaud sustained the injury when his right hand hit the bat of a Philadelphia Phillies player while throwing to second on a stolen-base attempt Wednesday.And do not forget Duda, who was also injured Wednesday, bending his left elbow back on a play at first base. He landed on the 10-day disabled list before Friday’s game, as the team’s doctors determined that he needed more time to recover.Flores, a crucial utility player, joined Duda on the disabled list Friday. Flores has been dealing with an infection in his right knee that sent him to the hospital Thursday. Flores was expected to remain in the hospital all weekend to receive more intravenous fluids and antibiotics.AdvertisementThe roster shuffling left Collins with an infield that featured, from left to right, Rivera, Reyes, Neil Walker and Jay Bruce, who is normally a right fielder but played first base for the second straight game because of Duda’s injury. With Conforto in left, Juan Lagares started in center and Granderson in right.That left the bench with one healthy player: Plawecki. Collins put the remaining players to use on Friday: Gsellman as a pinch-runner for catcher Rene Rivera in the ninth inning, and Plawecki as a pinch-runner for Cabrera after his pinch-hit walk. D’Arnaud pinch-hit in the 11th.“I got a good team, and they’re only good when they’re playing,” Collins said before the game. “We’ve been through it before. It’s frustrating to know that we’re better than what’s going on right now.”A version of this article appears in print on April 22, 2017, on Page D3 of the New York edition with the headline: Patching Together a Lineup, the Mets Come Apart Against the Nationals.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.