By BILLY WITZAPRIL 22, 2017
PITTSBURGH — Perhaps there was a time when Joe Girardi embraced his inner rebel, when he took a joy ride just so he could feel the wind in his hair. But when he puts on his uniform and manages the Yankees, there is no such frivolity.It is as if he is parenting 25 teenagers. He frets. He worries. He searches out risks that an actuary would laugh off and wants to cover them in bubble wrap.So when news arrived on Friday that the San Francisco Giants’ star pitcher, Madison Bumgarner, had sprained his throwing shoulder riding a dirt bike in Colorado on Thursday and could be out for two months, it was as if Girardi had lost one of his own.He winced. He shook his head.“I’m scared to death of motorcycles,” Girardi said. “I’m scared of heights. I think golfing is a risk.”AdvertisementAnother danger for pitchers, in Girardi’s eyes, arises at National League ballparks like PNC Park here: hitting.AdvertisementUnlike Bumgarner — who homered twice on opening day — or a number of other pitchers in the National League with competent swings, Yankees pitchers rarely accomplish much with a bat.Since they hit just sporadically, the Yankees’ philosophy with pitchers at the plate is simple.“Don’t get hurt,” the assistant hitting coach Marcus Thames said.The Yankees avoided injury but could have used more help at the plate on Friday in a 6-3 loss to the Pittsburgh Pirates, let down by the uncertain pitching of C. C. Sabathia and the unsure hands of second baseman Starlin Castro, who dropped a fly ball to pave the way for two late runs.The Yankees left 11 runners on base, including two each in the eighth and ninth innings when Matt Holliday and Aaron Judge — their two best power hitters — went to the plate as the tying run. But Holliday struck out, chasing a 3-2 changeup from Daniel Hudson to end the eighth, and Judge grounded out against closer Tony Watson to end the game.The loss curbed the momentum the Yankees had after winning eight of nine during their homestand. It also served as a reminder of their troubles last season in National League parks, where they have lost eight of their last 11 games.With Holliday on the bench — and Gary Sanchez and Didi Gregorius (who had two hits in his first rehabilitative assignment Friday) still on the mend — the Yankees’ lineup did not have premium pop.Early hiccups from their pitcher did not help. Sabathia, who had been superb in his first three starts, watched Jordy Mercer hit his second pitch over the center-field wall, and the Pirates jumped to a 4-0 lead in the second when Josh Bell hit a two-run homer.AdvertisementThere was a time when Sabathia might have aided himself with his bat. He was once a formidable hitter as pitchers go — he has hit three home runs in his career — but his hitting stroke has abandoned him in recent years as his degenerative right knee worsened. He has not had a hit since 2010 and had not taken batting practice in recent days.It did nothing to deter his confidence.“I love it,” Sabathia said. “I didn’t take any swings or anything since last year, and I still get in the box and feel confident, which is so weird. I just feel comfortable hitting.”Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.His two at-bats were not fruitful: He popped up and struck out trying to bunt. But at least he did not get hurt, something Girardi had worried about before the game. And he did no worse than Yankee pitchers usually do.They are 1 for 44 dating to the start of the 2015 season and have not had a hit since Branden Pinder doubled at Atlanta on Aug. 30, 2015 — a hitless streak that is now at 24. Last season, Yankees pitchers were 0 for 17 with 14 strikeouts. They walked once and had two sacrifices.“Every American League team is going to sign a guy to D.H. that’s probably going to hit in the first five spots,” Girardi said. “That’s the bottom line, but we all have to deal with it.”Greg Bird, who has begun the season with pitcher-like numbers at the plate, lowered his average to .122, but he might have reversed his fortunes — and those of the Yankees — but for a couple of near misses.Both swings came with two aboard, two out and the Yankees trailing by three runs, and both produced towering drives down the right-field line that dented the Pirates Charities sign that sits atop the bleachers, just foul.“Too far right,” said Bird, who followed the first one with a strikeout and the next with a hard grounder that got through second baseman Josh Harrison for an error in the fifth that scored two runs, narrowing the Pirates’ lead to 4-3.But the Yankees could not reel in the Pirates before Castro made a long run from behind second base to near the right-field foul line, where Andrew McCutcheon’s fly ball popped out of his glove with two out in the seventh. One run scored, and another came in shortly after, on David Freese’s single off Jonathan Holder.Advertisement“It’s kind of a tough moment for me, because I should make that play,” Castro said. “If that play happened the right way, we get out of that inning because there’s already two outs.”With Chase Headley also having been thrown out at the plate, the Yankees hope to play a cleaner game the rest of the week, and they may need to do so with their pitchers being asked to hit.On Saturday, it will be Michael Pineda’s turn. He has one hit — as a rookie in 2011 with Seattle. Jordan Montgomery, who will pitch on Sunday, has not come to the plate as a professional. He took batting practice before Friday’s game.Asked if he was looking forward to hitting on Saturday, Pineda was not as enthusiastic as Sabathia.“That’s a good question,” he said with a smile.He added: “You know, I’m not a position player. Maybe I hit one or two times, I don’t focus on it. Maybe it’s like making the position players go to the mound for pitching. See how they like that.”INSIDE PITCHShortstop DIDI GREGORIUS, who injured his throwing shoulder during the World Baseball Classic, played in his first rehab game on Friday night, going 2 for 3 while playing shortstop for Class A Tampa. Unless he has a setback, Gregorius is expected to play about five more games in the minor leagues before rejoining the Yankees.A version of this article appears in print on April 22, 2017, on Page D3 of the New York edition with the headline: The Yankees Stumble In an Unfriendly Setting.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.