By JERÉ LONGMANAPRIL 21, 2017
Tom Fleming, a two-time winner of the New York City Marathon in the 1970s, when he trained as many as 200 miles a week in a period known as the first running boom, died on Wednesday in Montclair, N.J. He was 65.His death, apparently of a heart attack, was announced by Montclair Kimberley Academy in New Jersey, where Mr. Fleming was a fourth-grade teacher and the varsity track and field and cross-country coach.Todd Smith, the academy’s athletic director, said that Mr. Fleming had complained of feeling ill at a meet in Verona, N.J., and was found unconscious near the track in his car, where he had gone to sit. He was pronounced dead at Mountainside Hospital in Montclair.At the height of a sterling career, Mr. Fleming was the top local runner in the New York area in a number of distances. His contemporaries included Frank Shorter, the 1972 Olympic marathon champion, and Bill Rodgers, a four-time winner of both the New York and Boston marathons.AdvertisementMr. Fleming won New York in 1973 and 1975, when all 26.2 miles of the marathon were run in loops of Central Park. (The race expanded to the five boroughs in 1976.) He also won marathons in Los Angeles, Toronto, Washington and Cleveland and had two second-place finishes in the Boston Marathon and a fifth-place finish at the 1976 Olympic trials.AdvertisementHis dedication was summed up in an often-cited quotation: “Somewhere, someone in the world is training when you are not. When you race him, he will win.”Many of today’s elite marathon runners train about 120 miles a week. Mr. Fleming preferred to run 140 to 150, and for at least two weeks during his career he raised the distance to 200.“He slept, ran, ate, slept, ran, ate,” George Hirsch, the chairman of New York Road Runners, which organizes the city’s marathon, said on Friday.While many elite runners train twice a day, “Tom, some days, did three runs, and I know a few days he did four runs,” Mr. Hirsch said. “He was as tough a runner as I’ve known.”Though Mr. Fleming did not win the race he most coveted — Boston, the oldest annual marathon — it was not for lack of determination. After finishing second or third in Boston one year, Mr. Rodgers said on Friday, “he went back home and went out that night and trained some more.”In his heyday, Mr. Fleming, a rangy 6 feet 1 inch, raced at 159 pounds. In 2011, he weighed 210, he told an interviewer. Barbara Fleming, his former wife, said in an interview that he had been reluctant to get regular medical checkups, though he had recently lost about 25 pounds.Thomas J. Fleming was born on July 23, 1951, in Long Branch, N.J. A longtime resident of Bloomfield, N.J., he began his running career as a junior at Bloomfield High School and became an all-American at William Paterson College, now William Paterson University.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.In 1973, during his senior year in college, he competed in a track meet on a Saturday, then ran the Boston Marathon two days later, finishing second.AdvertisementLater that year, he entered the New York City Marathon and finished first. There were only 406 entrants in that race, and Mr. Fleming’s mother and sister rented bikes to follow along as he ran through Central Park.“They were glad I was running so they could get some exercise,” Mr. Fleming told the writer and coach Gary Cohen.Near the finish line, Mr. Fleming said, a police officer approached his mother and said, “Please lady, move away,” to which she responded, “Hey, that’s my son!”His fastest marathon time, 2 hours 12 minutes 5 seconds, came in a third-place finish in Boston in 1975. In 1977, he finished fourth at the Fukuoka Marathon in Japan, then considered the unofficial world championship.He became an advocate for professional running in an era when Olympians were required to be amateurs and money was paid under the table. Elite marathon runners can now make hundreds of thousands of dollars in prize money and appearance fees.Affable and charismatic, Mr. Fleming seemed to have as much passion for coaching as he once did for running.“It is better to help others,” he said in a 2011 interview with Mr. Cohen. “It’s exciting to take kids who aren’t too good at anything and to help them find the one thing they can do better than most kids.”He is survived by a daughter, Margot, and a son, Connor.By the early 1990s, Mr. Fleming had recorded more than 123,000 miles in his training log. By the end of the decade, he had effectively stopped running, Barbara Fleming said, because “he was so used to being on top” and could no longer compete at a high level.“He was intense,” said Mr. Rodgers, his friend of more than 40 years. “He couldn’t jog. He had to race.”A version of this article appears in print on April 23, 2017, on Page A26 of the New York edition with the headline: Tom Fleming, 65, Dies; Won Two New York Marathons.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.