AdvertisementSupported byKeeping ScoreBy Benjamin HoffmanEarlier this season, as the Golden State Warriors adjusted to life with Kevin Durant, a narrative emerged that would prove hard to shake. The offense was firing on all cylinders, but the sacrifices required to sign Durant left what was perceived as a glaring flaw: There was no rim protector to keep opposing teams honest.The Portland Trail Blazers — a team that has recently become intimately familiar with JaVale McGee’s 7-foot frame leaping over them to swat away shots — would very likely disagree that flaw exists.Brought in by the Warriors as a backup to Zaza Pachulia, McGee was not signed until Sept. 15, and his roster spot was initially little more than a footnote. To that point, he was an injury-prone eight-year veteran known for, in order, a persistent feud with Shaquille O’Neal about his frequent blooper-reel performances on TNT’s “Shaqtin’ a Fool,” his outspoken mother (Pamela McGee, a former star player), his love of drinking water, and his frustratingly untapped athletic potential.Flying in the face of all of that, McGee has thus far dominated in limited minutes. Golden State has raced to a 2-0 series lead against the Blazers, and heading into Game 3 he appears to be a key cog for a team proving to be more than just a collection of superstars.On Twitter, where McGee’s prominence had always outweighed his performance on the court, the basketball writer Alex Wong summed up the cognitive dissonance of seeing a top team find what it had been lacking from such an unexpected source:McGee’s improbable impact has never been felt more than in Golden State’s 110-81 victory in Game 2. The team’s stars were mostly quiet, but McGee put together one of the finest low-minute performances in playoffs history. In just 13 minutes, he had 15 points, 5 rebounds and 4 blocks. He shot a perfect 7 for 7 from the field and even made his lone free-throw attempt.“It was amazing, the energy that he brought off the bench,” Draymond Green said in a news conference after the game. “Obviously, it showed up in the points.”Since minute totals became readily available in the 1983-84 season, just 20 players have had 15-5-4 off the bench in a playoff game. McGee did it in by far the fewest minutes, with 15 of the 19 other players needing more than twice as much playing time as he did to get there.While his impact has been aided by an injury to Jusuf Nurkic forcing Portland to play small, McGee has teamed with Green, an elite rim protector in his own right, to shut down activity at the basket. In Games 1 and 2, the Blazers shot just 30 percent against McGee at the rim, which has him in similar territory to Serge Ibaka, Toronto’s shot-blocking savant.The combination of jaw-dropping alley-oops on offense and visual deterrence on defense has made McGee popular with fans and teammates all season.“We kind of get caught up in looking for him, sometimes too much when he’s not open,” Stephen Curry said after Game 2. “We feel like he can do something spectacular above the rim.”The only limitation for McGee, who will have a difficult decision to make this off-season when he is a free agent, has been playing time. Coach Steve Kerr limited him to 9.6 minutes a game during the season and that has increased only to 11.5 during the playoffs. The prudence is probably influenced both by McGee’s error-prone past and his injury history, but as Golden State looks to finish off a thus-far uncompetitive first-round series against Portland, it is the goofy center with the 9-foot-6.5-inch standing reach that has the Blazers searching for answers.“We can’t allow JaVale McGee to come in and impact the game the way he has,” Damian Lillard said after Game 2. He added, “We’ve got to try to limit that if we want a chance to win games.”Advertisement