By THE ASSOCIATED PRESSJULY 9, 2017
CHAMBÉRY, France — The Tour de France threw an array of challenges at Chris Froome on Sunday: steep mountain ascents followed by daredevil descents at speeds that exceeded 45 miles per hour, the loss of his top teammate in a crash, a breakdown on his bike, and rivals who tried to make him crack with bursts of acceleration.But Stage 9 — the most grueling, thrilling day of the 104th Tour so far — finished with Froome still wearing the leader’s jersey. By surviving the 112-mile stage, which knocked 12 riders out of the race and left others bloodied and bandaged, Froome, an Englishman, took a big step toward claiming his fourth Tour victory in Paris on July 23.With seven ascents that cumulatively amounted to 15,000 feet, it was the “monster stage” that Froome had predicted would cull the number of contenders. At the start, eight riders were within a minute of Froome in the overall standings. Now only three remain.Among the top names who are out of the race: Richie Porte of Australia and the Welshman Geraint Thomas, Froome’s Sky teammate. Both riders crashed. Thomas, who led the Tour for the first four days, broke his collarbone.AdvertisementPorte, who had been fifth over all, was roaring downhill in pursuit of Froome when he missed a left-hand bend, cartwheeled across the road and bowled over another rider, Dan Martin of Ireland, before slamming into a stony, vine-covered bank. Medics treated Porte and took him by ambulance to a hospital.AdvertisementThe head of the Tour’s medical team, Florence Pommerie, said Porte had seemed “more scared than hurt.”The crashes took some of the shine off what was otherwise an impressive show of resilience by Froome. He placed third in the stage, narrowly beaten in a sprint by Rigoberto Urán of Colombia at the finish in Chambéry, in the Alps. The French rider Warren Barguil was just millimeters behind in second place — so close that he burst into tears because he thought he had won.Even Urán thought Barguil had beaten him to the finish line.“They told me I had won, but I was convinced Warren had won it,” Urán said.For taking third place, Froome was awarded four bonus seconds that allowed him to consolidate his overall lead. With the departure of Thomas, who had been in second place, Fabio Aru of Italy ascended to second, 18 seconds behind Froome. The French rider Romain Bardet, who was the runner-up to Froome at last year’s Tour, is third over all, 51 seconds behind Froome. The only other rider within a minute of Froome is Urán, who jumped from 11th to fourth, 55 seconds off the lead.During Stage 9, seven riders fell so far back that they missed the time cut and are now out of the race.Toward the front, Froome had a crisis of his own. His gears broke on the final climb, forcing him to change bikes just when he was riding furiously in a pack with the other top contenders.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.As Froome was frantically signaling to members of his team who were following in a car that he was in trouble, Aru — who was riding directly behind him — accelerated and pulled away, followed by other top challengers, including Porte.But Aru and the others slowed rather than press their advantage — apparently adhering to the Tour’s unwritten rule that challengers should not attack the race leader when he is in difficulty that is not of his own making.AdvertisementWith a replacement bike and teammates who waited for him, Froome ground his way back into the pack. Higher up the climb, he appeared to swerve across the road and nudge Aru with his right shoulder.But Froome said it was purely accidental, “a bit of a wobble,” not an attempt to reprimand Aru for his earlier attack.“It was in no way a swipe at Aru,” Froome said.“I want to say thank you to the other riders for not attacking,” Froome said. “They waited until I had changed bikes. That’s sporting and pleasing to see.”Aru said that he had not seen Froome’s raised hand, signaling trouble, and that he had attacked at that spot only because that had been his strategy all along.“Then I heard on the radio that Froome had stopped,” Aru said. “When I heard it on the radio, then I stopped.”A version of this article appears in print on July 10, 2017, on Page D4 of the New York edition with the headline: Froome Survives Brutal Day at Tour de France.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.