By MATT STEVENSJULY 7, 2017
A newly released surveillance video of a fatal car crash involving the tennis player Venus Williams shows her S.U.V. entering a Florida intersection.The authorities investigating a fatal car crash involving the tennis star Venus Williams said on Friday that new evidence showed that she had legally entered the Florida intersection where the collision occurred.In an initial police report about the June 9 crash, the Palm Beach Gardens Police Department had said that Williams, 37, was at fault in the crash as a result of “violating the right of way” of the other vehicle involved.According to that report, witnesses told investigators that Williams had run a red light in a Toyota Sequoia S.U.V. just as a vehicle driven by Linda Barson, 67, entered the intersection on a green light. Jerome Barson, 78, was a passenger in his wife’s 2016 Hyundai Accent and died 13 days later after sustaining injuries in the crash.But in a statement distributed on Friday, the police said they had obtained new evidence that shows that “Williams lawfully entered the intersection on a circular green traffic signal” and was traveling north. In addition to their statement, police released a video of the crash.
            Here's the press release update on the Venus Williams crash pic.twitter.com/ooPE1LpKAV The statement says — and the video provided by the police appears to show — that a Nissan Altima then entered the intersection traveling south. The Altima then made a left turn in front of Williams’s vehicle, “causing her to stop advancing through the intersection to avoid a collision,” according to the statement.AdvertisementWilliams then continued straight through the intersection “in accordance” with the law, the statement said.AdvertisementAbout the same time, the vehicle driven west by Ms. Barson approached a red traffic signal, the police said. After the signal had turned green, the police said, Ms. Barson entered the intersection.The video provided by the police shows that Ms. Barson’s vehicle slammed into the passenger side of Williams’s S.U.V. as the S.U.V. appeared to be leaving the intersection.Although the information released Friday appeared to help Williams, Maj. Paul Rogers of the Palm Beach Gardens Police Department said that “the investigation is still underway and a final determination of fault has not been made at this time.”Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.He added that no citations had been issued, no arrests had been made and no charges had been filed in connection with the crash. A daughter of Jerome Barson has filed a wrongful-death lawsuit against Williams, citing unspecified damages.In a statement, Michael Steinger, a lawyer for the Barson family, maintained that Williams was at fault.“There is nothing that disputes Ms. Williams was in the intersection on a red light, and the witnesses clearly confirm the Barsons had a green light and lawfully entered the intersection,” Steinger said in the statement.In a statement posted on Facebook on June 30, Williams said she was devastated “and heartbroken by this accident. My heartfelt condolences go out to the family and friends of Jerome Barson and I continue to keep them in my thoughts and prayers.”Williams, a seven-time Grand Slam singles champion, is the 10th seed at Wimbledon.At a news conference there on Monday, she was asked if there was anything she wished to add to her statement about the crash.
            Venus Williams was asked about events outside of #wimbledon today in her post-match press conference pic.twitter.com/ewnDywOmRy “There are really no words to describe, like, how devastating and — yeah, I’m completely speechless,” she said. “It’s just — yeah, I mean, I’m just. …”She began to sob and then said, “Maybe I should go,” before being led out of the news conference.AdvertisementWilliams advanced to the round of 16 by winning her match on Friday against the 19-year-old Naomi Osaka, 7-6 (3), 6-4. She is scheduled to face another teenager, Ana Konjuh, 19, on Monday for a spot in the quarterfinals.Malika Andrews, Harvey Araton and Christopher Clarey contributed reporting.A version of this article appears in print on July 8, 2017, on Page D5 of the New York edition with the headline: Evidence Bolsters Williams’s Case in Fatal Crash.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.