By THE ASSOCIATED PRESSJULY 7, 2017
CLEVELAND — Terry Francona, the Cleveland Indians manager known for his passion and drive, had a procedure on Thursday to correct an irregular heartbeat that sidelined him for a few games and will prevent him from managing during the All-Star Game next week.Francona, 58, had been experiencing dizziness, fatigue and a rapid heart rate for several weeks. He had a cardiac ablation at Cleveland Clinic, where he is recovering after being admitted Tuesday.He is resting and is expected to be discharged in a day or two, the Indians said on Friday. The plan is for him to resume managing after the All-Star break. Cleveland’s first game after the break is next Friday in Oakland, Calif., which will begin a six-game trip.Francona’s condition had been weighing on the Indians for weeks, but now that doctors have identified the cause of his problems and he has been treated, the team’s mood has improved.Advertisement“Just happy it sounds like he’s got it figured out and taken care of,” reliever Andrew Miller said. “That’s what we want, him to be healthy. He’s so generous with everything, whether it’s his time, or his money, or the way he treats people. Hopefully, he’s taking care of himself right now. Selfishly, we want him back. He’s a big part of the mood in the clubhouse and the way things go.”AdvertisementFrancona and his staff earned the opportunity to lead the American League All-Star team — which features five Indians players — after guiding Cleveland to the World Series last season, the team’s first since 1997.But with Francona unable to manage at the All-Star Game in Miami next week, the job will fall to the Indians bench coach Brad Mills, who has been filling in with Cleveland in Francona’s absence. He will be assisted by Cleveland’s staff and Tampa Bay Rays Manager Kevin Cash, who previously worked for the Indians.Get the big sports news, highlights and analysis from Times journalists, with distinctive takes on games and some behind-the-scenes surprises, delivered to your inbox every week.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.“If T’s not going to be there,” Mills said, referring to Francona, “I think the staff is ready to kind of step up and all share in those duties, and we’re all excited about it.”Francona was forced to leave two games last month when he became lightheaded. He had tests after both episodes, and the team’s president, Chris Antonetti, said this week that doctors had ruled out any major health issues.But during a series last weekend in Detroit, Francona was not feeling well again, and he was admitted to a hospital this week because of abnormal heart readings. Doctors had detected an arrhythmia through a monitor he had been wearing for several weeks.On Thursday, doctors performed an ablation in which a tube is inserted through the leg and guided to the heart. Damaged tissue is then treated with heat, cold or radio energy to help prompt regular heartbeats.Antonetti told Francona, who also missed a game last August after he experienced chest pains, to put his health first. Antonetti acknowledged that Francona can be stubborn, and is perhaps not the ideal patient. However, after speaking with him on Friday, Antonetti said that Francona, known to many as Tito, accepted the team’s short-term plans.Advertisement“It took some dialogue to get there,” Antonetti said. “But I think, as Tito said, ‘I want to get back to doing what I love and what matters most, and that’s managing the Cleveland Indians, and what would put me in the best position to do that for the second half of the season?’“And I think as we walked through that, it made sense for him to get a few days, get out of the hospital and recover,” Antonetti continued. “Not go to Miami. Not be on late flights and have all the obligations that go around the All-Star Game because, that way, when he’s managing Friday, he’s in a really good spot.”The team displayed get-well cards at Progressive Field on Friday for fans to sign and present to Francona, who has led the Indians to a winning record in his previous four seasons with the team.Francona joined the Indians in 2013 after spending one year as a television commentator. He previously had a messy departure in Boston, where he took the Red Sox to two World Series titles in eight seasons.A version of this article appears in print on July 8, 2017, on Page D4 of the New York edition with the headline: Baseball; Francona Won’t Manage A.L. All-Stars.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.