By ADAM SCHUPAKJULY 9, 2017
Colin Montgomerie, 54, is the last Scot to win the Scottish Open, in 1999. Montgomerie grew up playing Royal Troon, where his father, James, was club secretary for 10 years. Russell Knox, 32, now the top-ranked Scot at No. 46 in the world rankings, said he spent nearly every summer day of his youth at Nairn Dunbar Golf Links in the Highlands.“And yet, I never tire of the views of the Moray Firth coast,” he said, referring to an area of the Highlands.Montgomerie and Knox named their top five courses in Scotland, excluding their home layouts. The breadth of their responses — only Kingsbarns Golf Links near St. Andrews was named by both — speaks volumes about the golf links bestowed upon a country long known as the home of the sport.1) Muirfield “It is cool because it has two loops, unlike most links courses that are straight, out and back. So you never play into the same wind direction on two consecutive holes. It is, by far, the best.”2) Royal Dornoch “It is worth your time to make a trip to the north just to play this out-and-back gem, where no two holes are alike. Its domed greens inspired the design approach of architect Donald Ross, and the flowering gorse and majestic views are reason enough to put it on your bucket list.”Advertisement3) Carnoustie “They call it ‘Car-Nastie’ for a reason. Probably the toughest course I’ve ever played, but I can’t wait to get a crack at it for the 2018 Open Championship.”Advertisement4) Gullane No. 1 “I had my best chance — so far — of winning the Scottish Open here in 2015. This is some of Mother Nature’s finest work, and the view from the summit of the seventh tee is one of the best in golf.”5) Kingsbarns “It reminds me a bit of Dornoch. You can see the North Sea from virtually everywhere, and despite being built only in 2000, Kingsbarns looks like it’s been there for hundreds of years.”1) Nairn “Where I won the Scottish Amateur in 1987 and a real hidden gem in the north of the country near Inverness. It’s one of the best links courses in the world.”2) Loch Lomond “The best inland course in Scotland. Tom Weiskopf [the course architect] did a fantastic job. And the setting is spectacular.”Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.3) Turnberry “A links course with the most character in Britain. It’s been ranked No. 1 in Britain by some and deservedly so. The Ailsa Course quite simply is stunning.”4) Old Course at St. Andrews “The most historic golf course in the world and the reason we call Scotland ‘The Home of Golf.’”5) Kingsbarns “A relatively new links course that is less than 20 years old, but already ranked in my top five in Scotland. It’s a course full of the most interesting links shots you will ever see.”A version of this article appears in print on July 10, 2017, in The International New York Times.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.