
On Tennis By                     
 CHRISTOPHER CLAREY
 
JULY 9, 2017
WIMBLEDON, England — Roger Federer is back in the second week at Wimbledon, and he has his usual companions.The rest of the Big Four — Novak Djokovic, Andy Murray and Rafael Nadal — are right there with him. The good old days seem as fresh as ever.“I think one of those four men will hold up the trophy again,” said Boris Becker, a three-time Wimbledon champion who coached Djokovic in 2015 and 2016.Federer, 35, is the senior club member by almost five years. He is the only one who has four young children, all of whom are staying with him and his wife, Mirka, in Wimbledon Village. He is the only one battling a cold in the middle of an unusually torrid English summer.Advertisement“I’ve almost had more problems with my cold than the opponents, even though there were some problems today, and a tiebreaker is always a bit delicate,” Federer said Saturday, still sounding congested after defeating Mischa Zverev in straight sets in the third round.Advertisement“I’m definitely feeling better,” Federer said. “Today I feel 50 percent better than I did two days ago.”The next challenge after a day of rest: a date with Grigor Dimitrov on Wimbledon’s so-called Manic Monday, when all the men’s and women’s fourth-round singles matches are played in a civilized rush.Dimitrov shares a playing style and a management agency with Federer, but their résumés have very little in common beyond that. Federer is chasing his 19th Grand Slam singles title. Dimitrov is still chasing his first, and he is 0-5 against Federer, although they have never played an official match on grass.Federer has now played 98 singles matches at Wimbledon, and has won 87, more than any other man in the Open era. Saturday’s victory was a throwback, with Zverev serving and volleying and inspiring some of the same from Federer.Get the big sports news, highlights and analysis from Times journalists, with distinctive takes on games and some behind-the-scenes surprises, delivered to your inbox every week.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.All tennis is fast-twitch tennis these days, with the power of the players and the equipment. But Federer versus Zverev was only intermittently supersonic. There were baseline rallies on Federer’s service games, exchanges that seemed languid in comparison with the grip-it-and-rip-it approach now in vogue. Federer and Zverev traded sliced backhands, giving spectators ample time to appreciate the ball in flight.Zverev has fine touch, feathery footwork and an artisanal forehand that is more of a poke than a stroke. Against nearly all other opponents, he would have been the flashiest player on the grass on Saturday. But Federer remains No. 1 in that category, even if he is seeded No. 3 at the All England Club.Saturday was not quite full flight for him, but there were plenty of flourishes. Above all, he did an exemplary job of putting the ball again and again in an awkward position for Zverev — the outer limit of his reach, the top of his leap, the tips of his toes.AdvertisementFederer has already proved that he can learn new tennis tricks at an advanced age, having come back from knee surgery and a six-month layoff, the longest of his career, to win the Australian Open in January. He has already proved that he can drive his single-handed backhand with new commitment and find an antidote to Nadal, having beaten him three straight times on hardcourts this year.But winning his eighth Wimbledon title, and his first since 2012, will require plenty more legerdemain and staying power. If he beats Dimitrov, Federer will face either Milos Raonic, a finalist here last year, or Zverev’s outrageously talented younger brother, Alexander, in the quarterfinals. Past that, Federer is likely to face Djokovic, who continued to show signs of resurgence in his straight-sets victory over Ernests Gulbis on Saturday.Calling Federer a clear favorite seems a stretch, but he is certainly a crowd favorite. After his victory on Saturday, the usual horde awaited him below the pedestrian bridge near Centre Court, camera phones at the ready.Federer soon appeared on the bridge, holding his arms wide and smiling down at a following he has acquired over 19 Wimbledons.He exited the stage, but the crowd wanted more and began chanting, “Roger.” Marcus Willis, the unlikely British qualifier who reached the main draw in singles last year and is still in contention in doubles this year, seized the moment instead: He walked onto the bridge and did his best arms-outstretched Federer impression for the fans.“You’ve got to milk it while you can,” Willis said with a wink as he walked toward the players’ garden.For Federer, however, the big moment never seems to end.A version of this article appears in print on July 10, 2017, on Page D3 of the New York edition with the headline: Federer, Wimbledon’s Constant, Is Turning Back Time in Search of an Eighth Title.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.See More »