By MIKE VORKUNOVJAN. 10, 2017
GREENBURGH, N.Y. — Derrick Rose returned to the Knicks on Tuesday after a confusing day away from the team that left his teammates and club executives concerned about his well-being.It turned out that Rose had traveled to Chicago, his hometown, to be with his mother without initially letting anyone on the Knicks know. And in the process, he missed the Knicks’ game against New Orleans on Monday night at Madison Square Garden, where they were run off the floor by the Pelicans.On Tuesday, Rose practiced with the Knicks and then spoke to reporters. The team fined him an undisclosed amount but did not suspend him, and he was set to be back in uniform on Wednesday night for a game against the 76ers in Philadelphia. He could even start, Knicks Coach Jeff Hornacek said.Still, how Monday’s incident will affect his status on the team remains to be seen.In his comments to reporters, Rose attributed his absence to a family issue that had nothing to do with the Knicks. “This was the first time that I felt like that emotionally, and I had to be with my family,” he said.AdvertisementRose had taken part in the team’s pregame shootaround on Monday but was nowhere to be found as game time approached. The Knicks announced that he was not with the club but did not say why. At that point, the Knicks did not have an explanation.AdvertisementDuring the game, Rose finally connected with the organization, talking to Knicks General Manager Steve Mills by telephone and then exchanging text messages with Hornacek after the game. On Tuesday, Hornacek spoke to reporters after Rose did and tried to offer some sympathy for his player.When it comes to family matters, Hornacek said, “are you thinking about anything else at that point?”He added: “Your concern is for your family. He went back. Yeah, we would have loved for him to at least call and tell us that. But it is what it is.”Get the big sports news, highlights and analysis from Times journalists, with distinctive takes on games and some behind-the-scenes surprises, delivered to your inbox every week.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.Rose also addressed his teammates Tuesday and spoke with Phil Jackson, the team’s president. Jackson did not speak with reporters Tuesday, nor did he do so after Monday night’s game, when it was still unclear, at least to the public, where Rose was.In the past, Rose has pointed to his mother, Brenda, as a strong influence in his life. Although he acknowledged on Tuesday that he could have acted more thoughtfully when he left for Chicago — and admitted, too, that he had declined to answer the first phone calls from the Knicks — he insisted that he was preoccupied solely with family issues.“Like I said, basketball didn’t have anything to do with this,” he said. “Losing games or, I don’t know, whatever y’all thought, it didn’t have anything to do with basketball at all.”Both Rose and Hornacek disputed the idea that Rose’s absence was related to any possible friction between the two.AdvertisementWhile Rose, 28, has put up decent numbers with the Knicks this season and has generally been healthy, he has had a series of challenging moments.He missed several weeks of training camp because he was a defendant in a civil trial in Los Angeles in which he was accused of sexual assault. (He was found not liable.) As the regular season has progressed, Rose, who is not a strong defender, has seen his playing time occasionally curtailed by Hornacek. Most notably, he was benched for consecutive fourth quarters on Friday and Saturday as Hornacek turned to an undrafted rookie, Ron Baker, to play point guard in Rose’s place.In the first of those two games, at Milwaukee, Baker led a rousing fourth-quarter comeback that gave the Knicks their only victory from their last nine games.Rose will be a free agent at the end of the season, and the Knicks, who acquired him from Chicago in an off-season trade, may opt to look elsewhere rather than try to re-sign him. But he appeared undaunted on Tuesday when he was asked if he thought the past 24 hours had hurt his relationship with the organization.“That’s something that you probably would have to ask them,” he said. “I really don’t know how they feel.”He said that when he talked to the Knicks about Monday’s events, “everything was cool.”He added, “They understood.”A version of this article appears in print on January 11, 2017, on Page B12 of the New York edition with the headline: Rose Returns, Citing a Family Issue for His Absence.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.