

      By THE NEW YORK TIMES

JAN. 9, 2017

In a wild second half, Clemson scored with 1 second left in the game to stun Alabama, 35-31, and claim college football’s national championship.
Hi, Joe Drape here. I once had the college beat for the Times and covered the first Bowl Championship Series  title game.Back in the day, as the kids say, a compendium of human polls and computer rankings, including the long and thankfully gone New York Times Computer Ranking, matched the nation’s two best teams. It was Tennessee over Florida State 23-16. It turned out that game was a small step for the bowls, but a giant leap for playoff-kind that led us to these playoffs.Along with Marc Tracy and Victor Mather, I will be sharing my wit and wisdom about America’s real national pastime.I am settled in here at Raymond James Stadium in Tampa (next to my colleague Sam Borden, who will be writing the game story). A few players are starting to warm up on the field. I can’t believe I’m saying this, although perhaps I should not be surprised, but my strong suspicion is there are more Clemson than Alabama fans here tonight. In fairness Alabama has played at least one playoff game in six of the past eight seasons, including this one.I just returned from field level and it is hopping. I particularly appreciate Clemson’s orange-and-white uniforms, with purple only in one place on their pants, and the end zones painted black with each team’s names.Am honored to be joined by my colleague Joe Drape. I covered the first College Football Playoff national championship game, in 2015; Joe covered the first Bowl Championship Series national championship game, in 1999. Joe — good game?Marc, it was a good game and a massive upset as Tennessee and quarterback Tee Martin beat Florida State and their 26-year old quarterback Chris Weinke. It was the era of Free Shoes U and Bobby Dadgum Bowden.A favorite joke of my father’s, from vintage Saturday Night Live, had Bill Murray on Weekend Update right after the pope-who-lasted-one-month died, beginning a joke: “Well, the pope died—” and then interrupting himself: “Hey, we did this joke last month!” It feels a little similar with the same two teams playing each other for the second consecutive year. Not only is this the first consecutive years rematch in title game history; it is the first rematch, period.Which is an especially amazing stat because this is an oligarchic sport: only … hold on a minute … 16 programs have even played in one of these 19 title games.That’s an amazing stat and, if you look back, it has been dominated by Southern powers - Florida State, Miami, Texas, Auburn, L.S.U., and Alabama of course. I know Notre Dame and Ohio State have shown up on occasion, but there is a reason football is king in the South.The bad thing about tonight is that we don’t have a red carpet to kill time while we are waiting for kick off.Among the great joys of a big college football game is how gamblers see it.  Our guys in The Upshot call it the predictive markets. I call it sharp or wise guy money. Here’s a few indicators before you pull your trigger on the off-shore account from our friends at William Hill in Nevada.
Joe, what do you make of the majority of the money being on Clemson to cover? I imagine Alabama is the “public” team, the one that casual fans instinctively put money on (a la the Steelers, the Cowboys, the Packers). I will say that it seems consistent to bet on Clemson to cover and for OVER — Clemson would like to make this a shootout, it means they’ll have overcome Alabama’s insane defense and forced true freshman quarterback Jalen Hurts to throw the ball.Lee Corso, who predicts the winner at the end of every GameDay broadcast, just put on an elephant head. He is going with the team from Tuscaloosa.To me, the key battle tonight will be between Clemson quarterback Deshaun Watson and the murderous Alabama defense. Watson will be the most explosive quarterback faced all year by Alabama, and he can pass and run. But he has also been intercepted a mind-boggling 17 times this year, second in the nation. He’s going to have to be accurate tonight or the game may get ugly quickly.A reminder that President Obama called for a college football playoff shortly after being elected in 2008 (he wanted eight teams!). Might be a tougher part of his legacy to repeal than the Affordable Care Act.Gambling wise, the numbers say bettors believe Clemson is the value. They are basically 2 to 1 on the money line, which means if they win straight up, your $100 nets you $200. It’s not dumb money — as the Wizards of Odds out there call it. As far as state universities go, Clemson is small so be-true-to your-school ain’t moving the line. Like Victor says, the Tigers bring a something the Tide haven’t seen yet and the reward outweighs the risk.After the rather listless quartet of N.F.L. games over the weekend, we have high hopes for a better contest here in the Natty.They released an eagle during the National Anthem, presumably in reference to the national bird … but I have to wonder how Alabama’s players and fans felt about the mascot of their great rival flying into the stadium #WarEaglePeyton Manning has a huge head. Steve Spurrier, the ole’ ball coach, was one of the most entertaining sports figures I’ve ever covered.And the karma has returned! Spurrier was just booed as he walked out for the coin toss. Until midway through last season, he was the coach of Clemson’s archrival, the South Carolina Gamecocks.And we’re off! First play, a deflected pass from Jalen Hurts.Gutsy having Alabama’s true freshman quarterback begin with a pass into the flat.That’s why ‘Bama is vulnerable. ESPN’s graphic shows Hurt would be the first true rookie quarterback to win the championship.I believe second — 1980s Oklahoma had a true freshman quarterback. Then again, they were just running the Wishbone so it was pretty much semantics.And Clemson running back Wayne Gallman picks up 12 yards. That’s nearly a fifth the number of yards Alabama gives up on average over an entire game.Reuben Foster with the roughing-the-passer penalty. He is the defense’s leader in tackles and general leader.Clemson, at the 41 and on fourth-and-one, seemed to consider going for it before thinking better of it. Interestingly, they appeared to be moving toward an empty backfield: to pick up a yard, they would rather throw than run versus a defense that gave up 62 yards per game this season.Like, trying to shove it down Bama’s throat out of the box on 4th down.And Clemson goes for it and runs on a pitch to Gallman — and doesn’t get it. Meet Alabama’s defense.Okay. Bama holds. It’s on!And a roughing-the-passer penalty now goes against Clemson. You can’t gift Alabama’s offense yards when they may struggle enough to get them on their own. Notably, Hurts has now had two passes deflected.Alabama takes a 7-0 lead. Running back Bo Scarbrough, who had 180 yards and 2 touchdowns last game, ran for a 25-yard touchdown. They just showed Steve Sarkisian, who’s the new offensive coordinator for Bama after Lane Kiffin left. Worth noting, not cruelly, that this is a renewal for the former BYU quarterback. He was fired from U.S.C. after one of the newspapers there found evidence of his excessive drinking, including a tab for Tequila shots before a game.Bama draws first blood, which was consistent with the William Hill Line. They were  -140 to score first vs. +190 for ClemsonAlabama kicker Adam Griffith, a senior, was involved in maybe the most famous kicking play in college football history. If you’re an Alabama fan it’s one you’d like to forget.https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=HqIBNX0CXDcA terrific 34-yard kick return by Clemson’s Artavis Scott is negated by a 15-yard personal foul penalty.Okay, Clemson absorbed the first blow and is punching back.Clemson gets a first down by going to Mike Williams, the wide receiver whom commentator Gary Danielson told me has a Dez Bryant-type body.   Photo        How Clemson Can Beat Alabama (Praying Is Optional)  Limiting scoring opportunities for the Crimson Tide’s opportunistic defense, throwing deep balls and rattling Alabama’s true freshman quarterback, Jalen Hurts, are key.   The New York Times    Limiting scoring opportunities for the Crimson Tide’s opportunistic defense, throwing deep balls and rattling Alabama’s true freshman quarterback, Jalen Hurts, are key.The New York TimesMarc has done some tremendous work on Alabama. I think the Tuscaloosa Times may come get him. But his stuff on defense it spot on.They tried going deep on third and short to Deon Cain. It goes over his head, incomplete — but I like the call. They have the speedy Cain, who was injured for last season’s championship game, one-on-one. Between a completion and a pass interference call, I like the odds.Joe and I once had a good meal in Tuscaloosa. Like that town. Your commercial-time reading is Joe’s examination of how Alabama makes all this money off its football team:    Photo        Alabama Is Rolling in Cash, With Tide Lifting All Boats  Over the past decade, the success of Alabama’s football program has become a powerful engine for the university’s economic and academic growth.   The New York Times    Over the past decade, the success of Alabama’s football program has become a powerful engine for the university’s economic and academic growth.The New York TimesHave any Alabama-based football teams in the past had any luck with massive running backs named Bo? Scarbrough’s got five carries for 33 yards and a touchdown (and a first down just there).Bo is going to cause them problems all night.Shameless promotion time: Alabama is on its own 41, while Alabama Coach Nick Saban is currently standing at about the Clemson 45. Saban stands behind opposing defenses during games to see what they’re doing, as I reported:    Photo        Nick Saban Is Not Just Alabama’s Coach; He’s Also Its Super-Scout  Saban can often be found on the sideline observing the other team’s defense, alerting his staff to ways that help the Crimson Tide keep winning.   The New York Times    Saban can often be found on the sideline observing the other team’s defense, alerting his staff to ways that help the Crimson Tide keep winning.The New York TimesClemson is lucky a couple of penalties have stymied drives.And that’s the third deflected pass from Hurts. Alabama will need to punt. Enough of these throws to the “flat,” at the short side of the field, and one of them is going to get picked off and returned all the way.And now a tipped punt! Won’t be such a disaster for Alabama as Clemson will start at its own 37. But if I’m Alabama I’m scared they were able nearly to cause havoc on special teams.And again Clemson tries to go deep to Cain, and Watson overthrows him. Cain had “separation,” as they say, on his quarterback. If they keep doing this, they just might hit one.What we have been seeing all year, Alabama defense being opportunistic with the takeaway.That’s the 28th takeaway for the Tide’s defense. Pretty remarkable.Sophomore wide receiver Calvin Ridley, who thrived last year under the traditional-style quarterback Jake Coker, drops a pass from Hurts. Not the easiest catch, but should have made it. On the next play, Hurts has to throw it away and Alabama will have to punt from Clemson’s 42.If I were an Alabama fan I wouldn’t mention this for fear of jinxing it, but I am paid to be objective so: with Clemson starting on their own one-yard-line, these are ripe conditions for a safety.There have now been 70 yards worth of penalties on both teams, and we’re not quite through the first quarter. In case you were planning on going to bed early tonight.I have to say that I hate the Watson sneak. Clemson should either go to the edge or give it to a big back.So at the end of the first quarter, it’s Alabama 7-Clemson 0, with the Tigers driving from deep in their own territory. Pretty much what we expected: both teams struggling on offense with one thanks to facing a world-beating defense, the other thanks to a true freshman, throwing-challenged quarterback working with a brand-new offensive coordinator.Marc, who’s Clemson’s offensive coordinator? He’s utterly crossed up.Tony Elliott, a former Clemson player. It used to be Chad Morris, now the head coach of your alma mater, Southern Methodist.Well, I can see the problem. My alma mater has more signs of life since Chad got there. Tony can’t run inside with Watson. He needs to get Watson outside. He needs to get his receivers outside.I think if they keep running Watson — they asked for him to run a lot less this year than last, when he was also a Heisman finalist — they are asking for an injury. In the first title game of the Saban era, after the 2009 season, Texas’ Colt McCoy was injured and Alabama never looked back.Listening to Kirk Herbstreit who has passion and more knowledge than me, but he’s giving Alabama the edge that they haven’t earned yet. It’s 7-0 and Clemson is giving them an argument. Now at all levels, I’ve watched talent wear down their opponents. But it looks like Clemson is as talented and deep as the Tide.I hear you, but, and I don’t have the figures directly in front of me, Alabama’s cumulative second-half scoring margin is utterly insane. They have been down several times this year — to Ole Miss, to Texas A&M — but you ideally would bury them early.There’s Ridley with a nice run after the catch. We haven’t been able to see him strut his stuff with the “dual-threat” quarterback Hurts, but he is extremely talented. Someone for you to draft on your 2018 NFL fantasy team (he’s currently a sophomore).Alabama 14-Clemson 0And there’s a dominant touchdown run from Bo Scarbrough for 37 yards. Was he touched? You can feel all us experts in the press box collectively saying, “Well, yeah.“Wow! Smart drive. Big Back. How many has the Tide sent on to the N.F.L.? They just showed Dabo on the sideline and he knows what he’s up against. It’s early in the second. Clemson needs to breathe and mount a drive.Joe, Saban-era running backs include Mark Ingram, T.J. Yeldon, Trent Richardson, and Derrick Henry. Bo Scarbrough will make a nice pro back, but not before he makes a nice college back in next season, his junior year. Did I mention Alabama yesterday secured the commitment of the top-rated high school prospect in the country, a running back? Roll Tide, indeed.Clemson looking a bit more like the team that lost to Pitt and barely beat Troy than the side that stomped Ohio State last week.Playing Alabama will do that.Scarbrough, by the way, was Alabama’s fourth-leading rusher this year. Had injuries. This is what Alabama’s fourth-leading rusher looks like.Important announcement: the special treat in the press box appear to be customizable doughnuts. Good thing, as sportswriters are a notoriously healthy breed who could use the fried food.Fifth (or is it fourth?) deflected pass from Hurts of the night. The worrying thing is they are interceptions waiting to happen. Hurts can be incomplete all he wants and has been good about throwing the ball out-of-bounds sometimes. Alabama does not need him to have a big game.And Alabama punts and Clemson will get the ball at their 13. The time to put together a good drive is: Right. Now. And though I’m no ball coach, you’ve got to try to throw it deep and hope for the best.And there’s your game-breaking play for Clemson: Watson finds Cain on a short slant and he runs and runs for 43 yards.Next play Watson went for Cain, incomplete, the Clemson sideline wanted a flag but didn’t get it, but the one-on-one receiver matchups are the only way Clemson can do something.Alabama 14-Clemson 7Touchdown, Clemson, Watson runs it in.Boom! Watson  on the edge. Thank you. Let’s see Dabo.  Go Dabo … Go Dabo … Go Dabo.That play was misdirection: presnap runner to the right, Watson goes left, gets a crucial lead block.The halftime score of last year’s 45-40 Alabama victory was a modest 14-14. Could very easily be that again.Joe, where do you think this game is headed?Clearly if Clemson continues to be able to make stuff happen on offense, Alabama might be hard-pressed to answer except for continued Scarbrough runs.And there’s Watson finding Mike Williams for 20 yards. Clemson moving.And on third down, Watson is … sacked. The recipe is clear: pass the ball, deep, to one of your best receivers, without holding onto it long. (I am half-joking in the sense that is much easier said than done. But really.)Read all Marc’s stories about the Alabama defense. They are probably the best bunch in the history of college football.He means my stories, folks. (He means Alabama’s defense, which gave up 62 yards rushing per game, with second-place being over 97.)If you are Dabo, you want to shut the Tide down for 2 plus minutes and get in the locker room down 14-7.Amen. And here’s the thing: as super-human as Scarbrough is, if the defense knows that’s your only weapon, they’ll stop it. He just gained one yard, for third-and-seven.And Scarbrough is taken down for a loss. Even Alabama’s offense needs some kind of second dimension. (Well, or, they could just keep the score as is, which is not that impossible.)Lousy decision on the punt return by Clemson. Let it bounce. Now the offense is pinned deep in their own territory.Instead Clemson starts with 1:04 left on their 5 … and Alabama has all three timeouts.And Alabama uses a timeout to stop the clock.Clemson should have ran it on 1st down.A tipped pass from Watson is nearly intercepted. That could happen to one of Hurts’s! 44 seconds left in half, Clemson still deep in own territory.Dabo, my main man, just run out the clock.Watson took a nasty hit there. I’m with Joe. No shame in heading to the locker room down seven to Alabama.I don’t get this. Go to the locker room!Clemson punts. One of those low ones, like when you chip it and instead you top the ball and it rolls up to the green. (I’m making golf analogies?!) With 19 seconds left, Alabama (will?) take a knee.Halftime: Albama 14-Clemson 7Feels trite to say you’d rather be Alabama than Clemson, but, yeah, Alabama can protect a lead. I am not convinced Alabama has anything it can do on offense other than feed Bo Scarbrough, and Alabama’s non-Scarbrough offense has 107 yards and 0 points. Meanwhile Alabama did get a turnover but it was not a hugely consequential one. And Clemson was the last team to score. Edge: Alabama, but the game is closer than I thought it would be. I thought either Clemson would come out guns blazing or would just have nothing. It’s been closer to the latter, but I simply didn’t expect Alabama’s offense to be so predictable. Joe, what say you?I’m with Marc. Those of us with Clemson investments wanted to see the score 14-7 the other way or better. But this game is far from decided. Alabama is used to seeing “Losers” in the eye of the opponents at this time in the game. But Clemson is not there at all. They’ve stymied Hurt, and figured out Bo. Likewise, Saban and his staff haven’t let the Tigers do anything at all that they wanted. It’s up for grabs.And at 10:21 Eastern, Clemson returns to the field to begin second-half warmups.  Almost impossible to imagine this game ending before midnight, between an Eastern time zone fanbase and a Central time zone fanbase. Won’t someone please think of the children? (And the sportswriters?)My son, Jack, who knows his football just said, Dad, “Can you tape the rest of the game.” It’s bed time for Bonzo and anyone else who is sane.Just so I can sound like a hack analyst first: Big drive coming up.After kickoff, Clemson takes over at the 27. Let’s see who won the halftime-adjustment battle.Clemson fumble, Alabama recovers. Not quite a touchdown this time, but closer to one. Alabama starts deep in Clemson territory.The fumble was both forced and recovered by Ryan Anderson, the bulky pass-rusher who had a pick-six versus Washington on Dec. 31.Marc will tell you, but the Tide has had to have set some type of record on takeaways in college football this season.Actually in terms of pure takeaways they did not lead the league, though they were up there. But in terms of four scores, it wasn’t even close, no.They actually asked Hurts to do something there, trying to find Ridley in the end zone from the 18. They’ll be safe to make sure they at least come away with 3.Alabama 17-Clemson 7Hurts completes it to O.J. Howard, the tight end who so dominated Clemson in last year’s title game, but not for quite enough, so they kick the field goal. This is unfolding like a Ravens-Bengals-Steelers-Browns game. Defense, field goals, defense, keeping it close. I’ve said this to the guys in the office: Nick Saban is the best coach in any sport at any level.Certainly the most accomplished at any level other than Geno Auriemma, in a somewhat different competitive environment (even more top-heavy than college football). We know he’s won 5 national titles (4 at Alabama, 1 at a previous stop at L.S.U.). Here’s one, though: 5-0 in title games. (Auriemma is, I believe, 11-0, so.)Like I said, best ever at any level in any sport.  Geno is great; he played Pat Summitt two or three times a year. That was a battle. No disrespect to the other coaches and program in womens hoops - our colleagues Jere Longman and Harvey Araton have made the public understand what upper levels of acheivement those programs attained. But college football is deeper in talent and history and tradition so it’s no comparison.Nice catch by Clemson’s Deon Cain on the sideline for 14 yards. Cain now has 57 yards receiving.Watson scrambles for another first down. He’s gaining 4 yards on scrambles that against most teams would be good for 10. But Clemson will take it.Hunter Renfrow is emerging as Clemson’s move-the-chains wide receiver, averaging just 8 yards a catch, but he has 7, several for first downs — including just now. (Though they are now reviewing it, and the “ooohs” in the press box at the replay suggest it will be overturned.)Not sure I like the replay in these circumstances. Rather see a challenge.Joe, who was S.M.U.’s biggest rival in the Southwest Conference when you were there (and they still had a team)? What game did you get most excited anticipating?My Mustangs played for the Frying Pan against T.C.U., which is still true. The current Horned Frogs Coach Gary Patterson is a former Kansas high school coach and we share various friends and mentors. But like now: We hate the Aggies and Long Horns.A pooch punt by the quarterback! Bill Belichick is happy.And now Alabama starts with teh ball at their own 5.ArDarius Stewart just got his mouthpiece knocked out — literally — by the hit from linebacker Ben Boulware. Incomplete pass.New research is shedding light on just what happens inside the brain during blows to the head.The New York TimesBoth teams are having that caffeine lull. They are taking a breather. Alabama thinks they are in control. Clemson is tired. Who fights through the third quarter matters.… spoke way too soon. Bad punt. Clemson will start at Alabama’s 42.You really hate to see a punter have a say in a big game like this. He’s a kid.An amateur kid!Another review. Speaking of caffeine …You think these refs are from below the Mason Dixon line?They are Big 12 refs, I believe.OK … does that not mean they are from somewhere else?Alabama 17-Clemson 14Well well well. Clemson touchdown, as Watson finds Renfrow, who zig-zags his way to the end zone. Massive turn. Let Watson get it to the the little guy, Renfrow. It’s a new game.So we most certainly have ourselves a ballgame. I don’t think it’s merely self-interest that makes me think this would be better if, at 11pm, there were 7 minutes left in the fourth quarter, not the third. Like that isn’t just a cynical reporter talking, right?Ratings have been good this season, particularly compared to the drop-off the N.F.L. seemed to experience. They do respond to such things — witness the about-face on having the semifinals on New Year’s Eve two out of every three years. If the length of games is ever seen to cause lower ratings, they will figure something out. Until then …OK. Forgive me if I’m wrong. But Hunter Renfrow will never play a down in the N.F.L. But he will have the most successful Budweiser distributorship/Allstate Insurance Office in South Carolina. That’s what all the good college programs do: pay it on the back end.Alabama feeding Bo in a slightly original way, on a short pass. No gain. 3rd-and-10.You have to catch that Dieter. Look at Saban. He’d cut him if he could.Hurts makes a good pass! I’m grading on a curve here. Receiver can’t hang on. 3 and out. There was a time, in the early second quarter, where Alabama would have been relieved to put its defense on the field. Not sure now.And Clemson moves the chains. I think people rooting for Alabama have ample cause to be nervous.Watson takes a HUGE hit on a scramble for 14 yards that is just short of a first.Nice hit; nice effort by Watson. Go for it Dabo. You can get a yard.But go for it Dabo did not, and Alabama gets the ball at its 21.Scarbrough rushes twice for a first down. Best thing that can be said is Alabama’s defense is getting a breather.… and now Scarbrough seems hurt. He has lots of injury issues. Duane Harris, the starting tailback for most of the season, is in reserve. He would be fine in most situations. In this situation, where running is all Alabama can do? I dunno.Scarbrough walked off the field on his own strength. Seems like maybe an ankle? He is on the sideline. (As is Derrick Henry, last year’s Heisman-winning running back, now of the N.F.L.”s Tennessee Titans.)Okay. Derrick Henry needs a makeover. Look at my mug, and I’m the last one to offer advice. But like my hometown of Kansas City, his hair has more fountains than Rome, and his clothes cover more avenues than Paris.Hurts had Ridley open just there, and threw it short. I saw Alabama play Texas A&M in October. The best thing that can be said for him is that he hasn’t (yet) turned the ball over. What’s crazy is that might be enough. I don’t think Alabama can afford that, though.Alabama 24-Clemson 14And wow. O.J. Howard, who killed Clemson last year, is WIDE open on left sideline, and Hurts puts it there for a 68-yard touchdown.To give you an idea: Howard has 489 yards in 14 games this season. Against Clemson last year, he has 208 yards in one game.Yes, a big play. Like Marc says, a familiar one.In a second I will queue up all the media day quotes of Clemson Coach Dabo Swinney saying they’ll cover O.J. Howard this time.Here’s what I could find on short notice. Swinney: “Last year I watched that No. 88 run up and down the field on us, and that was my number at Alabama, and then I come into this game with 88 wins. Maybe we can come out on the other side this year. Maybe the karma will be on our side.”Great find, Marc!I’m not going to litigate the specifics of that pass interference call, but yeah, when you put good receivers in one-on-one deep coverages, you’re going to get some. Helpful for Clemson.Give me the flag, please. Only Phyllis in Musca whatever is arguing that call!It’s Mulga! And two seasons ago I visted her (she lives in Birmingham now)    Photo        Pride in Success of Saban Resounds Across Alabama   Since Saban became the team’s coach after the 2006 season, the Crimson Tide have gone 91-16, a dynasty that has benefited fans, radio hosts, entrepreneurs and the university itself.   The New York Times    Since Saban became the team’s coach after the 2006 season, the Crimson Tide have gone 91-16, a dynasty that has benefited fans, radio hosts, entrepreneurs and the university itself.The New York TimesWhen I went to Tuscaloosa, I drove from Atlanta and listened to Paul Finebaum and she called. It was June. Please go to Alabama and listen to him to understand Bama football. it’s like following the Pope in Rome.It must be said: Watson is great. (Well, a two-time Heisman finalist, so not breaking news.) Beautiful back-shoulder pass for another first down.Clemson is back in the red zone thanks to Watson’s terrific play.That is a sneaky good screen pass by the Tigers!So at the end of the third quarter, it’s Alabama 24, Clemson 14, but Clemson knocking on the end zone door.Marc, this is a very good championship game. Up in the air. Dabo has matched wits with Nick and, what I want to read from you next summer, is how Dabo and Clemson has brought in players that rival Bama in a relatively short time.Alabama 24-Clemson 21Touchdown, Clemson. Fade to Mike Williams, who broke free of his cornerback. Boom. Eleven touchdowns this year for No. 7. You can’t keep the great ones down. Have no idea what Saban and his defensive backs are complaining about.Attendance tonight: 74,512. A Raymond James Stadium record, we’re told! And it’s a bad day at Clemson’s home field (much less Alabama’s).Some day I'l tell you about how I almost got arrested sneaking into Clemson’s Memorial Stadium to rub Frank Howard’s rock. I rubbed it. Me and my buddies had an understanding cop. We were young. About 40.Around this time last year Alabama had a 95-yard touchdown on a kickoff return. Clemson is taking no chances, kicking it short, ceding some potential field position in order to make Alabama’s offense works.There was another of those Hurts throws to the flat, probably the closest yet to a pick-six. They can’t keep trying those and expect not to have that happen.Nice shoestring tackle.Touchback, Clemson will get the ball. Reminder that Alabama has not yet done what it has done in many games, which is score on defense.Alabama just got a sack on a blitz. They might see something in Clemson’s offensive line — though just as likely they see that Watson will pick them apart if they give him too much time.Clemson goes three and out.Small detail: both teams in this quarter will be trying to score in end zones with their own fans. So expect them to have a tougher time trying to get out of their half of the field.Josh Jacobs carrying the ball. 84 carries this whole season entering tonight.Alabama now 2-of-13 on third downs. As Larry David wouldn’t say: Pretty, pretty, pretty bad.Okay Marc. We see the young quarterback there. Bama is tired right now. None of us are used to seeing that.Nine minutes: Clemson has not made any major mistakes. Nor have they asserted their will. If I’m in Vegas, I get 3-1 they are going to score on this drive and empty my pockets.I feel like Alabama has slowly figured them out on defense over the last few drives.Clemson has plenty of time. Get the first down here and regroup. Good timeout.I wouldn’t worry about them getting tired, they all lost weight before this season, they use substitutions very wisely (me from last year:    Photo        Wave After Wave of Defenders Help Alabama Roll On  The Crimson Tide, allowing just 13.4 points per game, have turned their surplus of talent into intensely specialized platoons, allowing them to counter any particular offensive look.   The New York Times    >)The Crimson Tide, allowing just 13.4 points per game, have turned their surplus of talent into intensely specialized platoons, allowing them to counter any particular offensive look.The New York TimesAnd they do get the first down.Give me a flag!Dabo going nuts about not getting a pass interference call, and that’s after a sideline warning.Not unsympathetic … although that last touchdown probably should have been a penalty on Clemson.Ok if that pass had been completed it would have been one of the great plays of all time: Watson evading a shoulda-been sack and finding his tight end up and on the other side of the field. Instead, third and 10.Wow. Jordan Leggett, that tight end, was open on third. Not a great pass, and not a great catch. Incomplete. Clemson will punt.Like Dieter for Bama, got to catch those.What Alabama doesn’t have, besides a good-throwing quarterback, is a true specimen like Julio Jones or Amari Cooper, both fast and massive.Which, of course they don’t. Those are once-in-a-class players, but actually Alabama usually gets them! In this game the player most like that is Clemson’s Mike Williams.And another three-and-out for Alabama. 18th punt of the game.Clemson marching …INCREDIBLE catch by Mike Williams, who is hyped. Clemson rushing up to the line. Now there’s a flag.Unsporstmanlike conduct on Alabama lineman Da’Ron Payne. Another 15 yards. Wow!Clemson has plenty of time and is doing a nice job of controlling the drive. Williams goes and gets that. Big flag on Bama: Breathe deep Tigers, this is yours.And now they are reviewing the catch.Catch! Catch!Clear catch. No clue why they reviewed.Watson runs and dives, barely short of touchdown.Oh my, great run by Watson. Now take your time and bang it in Clemson.He’s not in.This is already the game I and most others did not foresee: close, not especially low-scoring but not a shooout.Clemson 28-Alabama 24Touchdown, Clemson.Offsides. Declined.The Clemson fans are going nuts, justifiably.They are 4:38 from the promised land.And on that note I am heading down to the field. It’s been a pleasure!OK. It ain’t over but the sharp money on Clemson looks good. Marc is the best college sports writer in the land. Smart, fun, savvy. Look forward to your column tomorrow.You don’t see Bama teams scrambling like you do now. Snuffed out screen.Give Hurts credit for keeping it alive. 4th and 1.What you expected: Bama up the middle for a yard. It aint’ over.Alabama 31, Clemson 28Oh my, the freshman Hurts for a 30-yard scramble up the middle for a touchdown.All the credit goes to the freshman quarterback - a hard throw, a trick play and a scramble. Clemson can win on a touchdown with plenty of time. Tie on a field goal.Fuller almost broke the kickoff for Clemson.Watson down field to Williams, remarkable catch. Hold on folks.Clemson has a minute left. Watson with a short 3rd down. A quick pass and he gets it.Are they playing for overtime?Watson to Leggett. Timeout with 14 seconds left. Fire to the end zone, Dabo.This is a great finish. Clemson on the 9-yard-line, with a shot at the end zone.Watson overthrows.We got 9 seconds left. They are taking one more shot.Watson gets a flag on Williams.2-yard line now. How good is this?Clemson 35, Alabama 31
1 second left. Watson touchdown.My man Renfrow is going to be the most popular Budweiser distributor in South Carolina. Love it that he’s a walk-on. He’s a legend right this very minute.Clemson 34, Bama 31 
I was a little off on my final. But Tigers cover on the money line. Crush on the spread.Folks, a game worthy of a championship. Two great teams. Who wants to know more about Dabo besides me? My friend Marc Tracy will bring that and a whole lot more to all of us who are interested in college sports. Thanks for hanging with us. As they say in Clemson: We are No. 1.It’s the ugliest victory dance by a man who has no rhythm but a lot of heart. He’ll be doing it again now.https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=dFEGxQvWJG4For our complete game report go here:Clemson’s Hunter Renfrow scored to deny Alabama its fifth title in eight years.The New York TimesAdvertisement