By THE ASSOCIATED PRESSMARCH 26, 2016
TAMPA, Fla. —  The Tampa Bay Lightning won a big game but lost a key player.Tyler Johnson and Jason Garrison scored 23 seconds apart midway through the third period, and the Lightning beat the Islanders, 7-4, on Friday night.Tampa Bay defenseman Anton Stralman left in the first with a broken left fibula after being checked by Anders Lee. Stralman will miss the rest of the regular season, but Coach Jon Cooper would not rule out a return during the playoffs.“Naturally, if anybody gets hurt, especially someone like Anton, it’s a stinger,” Cooper said. “But I’m not going to sit here and say, One of our defensemen got hurt — that’s it, we’re mailing it in. No way. Stral would be the first one to tell you, Boys, let’s go extend the season so I can come back. That will be our goal.”Cooper said Stralman had been rattled by the injury.“Hopefully, it can heal quick,” the Tampa Bay captain Steven Stamkos said. “It’s a tough bounce for our group right now, especially heading down the stretch and into the playoffs.”AdvertisementJohnson had a go-ahead rebound goal at 10 minutes 9 seconds of the third period before Garrison ended a 26-game goal drought and put the Lightning up, 6-4. Garrison also had two assists after going 18 games without a point.AdvertisementTampa Bay also got goals from Nikita Kucherov, Vladislav Namestnikov, Stamkos, Andrej Sustr and Victor Hedman, who had an empty-netter. Ondrej Palat had three assists.The Lightning host Florida on Saturday night with first place in the Atlantic Division at stake, as both teams have 91 points.Brock Nelson, Shane Prince, Johnny Boychuk and Nikolay Kulemin scored for the Islanders. They remained a point behind third-place Pittsburgh in the Metropolitan Division.“It’s embarrassing to give up seven goals at this time of year,” Islanders center Frans Nielsen said. “It’s not a good feeling right now.”Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.Kulemin got the Islanders even at 4-4 just 19 seconds after Sustr had scored for the Lightning at 6:02 of the third. Sustr ended a 25-game drought.Tampa Bay tied a team record for the two fastest goals and took a 2-1 lead when Kucherov (13:42) and Namestnikov (13:51) scored nine seconds apart in the first. Kucherov tied his career high with his 29th goal on a nifty redirection before Namestnikov beat Thomas Greiss from the low left circle.Greiss made 35 saves.“You’re not going to win many games in this league giving up seven goals,” the Islanders captain John Tavares said. “We battled back a few times. Obviously, the back-to-back goals hurt us.”Kucherov has goals in four consecutive games. He was slowed in the third period after taking a shot off his foot.AdvertisementAfter Stamkos scored his 35th goal on the rebound at 5:02 of the second, Prince got the Islanders to 3-2 behind just 23 seconds later.Garrison assisted on Stamkos’s goal for his 100th career N.H.L. assist.Boychuk tied it at 3-3 from the blue line with 3:42 left in the second.Nelson opened the scoring by beating Ben Bishop from the left circle at 8:54 of the first.Bishop stopped 27 shots.A power-play goal by Lee was disallowed 1:19 into the game because of a referee’s whistle.We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.