DEC. 13, 2016
The best-selling sports books in November 2016, according to the New York Times best-seller list.1. SHAKEN by Tim Tebow (Waterbrook). The Heisman Trophy winner writes about overcoming obstacles.2. A LIFE WELL PLAYED by Arnold Palmer (St. Martin’s). Stories of career and relationships by the great golfer, who died in September.3. COURAGE TO SOAR by Simone Biles with Michelle Burford (Zondervan). The life of the gold-medal-studded Olympic gymnast.4. THE BOYS IN THE BOAT by Daniel James Brown (Penguin). The story of the American rowers who pursued gold at the 1936 Berlin Olympic Games. Originally published in 2013.5. GUNSLINGER by Jeff Pearlman (Houghton Mifflin Harcourt). A biography of the champion quarterback Brett Favre.6. LUCKY BASTARD by Joe Buck (Dutton). The sportscaster describes what it was like to forge his own career in the shadow of his beloved broadcasting father (who was also his best friend), Jack Buck.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.7. SHOE DOG by Phil Knight (Scribner). A memoir by the founder of Nike.8. WON FOR THE AGES by the staff of the Chicago Tribune (Triumph Books). A commemorative collection of stories, player profiles and photos that celebrate the Chicago Cubs’ first World Series win since 1908.9. THE AMERICAN FISHERMAN by Willie Robertson and William Doyle (William Morrow). A celebration of sport fishing in America, its history, locales and impact, by the outdoorsman who is the star of the television show “Duck Dynasty.”10. RUN FAST. EAT SLOW. by Shalane Flanagan and Elyse Kopecky (Rodale). Recipes for athletes created by an Olympic marathoner and a chef/nutrition coach.14. BELICHICK & BRADY by Michael Holley (Hachette). The coach and quarterback who together made the New England Patriots the envy of the N.F.L. and revolutionized the way professional football teams are built and how the game is played.Rankings reflect sales for November 2016. The sports titles ranked here are selected by the editors from among all adult nonfiction books in all print and electronic formats, as reported to the New York Times best-seller list for the previous month. The definition of sports is deliberately broad and inclusive, so as to reflect all manner of the outdoor sports world, varying from the professional leagues to personal athleticism.A version of this list appears in print on December 14, 2016, on Page B13 of the New York edition with the headline: The Best Sellers: Filed Under Sports.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.