By TIM ROHANMARCH 25, 2016
PORT ST. LUCIE, Fla. —  Ruben Tejada ranged over to field a high-bouncing ground ball, but he took his eye off the ball for an instant, and it bounced around his glove. Rather than boo, some Mets fans at Tradition Field chuckled.After spending his entire career with the Mets, Tejada was playing his first game with the St. Louis Cardinals.In a span of a few years he was deemed the Mets’ shortstop of the future, criticized for his poor work ethic, benched, demoted and then celebrated as a fan favorite after he hung in on a double-play attempt during the 2015 playoffs and had his leg broken by the Los Angeles Dodgers’ Chase Utley.The Mets released Tejada during spring training when it appeared he would not be playing much behind the veterans the Mets had acquired this winter. Tejada promptly signed with the Cardinals.Advertisement“I turned the page to another history, another chance, another day,” Tejada, dressed head to toe in Cardinals red, said Friday. “That’s why I stay happy and stay the same, stay focused.”AdvertisementFor Tejada to land with the Cardinals was a stroke of luck. Their regular starting shortstop, Jhonny Peralta, sustained a broken thumb this spring and is expected to be out for at least half the season.“With his athleticism and my athleticism, we can kind of make some fun things happen,” second baseman Kolten Wong said of Tejada. “I’m excited to see how we mesh together.”In an odd coincidence, since Tejada signed a one-year deal with the Cardinals about a week ago, the Mets have not won a single spring training game. They have lost seven consecutive games, including both of their split-squad games on Thursday.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.And when Jeurys Familia blew a two-run ninth-inning lead on Friday, the game ended in a 5-5 tie, and “the Curse of Ruben Tejada” seemed to be gaining steam.Noah Syndergaard had pitched a gem, striking out nine batters and holding the Cardinals to two runs in six innings; his spring training E.R.A. is 2.04.Matt Reynolds drove in three runs, and, playing at first base, Wilmer Flores had two hits and scored two runs.When Familia entered the game, his sinker lacked its signature movement. Familia allowed four consecutive hits, which tied the game, and then intentionally walked the bases loaded, hoping for a double-play ball, only to walk home the go-ahead run. It was the second time this spring that Familia had pitched on back-to-back days.“I’ve seen it in the past,” Manager Terry Collins said, “where guys who’ve accumulated a lot of work and a lot of innings, like last year, it takes a little while for their arms to bounce back.“As long as he’s healthy, as long as he feels good, he’ll get there.”Told about Collins’s comments, Familia said: “Everything’s good, man. My arm’s 100 percent.”A version of this article appears in print on March 26, 2016, on Page D7 of the New York edition with the headline: In Tejada’s Presence, Curse on Mets Continues.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.