AdvertisementSupported byOn SoccerBy Sam BordenPARIS — It is an established rite, a time-honored tradition: Before every major soccer tournament, each participating team hosts a send-off match in which the players get one last runaround, one final standing ovation from a stadium full of devoted fans in a game against a (relatively) hapless opponent.For years, Northern Ireland was that opponent. Before the 2010 World Cup in South Africa and before the 2014 tournament in Brazil, Northern Ireland made transoceanic crossings to be, essentially, an afterthought. One year, it was in Chile; another, in Uruguay.“I remember in Chile in 2010 looking around at the stadium, seeing 50,000 fans in their seats two hours before kickoff and just being amazed at how happy they looked, how much they were singing, how excited they were,” said Patrick Nelson, the chief executive of Northern Ireland’s soccer federation. “They were going to play in games that mattered. And I remember thinking: How fantastic would it be if we could someday do something like this, too?”Now, they will. This European championship, which begins Friday night with France facing Romania, has understandably been labeled the tournament of minnows after the field was expanded to 24 teams this year from 16. As a result, more first-time contenders, or long-missing ones, will be playing alongside the European establishment.Northern Ireland. Wales. Albania. Iceland. Slovakia. These five teams are playing in the Euros for the first time. Other countries, like Hungary, which has not made the field for this tournament since 1972 or for a major tournament since 1986, are ending long absences.The expanded field is the legacy of Michel Platini, the former president of UEFA, who resigned after being suspended on corruption charges. Platini, who has denied any wrongdoing in the scandal that cost him his post, often trumpeted the increased number of teams as a necessary growth that was good for the sport. Perhaps not coincidentally, he argued it was also good for the financial situations of many smaller federations — who, it must be said, often made the difference in continental or global elections. (Before his suspension, Platini was planning to run for FIFA’s presidency.)And yet, the expanded field is a tricky subject. The arguments in favor of 24 teams over 16 are obvious, starting with the increased number of fans who will get to cheer for their countrymen. One could also consider the growth organic: The Euros started as a four-team tournament, expanded to eight teams in 1980, to 16 in 1996, and now to 24. The continent, too, has grown in its number of soccer federations: While 33 teams tried to qualify for the eight spots in 1992, 53 entered qualifying this time around.There is concern, however, that expansion will dilute the final product. The Euros have often been held up as the third-biggest sporting event in the world, after the World Cup and the Summer Olympics. Many people even thought the quality of play at the 16-team Euros was higher than at the World Cup because European soccer was far richer in talent than, say, teams from Africa, Asia and the Americas. While adding more teams may be good for the sport, the critics of expansion say it will inevitably arrive with a decrease in overall quality.The argument has merit. Sure, the knockout rounds still figure to be dramatic. But a group stage that involves every team playing three games to eliminate only eight participants seems unappetizing. Instead of only the top two teams in each group advancing to the quarterfinals (as in the old format, and in this month’s Copa América in the United States), the top two teams plus the four best third-place teams will now move on. That makes it likely that a single victory — or even two draws — will be enough for a team to advance.That will almost surely lead to more defensive, cautious game plans from coaches, particularly since the tiebreaker among teams tied on points is goal difference. For the tinier teams, losing is not necessarily a disaster; being blown out, on the other hand, could be devastating. For that reason, we are likely to see less open play and fewer adventurous attacking schemes.The measure of the expansion will ultimately emerge in the results: Is the tournament appealing, or not? But the teams themselves are not terribly interested in debating philosophy. The favorites, like Germany and France, will prefer to focus on the task in front of them. The newcomers will not quibble over the circumstances that brought them to this stage.They simply want to make a mark, and some have higher hopes than others after going through the qualifying gantlet. Iceland won six of its 10 qualifying games, advancing comfortably. Wales won six as well, and took 4 points from its two games against Belgium.Northern Ireland actually finished atop its group, beating teams like Hungary, Finland and Greece. It is not the minnow with the most talent; the team from Iceland, with a population of little more than 320,000, seems to be the most popular potential overachiever. But as Northern Ireland’s Nelson noted, “If the field had been only 10 teams this time, we would have qualified since we were a group winner.”Making it out of a group that includes Poland, Germany and Ukraine would be a significant victory for Northern Ireland, but then, in many ways, it has won already. About 40,000 fans are expected to travel to France for the tournament, and the prospect of being involved in a major championship for the first time since the 1986 World Cup is being seen as important for the country as a whole. According to Nelson, a survey by his federation found that 71 percent of residents said qualifying for the tournament would help unite Northern Ireland, where religious differences have long split the population.About two weeks ago, Northern Ireland held its own send-off match. On a spirited night in Belfast, Manager Michael O’Neill watched his players soak in the adulation of the fans and thrash a (relatively) hapless Belarus team, 3-0. There were goals and glory. There was singing and cheering. There was, most important, the euphoric anticipation of what was still to come.“It was all we wanted,” Nelson said. “We had been waiting 30 years to have that kind of party.”Advertisement