By PAT BORZIJUNE 10, 2016
Anyone who grew up on Long Island, or at least in greater New York, might appreciate the Mets scouting director Tommy Tanous’s tone when he described how the team had come to choose Long Islanders with its first two picks in baseball’s amateur draft.He was sarcastic. Naturally.“To be honest, I didn’t feel like flying this year, so I just scouted guys I could drive to,” Tanous said on a conference call late Thursday night.He was not far off.The Mets homed in on the right-hander Justin Dunn, of Freeport, the 19th overall pick, when he joined the rotation at Boston College in early April. The Mets actually chose the left-hander Anthony Kay of Stony Brook twice — three years ago in the 29th round from Ward Melville High School (the same school the current Met Stephen Matz attended), and again Thursday with the 31st pick. Kay reportedly rejected a $175,000 bonus offer to attend the University of Connecticut.“I was really excited when he got drafted out of high school to the Mets,” said Matz, a Ward Melville senior when Kay was an eighth-grader. “It was pretty cool to see him have a lot of success and bump up all the way to the first round. I’m really excited for him.”AdvertisementKay led UConn to its first N.C.A.A. tournament in four years, going 9-2 with a 2.65 E.R.A. to be named pitcher of the year in the American Athletic Conference. UConn Coach Jim Penders said that a curveball Kay mastered late in the season had contributed to his effectiveness.Advertisement“He’s the best pitcher I’ve ever had at UConn,” Penders said in a telephone interview. “A legendary competitor. The thing that stands out more than anybody we’ve had here is his competitive courage. It’s a different level. Whether he’s playing you at darts or checkers or Ping-Pong, he wants to beat your brains out.”Three years ago, Penders said he was shocked when Kay lasted past the top 10 rounds.“We thought we were going to lose him,” Penders said. “He wanted to stick it — not to the Mets, necessarily; to all 30 teams. It was like, ‘You guys are going to have to pay a lot more if I go to UConn.’”And they will. The bonus slot value for the 31st pick is $1.9 million.“I think it was just a good opportunity to go to school, and I wanted to get the experience of playing college baseball and get a couple of years of education under my belt,” Kay said on a conference call Friday. “I thought that it was a good trade-off.”Get the big sports news, highlights and analysis from Times journalists, with distinctive takes on games and some behind-the-scenes surprises, delivered to your inbox every week.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.Kay grew up rooting for the Yankees, “but I guess I’m a Mets fan now,” he said.Penders said he had also recruited Dunn, who attended the Gunnery School, a boarding school in Washington, Conn., but had considered Dunn too much of a project and backed off. The Dodgers chose Dunn in the 37th round in 2013.Dunn started an N.C.A.A. superregional playoff game against Miami in Coral Gables, Fla., on Friday. Dunn entered Friday with a 1.49 E.R.A., the lowest in the Atlantic Coast Conference, in 17 appearances. In seven starts, he went 3-1 with a 1.43 E.R.A. He beat Tulane, 7-2, on June 3 in an N.C.A.A. regional playoff game, striking out a career-high 11 in seven innings.“It was so bizarre, the fact that both kids are local kids,” Tanous said. “It’s just how the draft played out. We had no intention of manipulating the draft or anything to get these players. We were thrilled to get them.”JOHNSON’S RETURN The newly reacquired Kelly Johnson began his second stint with the Mets in two years by starting at second base Friday for Neil Walker, whose chest remained sore from a one-hopper that struck him Thursday night. Manager Terry Collins plans to use Johnson at first, second and third and in the outfield.Advertisement“He’s a quality guy in the clubhouse, a veteran guy who knows his role and goes about it the right way,” Collins said. “What he gives us on the bench and in the clubhouse is huge. Positive guy, always has a smile. When it comes to crunchtime, your bench and your bullpen are what you turn to. It’s nice to have some quality veteran guys on that bench.”Johnson uses different gloves at different positions. The one for second base is the smallest, so he can extract the ball quickly on double-play turns. Johnson is only the second major leaguer to be traded between the same two teams (Atlanta to the Mets) in back-to-back seasons, joining Chad Kreuter, dealt from the Chicago White Sox to the Anaheim Angels in 1997 and ’98.“It’s obviously a good situation,” Johnson said. “You know what you’re coming into. You’re way more comfortable. And you don’t have to feel any pressure to do this or that. I hope to do some stuff to contribute to some wins.”LESSON FOR LAGARES Terry Collins said he had spoken with Juan Lagares about sliding headfirst into second base on a ninth-inning double Thursday night, during his first action since he partially tore a left thumb ligament June 4 in Miami. Collins prefers Lagares to slide feet first to better protect the thumb.“You can ask him, but you’re not going to get it, because it is instinctive,” Collins said. “I told him, ‘It’s not the wisest decision,’ and he said he never even thought about it.“I’d just as soon bring it up as have him haphazardly make a stupid mistake and blow that thumb up. I think he needs to know, Look, I know you can slide the other way. The one thing I want is him in the lineup.”A version of this article appears in print on June 11, 2016, on Page D4 of the New York edition with the headline: Mets Didn’t Set Out to Keep Picks Local.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.