By IVAN NECHEPURENKOJULY 29, 2016
MOSCOW — Instead of the Olympic Stadium in Rio de Janeiro, members of the Russian track and field team, which has been barred from the Games over a doping scandal, competed among themselves Thursday evening at what looked like a high school stadium.While many called the track meet Russia’s “alternative Olympics,” the organizers said it simply was an effort to support individual athletes who had trained hard for the Games. Track’s global governing body barred the team last month after revelations of state-sponsored doping, which has led other sports federations to bar Russian athletes.The track meet, organized in just a week, was dubbed the Stars 2016 Tournament.“We organized this event in order to let our athletes demonstrate the results of their work ahead of the Olympics and also to support them financially,” said Dmitri A. Shlyakhtin, the head of the Russian track and field federation.Winners were awarded 100,000 rubles each, or $1,500. Winning a gold medal at the Games can earn a government bonus of some four million rubles, around $60,000.AdvertisementThe 137 athletes competing at the tiny Zamansky Brothers stadium in northeast Moscow — considered too obscure to have ever hosted as much as a national championship — included many of the 68 barred track athletes, among them stars like Sergei V. Shubenkov, the current world champion hurdler, and Ivan S. Ukhov, the 2012 Olympic high jump champion.AdvertisementA total of 272 Russians have been allowed to compete in Rio so far. Russia had planned to send 387 athletes.An investigation, commissioned by the World Anti-Doping Agency and directed by a Canadian lawyer, Richard McLaren, listed abnormal levels of table salt in urine, scratches on the inside of the bottle caps and mismatching DNA as evidence of tampering with doping samples. Various computer data and emails suggested that high-ranking Russian sports officials were involved in the scheme.Get daily updates during the Olympics as well as a weekly roundup of sports news.The International Olympic Committee, in a highly criticized decision, declined to bar all Russian athletes but said the 28 individual sports federations overseeing Olympic sports should decide which athletes are clean and cleared to compete.At the meet here, only a few hundred people, mostly relatives and friends, came to cheer the athletes. The event, which was not highly publicized, was streamed online but not televised.Putin has dismissed the accusations against the Russian antidoping system as politically motivated, saying, “There is not the slightest concrete evidence” to prove them.The athletes agreed.“I don’t think sports had anything to do with this; they are just trying to pressure us on all fronts,” said Vasily A. Kopeikin, the winner of the long jump event, wearing a number bib that said, “I jump clean.” Other athletes had bibs saying, “I run clean” or “I throw clean.”Kopeikin denied he had ever encountered a state-run doping system in Russia. “All they want to do is push us back, so that Russia would sit silently and obey,” he said.AdvertisementThe Russian sports minister, Vitaly L. Mutko, who the WADA report said had extensive knowledge of doping, awarded prizes to the winners. After the ceremony, the athletes encircled Mutko in the middle of the green field for almost an hour, expressing their grievances and worries.“The house of cards has collapsed, so what do we do now?” asked Dmitri S. Tarabin, a javelin thrower and one of the meet’s winners.“Just tell me whom to fire; I will do everything,” said Mutko, a longtime ally of Putin. Mutko has said he would not fire himself.A version of this article appears in print on July 30, 2016, on Page D2 of the New York edition with the headline: Russian Track Athletes Run Through Their Events Far From the Rio Games.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.See More »