AdvertisementSupported byBy Carla CorreaIn women’s gymnastics, there is a consensus about the Olympic team event: It is a battle for second place between China and Russia.That is because if Simone Biles, perhaps the best female gymnast in history, and her United States teammates do what is expected, they will rout the field Tuesday. The Americans qualified for the final with 185.23 points, for a nearly 10-point lead over second-best China. To put that in perspective, the third-place Russians were less than a tenth of a point behind the Chinese.The competition started at 3 p.m. Eastern, but NBC has scheduled its coverage in prime time. To avoid the tape delay and see every gymnast, stream the events live via the NBC Olympics site or NBC Sports app. You will need cable credentials to log in. To watch international broadcasts, use a VPN.The American women’s gymnastics team won the gold with 184.897 points,  an 8-point lead over second-best Russia.In the qualification, 12 teams use the highest three of four scores on each apparatus. The stakes are higher in the team final: The top eight countries from the previous round present three gymnasts on each event, and every mark counts. The slate has been wiped clean, too, so the Americans will not have a cushion.The site 4for4.info is tracking gymnastics data, and as of Monday, it put the United States’ chance of a team gold at nearly 94 percent. China was given a 3.9 percent chance to upset the Americans. The Russians’ odds are slimmer. Britain and Brazil have an outside chance to earn the bronze medal.Romania has won a team medal in every Olympics since 1976, but it failed to qualify a group for Rio.Mary Lou Retton has described her as the top gymnast in history.“At this point in time, nobody can beat Simone Biles,” Nastia Liukin, the 2008 Olympic champion, has said. On the off chance you have lingering doubts, consider that Biles on Sunday qualified in first place for the all-around and first on vault, balance beam and floor exercise.In the team final, look for her powerful Amanar vault, which is the same skill that made McKayla Maroney a standout at the 2012 Games. Biles’s Amanar flies higher and goes farther than her rivals’. On floor exercise, her second tumbling pass includes a double layout with a half-twist and a blind landing. It is called the Biles because she was the first gymnast to land it in competition. Biles will also compete on beam and performs one of the hardest dismounts, a full-twisting double tuck.See a New York Times interactive on what makes Biles the world’s best gymnast.Also be sure to catch Gabby Douglas and the top qualifier, Madison Kocian, on uneven bars, as well as Laurie Hernandez and Aly Raisman on vault, beam and floor. Raisman performed one of her best Amanars ever in the vault qualifier. Hernandez — nicknamed both Baby Shakira and the Human Emoji — became a trending topic on Twitter after prime-time viewers saw her charismatic floor exercise.China excels on bars and beam. A do-not-miss bars performance is that of Fan Yilin, who holds a world title. On Sunday, she performed the most challenging routine in that event. Her teammate Shang Chungsong can also put up a strong bars mark.Look for Russia to get a lift on vault from the world champion Maria Paseka. The Russians should also put up a high total on bars, with Aliya Mustafina an Olympic champion and Daria Spiridonova a world champion.Britain could sneak onto the podium if the Russians or the Chinese falter. The team’s best work Sunday was on vault and floor. Ellie Downie, who had a tough fall in the qualifying round, has explosive power in both events.Brazil is making its first Olympic appearance in the team competition. The women seemed to be having fun in every rotation Sunday, drawing on energy from the hometown crowd. Flavia Saraiva was a standout on beam, qualifying third behind Biles and Hernandez. Rebeca Andrade’s Amanar will help on vault.The Netherlands could finish in last place Tuesday, but its dance elements on floor are among the most difficult and best-executed in these Games. One word for Eythora Thorsdottir’s leaps and turns: spellbinding.Advertisement