AdvertisementSupported byBy Ken BelsonWhen Michael Cooper, one of more than 50,000 runners in Sunday’s New York City Marathon, left his home in Perth, on the west coast of Australia, on Wednesday, he started the timer on his smartphone. He drove to the airport; flew 11 hours to Doha, Qatar; boarded an even longer flight to New York; and then rode several trains to reach the apartment he had rented on the Upper East Side.Total elapsed time: 33 hours 20 minutes 21.52 seconds.Cooper’s finishing time Sunday, 3:46:20, did not set any records, but his travel time to get to the marathon was certainly among the most impressive.“I think you have to have a bit mad to run a marathon, but then to travel this far on top of it, it makes you madder,” Cooper said after finishing with a personal-best time, which was roughly one-tenth the time it had taken him to get to New York. “But if anyone has the opportunity, I would say to definitely do it.”For the more than 20,000 entrants who live in the New York region, surely the toughest part of the marathon was wending their way through the five boroughs to the finish line. But for some of the 15,000 or so international runners, who came from 132 countries, the 26.2-mile run on race day was just part of the journey. Few entrants came from as far away as the runners — nearly a dozen of them — who had traveled from Perth.Although it may be far from New York, Perth, a city of 1.8 million, is also far from the middle of nowhere. The title of participant from the most remote locale might go to the runner who entered from Wallis and Futuna, a small French island territory about two-thirds of the way from Hawaii to New Zealand. There were also single entrants from places like Mauritius, New Caledonia and Sri Lanka, as well as war-torn Afghanistan and Iraq.Whichever route they took, the runners from Perth had to travel more than 11,000 air miles to New York, a trip that can make it hard to arrive rested, hydrated and limber.Cooper and the others who came from Perth coped as best they could. Cooper set his watch to New York time when he got on the plane and slept nine hours on the first flight. After a two-hour layover, he could not sleep much on the second, longer flight, so he ended up watching a bunch of episodes of the television show “Brooklyn Nine-Nine.”“I just dozed, and it felt like I slept for hours, but then I saw there were still 11 hours to go,” said Cooper, a graduate student who traveled with his brother, Ben.Belinda Nichols, who came from Perth with her fiancé, James Clarke, flew via Hong Kong. She took a pill that helped her sleep through most of the first flight and then took a second pill that knocked her out for five more hours on the second, roughly 15-hour flight.Soon after she landed on Thursday afternoon, she went out with friends.“My plan was not to drink anything, but the first thing I did was go to the pub,” Nichols said before the race. “But after five drinks, I slept eight solid hours, so I don’t think I’ll have any trouble with jet lag.”Clarke joked that drinking five beers “apparently is called tapering.”Adrenaline seems to offset some of the inevitable fatigue. Excited to be in New York and eager to take advantage of Friday’s sunshine, Nichols and Clarke rented bikes and rode around the city. Runners from near and far also benefited from the shift to standard time when the clocks were moved back an hour Sunday.But that was little consolation for Lindsay Kyle, who made the trip with her partner, Jaime McMullen. They arrived on Friday afternoon and barely slept on their flights despite taking sleeping pills. Once in New York, they dropped their bags and went to an event sponsored by Kyle’s employer, Lendlease, a global property owner and builder, before having dinner at Guy Fieri’s restaurant in Times Square. “Definitely not marathon food,” she said.Some of Kyle’s fatigue was eased by her access to a bus to the starting line and a heated tent that were provided by a charity she and her co-workers had raised money for.There is no shortage of suggestions from experts on how to overcome jet lag. For short trips across a few time zones, they say there may be little reason to adjust because the journey will end before the jet lag wears off. Lots of water and exposure to sunshine are advised. Nothing, though, can replace a good night’s sleep.“People just take sleep for granted and think they will fit in somewhere,” said Charles A. Czeisler, director of the divisions of sleep medicine at Harvard Medical School and Brigham and Women’s Hospital in Boston.Czeisler said that red-eye flights, while perceived to be an efficient use of time, were terrible if you hoped to arrive refreshed because it is difficult to sleep on planes and the air is dry, leaving fliers dehydrated.“Why would you start your trip by pulling an all-nighter?” Czeisler said. “It increases the risk of injury, degrades your chance of recovery, and there is a greater chance of getting a cold.”Given where they live, the Australians did not have much of a choice — even those from Sydney, which is at least four hours’ flying time closer to New York than Perth is.“We’re all nutty; there’s no way around it,” said Marg Murray, who came from Sydney with two friends from her running group, the Coogee Cougars.Many New Yorkers like the international flavor of the race but are amazed at the trouble some runners go to to get to the city.“I saw two Aussies who told me they arrived Wednesday night and said there wasn’t enough time to get over jet lag,” said Neil Freilich, who ran his 11th New York City Marathon but had to walk only a few blocks from the finish line to his home on the Upper West Side. Still, he said, “it’s a great race that brings locals and internationals together.”Advertisement