By THE ASSOCIATED PRESSNOV. 6, 2016
MIAMI GARDENS, Fla. — Kenyan Drake, a rookie kick returner for the Miami Dolphins, was delighted to find himself at the bottom of a pile of players on Sunday, because they were teammates in the end zone.Drake prompted the celebration when he went untouched on a 96-yard kickoff return with 5 minutes 15 seconds left, the final swing in a seesaw game as the Miami Dolphins beat the Jets, 27-23.An offside penalty had forced the Jets to kick off a second time, and Drake made them pay. The Dolphins (4-4) won their third game in a row while the Jets (3-6) fell deeper into last place in the A.F.C. East.Jay Ajayi came up short in his bid to become the first N.F.L. player to have three consecutive 200-yard rushing games, but he managed 111 yards and helped to run out the clock after the Dolphins came from behind for the third time.AdvertisementA botched Dolphins punt led to an 18-yard touchdown pass to Jalin Marshall from Ryan Fitzpatrick that put the Jets ahead, 23-20, with less than six minutes to play. The Jets then pinned Miami’s Jakeem Grant deep on the ensuing kickoff, but Antonio Allen was flagged for being offside.AdvertisementOn the rekick, the weary coverage team found itself chasing a fresh Drake, Grant’s backup. He sped past the final Jet — kicker Nick Folk — and into the clear.“I was trying to remember what my track coach said: to keep those knees up,” Drake said.Even his teammates gave chase.“Everyone was running down the sideline,” Ajayi said. “I was trying to beat him to the end zone. I was so excited for him.”The Jets hurt themselves with four personal-foul penalties, two interceptions thrown by Fitzpatrick and numerous squandered chances.Fitzpatrick missed four plays midway through the second half because of a left knee injury and was replaced by Bryce Petty. Fitzpatrick wore a brace when he returned. He said he would have a magnetic resonance imaging exam Monday.Ajayi was hit behind the line on many of his 24 carries but gradually wore down the Jets and had 55 yards in the fourth quarter.“I’m never going to go away from him,” Miami Coach Adam Gase said. “His job is to keep hammering it.”Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.Also impressive with his ball-carrying skills was the Dolphins’ Jordan Phillips, a 335-pound defensive tackle who leapt over an opponent during a 17-yard interception return to set up a field goal.Advertisement“Looked like he wanted to be a hurdler,” his defensive line teammate Ndamukong Suh said.Fitzpatrick had a pass intercepted in the end zone by Bobby McCain in the fourth quarter, and he missed an open Brandon Marshall in the end zone, forcing the Jets to settle for a field goal.“We had opportunity after opportunity and didn’t get it done,” said Fitzpatrick, who completed 17 of 28 passes for 193 yards. “It all falls on the quarterback. There’s a lot of things I could have done better today.”The same went for the Jets’ defense: Linebacker Jordan Jenkins dropped a potential interception with nothing but 85 yards of grass in front of him.The Jets were amped up at the start to stop Ajayi — but perhaps too much so.Ajayi lost 3, 1 and 5 yards on his first three carries. But two of the losses were negated, by an unnecessary roughness penalty on Buster Skrine and a taunting penalty on Calvin Pryor.On his fourth carry, Ajayi found a big hole and ran 20 yards for a touchdown to put Miami ahead, 7-3.The Jets’ Sheldon Richardson was flagged for unnecessary roughness twice in the second quarter.Richardson and a fellow Jets defensive lineman, Muhammad Wilkerson, sat out the first quarter and entered the game at the start of the second. A team official said their absences at the start were not injury-related but declined to say whether they were for disciplinary reasons.“Coach’s decision,” Coach Todd Bowles said.A version of this article appears in print on November 7, 2016, on Page D3 of the New York edition with the headline: One Mistake Too Many Leaves Jets on Poor End in a Reversal of Fortune.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.