By WALLACE MATTHEWSAPRIL 19, 2017
Of the more than 30,000 people in Yankee Stadium on Wednesday night, the only person seemingly unimpressed by Aaron Judge’s fifth-inning home run was the man who hit it.The faces of Judge’s teammates as they watched the blast — measured by Statcast at 448 feet, with an exit velocity of 115.5 miles per hour and a maximum height of 121.9 feet — were a tableau of shock and awe. Chase Headley watched the flight of the ball with his hands on top of his head, his arms spreading wide in a giant V as the ball landed in the rear of the left-centerfield bleachers. Austin Romine stood with his hands on the shoulders of Starlin Castro, both men’s mouths frozen open in wonder. Brett Gardner’s normally stoic face registered sheer disbelief.Only Judge seemed unaffected by the majesty of the blow, and maybe even a little embarrassed by the fuss he had caused.Asked for his impression of the homer, his fifth of the season, which accounted for the eighth run in a 9-1 Yankees victory over the Chicago White Sox, Judge said: “I honestly didn’t look at it too much. I just took my swing and started running.”AdvertisementAsked to recall his teammates’ reactions as he returned to the dugout, Judge said: “I couldn’t hear much. I was just giving everyone high-fives, to be honest.”AdvertisementAsked if he thought this might have been his longest in-game home run ever — he has hit some even more monstrous blasts off the soft tosses of the Yankees’ batting practice pitchers — Judge just shrugged. “I have no clue,” he said.And asked if he had ever been impressed by one of his own homers, Judge took a long pause before responding: “Um, I don’t know. I got no answer for you.”Judge, whose homer capped an outburst of power that put the Yankees back on a winning track after an anemic performance on Tuesday, preferred to talk about the accomplishments of his teammates. Most notable were Headley, who also homered and who boasts an early-season batting average of .396 and an on-base percentage of .500, and Castro, who preceded Judge’s solo homer with a three-run blast of his own.Judge talked about the pitching of Masahiro Tanaka, who managed to avoid trouble despite being hit hard at times and who worked seven innings of six-hit, one-run ball. And Judge talked about the importance of the Yankees’ come-from-behind victory last Sunday at Baltimore, the one that propelled them into an eight-game winning streak and the 8-1 homestand that concluded with the victory Wednesday night.Judge appeared willing to talk about anything but his own prodigious power. That he left to his teammates.Get the big sports news, highlights and analysis from Times journalists, with distinctive takes on games and some behind-the-scenes surprises, delivered to your inbox every week.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.“Oh, he’s unbelievable,” Castro said. “I’ve never seen a home run like that. We all as a team, we can’t believe the power that he has. He’s fun to watch. He hits the ball really well. He takes a lot of great at-bats too.”Headley, when asked about his intense reaction to Judge’s homer, said: “Yeah, it was a pretty strong home run. He hit it a long way. I was obviously fired up. I mean, he hit one to the moon.”AdvertisementOn a night when the Yankees hit four homers — the final one by Aaron Hicks as a pinch-hitter in the eighth — it was Judge who put the bomb back into the Bronx Bombers, a nickname that in recent years has seemed like more of a misnomer.After leading all of baseball in home runs for three of the first four years since moving into their new, homer-friendly ballpark in 2009 — including belting 245 in 2012 — the Yankees have had a marked power drop-off in recent years. In two of the past four seasons, they failed to hit even 150 home runs, and last year, their 183 homers ranked 19th among major league teams.But now, they are back on top — the four home runs gave them 22 as a team, the most in baseball, and they are on pace to hit 237 this season.But few will be more impressive than the one Judge launched on a 1-0 hanging curve from White Sox starter Dylan Covey, who was making just his second major league start.“That was pretty impressive,” Manager Joe Girardi said. “But I question the distance. I think they might want to remeasure that one.”Girardi went on to praise Judge’s plate discipline, his use of the whole field — he also singled to right field in his first at-bat — and the reduction in the number of his strikeouts; Last season, Judge whiffed in precisely half of his first 84 big-league at-bats.But the thing that will be remembered about Judge is not his strikeouts, or even his great size. It will be the home runs he hits, and more accurately, how high and far he hits them.And despite his outward modesty, the impressiveness of his shots is not entirely lost on Judge.Told that his blast had been measured at 448 feet, Judge looked disappointed, but only slightly.“Oh, man, I don’t know — they had Holliday’s the other night at like 460 or something like that,” he said, referring to his teammate Matt Holliday. “I thought I beat him, but I guess not. Maybe next time.”AdvertisementIt gives Judge another target to shoot at, to go along with the moon.Inside PitchCatcher Gary Sanchez, out with a strain of the right brachialis, made some throws for the first time since going on the disabled list April 8. Sanchez soft-tossed from about 60 feet and reported no discomfort from the injury, sustained while swinging in a game in Baltimore.A version of this article appears in print on April 20, 2017, on Page B13 of the New York edition with the headline: A Night After Being Shut Down, the Yankees Turn On Their Power.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.