By THE ASSOCIATED PRESSAPRIL 20, 2017
Anytime Connor McDavid, Alex Ovechkin or Sidney Crosby goes over the boards, everyone in the arena waits for something special to happen.From the opposing bench, tireless efforts have gone into preventing just that.Nobody gets more attention in the Stanley Cup playoffs than a superstar, from the likes of McDavid, Ovechkin and Crosby to the rookie of the year front-runner Auston Matthews and the game-changing defensemen Erik Karlsson and Brent Burns. Slowing them down to prevent them from taking over a game or a series takes days of preparation and scouting, the right strategy and a village of players on the ice.“Those guys are difference-makers in the game,” said San Jose Coach Peter DeBoer, whose Sharks have held McDavid of the Edmonton Oilers to two points in four games. “When you look at the analytics and the percentage of the offense he’s involved with with their team, it’s something you’d be crazy not to pay attention to.”There’s a reason lesser-known players Zack Kassian, Bobby Ryan, Jaden Schwartz and Jake Guentzel lead the playoffs in game-winning goals, with so much attention devoted to bottling up and frustrating the stars.AdvertisementAs Washington Capitals defenseman Dmitry Orlov put it: “Everybody probably more focused in the D-zone and everywhere and try to be smart all three zones. Nobody wants to lose. Just kind of simple things defensively, but it’s not always easy to do.”Some consider hockey the ultimate team sport because of how hard it is for an individual player to make a significant impact on the game. But the process of stopping a star may be more complex.“You can’t map it out like football, where you have a 3-4 defense,” Columbus Blue Jackets Coach John Tortorella said.Get the big sports news, highlights and analysis from Times journalists, with distinctive takes on games and some behind-the-scenes surprises, delivered to your inbox every week.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.In a basketball comparison, Capitals defenseman Matt Niskanen said it’s unrealistic to try something like a box and one.Taking away a player’s “time and space” is a time-honored hockey cliché, but it’s also the best way to contain a star.Advertisement“Good players, if they have space, they’re going to pick you apart,” Niskanen said. “The quicker you can get on him and force him to make good plays under heavy pressure, I think that’s your best chance of negating his creativity and his ability to operate.”In Game 1 of Washington’s series against the Toronto Maple Leafs, Capitals center Jay Beagle seemed at times almost glued to Matthews.To negate the speed of the young Oilers center and captain McDavid, Sharks center Logan Couture, an elite talent in his own right, always tries to stay in front of him. Couture also knows he has to battle on the boards and mind the transition attack from Edmonton, even when he’s on offense.“You’re putting yourself in defensive spots first,” Couture said, explaining how he seeks to hamper McDavid. “Even if it’s in the O-zone, you want to be above him, because he is so quick, and he’s got that extra step. If you can get above him and try to slow him down, it only helps us.”Maple Leafs forward Eric Fehr, who played a shutdown role for Pittsburgh during the Penguins’ Stanley Cup run last spring, said defending an elite talent meant having a laser focus no matter where the puck was.“It’s a game inside the game,” Fehr said. “When you’re playing against the same guy the whole series, every game, you start to get a little one-on-one rivalry. You just try to do your best to wear him out and make sure that every shift is difficult for him.”It’s also a team effort, as the Nashville Predators have shown in holding the Blackhawks stars Jonathan Toews and Patrick Kane to one point apiece through three games, all Chicago losses. Nashville Coach Peter Laviolette’s game plan, the team’s structure and Pekka Rinne’s goaltending have combined to do the trick.Toronto center Brian Boyle, who has been tasked with defending opponents’ top lines during deep playoff runs with the Rangers and the Tampa Bay Lightning, said teams plan for every player. As Leafs Coach Mike Babcock pointed out, Ovechkin needs only one shot to make an impact, so the key is keeping the puck off his stick as much as possible.Advertisement“Everybody has to do their job that way,” Boyle said.He added: “When you get close on a guy and you have the close support, you can outnumber and put him in situations where you can get the puck back. It’s not one-on-one for 200 feet of the ice. It takes five guys.”Sometimes it takes six, and when the last line of defense falters, the goaltender’s weakness can be the difference in the series. Evgeni Malkin has eight points and Crosby six for the Penguins, who have taken it to the Blue Jackets and the struggling goaltender Sergei Bobrovsky in going up, 3-1.But the work to stop a star begins well before he takes a shot on net. As the Sharks have tried to do with McDavid, the Leafs, defenseman Matt Hunwick said, seek to slow down top players in the neutral zone. Once they cross the blue line they can crisscross, change lanes and become even more dangerous — evading even the best-designed coverages, Hunwick said.“Just be cognizant of where they’re at,” he said. “You have to know exactly where those guys are, because the top goal-scorers in the league — somehow they seem to get lost sometimes.”We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.