By JAMES WAGNERAPRIL 19, 2017
After almost single-handedly rescuing the Mets from another defeat on Thursday with two home runs, Jay Bruce stood at his locker for his postgame interview in a blue and orange boxing robe and a silver and blue crown.He had already been showered with admiration during the game. He was pushed to the dugout steps by teammates for a curtain call after his second homer, a two-run, eighth-inning shot that put the Mets ahead for good in a 5-4 win over the Philadelphia Phillies. Bruce, who hit a three-run homer in the sixth, drove in every Mets run.“It was good to be a huge part of that tonight and to get a win coming off a four-game skid,” Bruce said.Inside the Mets clubhouse, the curtain call was not enough. The Mets used to have a tradition of giving a professional wrestling belt to the player of the game, who would wear it or keep it in his locker until a new player won it.AdvertisementBut after that ritual caught on in other teams’ clubhouses, the Mets switched to the fake silver and blue crown for this season. More than a month ago in spring training, Eric Langill, one of the team’s bullpen catchers, ordered the silk boxing robe in Mets colors, thinking it would fit well with the wrestling belt.AdvertisementBut the players ditched the belt in favor of the crown, which has been worn eight times now, once for each of the team’s wins. The robe arrived this week, and the Mets incorporated it into the postgame crowning, bestowing both awards on Bruce after the game.“I haven’t done much boxing in my life,” said Bruce, who admitted it was the first time he had worn a boxing robe.Asked if it was comfortable, he smiled sheepishly. “It’s silk, so yeah,” he said. “They give it to me, I’ll wear it.”
            This is new. pic.twitter.com/Hj8lCJ5KDa Bruce has now worn the crown twice, a goofy reminder that he has been the Mets’ most consistent hitter in an uneven lineup through the season’s first two and a half weeks. His six homers tied him with Yoenis Cespedes for the team lead, and his 14 R.B.I. are the most on the club — impressive production after Bruce struggled mightily last August and was dangled as trade bait this winter.“We talked about starting the season and not putting a lot of pressure on him out of the gate, so we hit him down in the lineup a little bit,” Manager Terry Collins said. “I said, ‘Look, you’ll determine where you hit.’ And he’s hitting where he wants to hit, and he certainly deserves to be there. He’s a run producer, and he’s showing it now, and we’re lucky to have him still here.”The Mets’ win, however, came with two minor losses. First baseman Lucas Duda left the game with a hyperextended left elbow in the fifth inning. The injury occurred in the fourth, when Cesar Hernandez ran into Duda’s arm as Duda reached for an errant throw from Gsellman.Get the big sports news, highlights and analysis from Times journalists, with distinctive takes on games and some behind-the-scenes surprises, delivered to your inbox every week.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.Duda was joined in the training room by catcher Travis d’Arnaud in the seventh inning. In the fifth, D’Arnaud hit his right hand against Aaron Altherr’s bat while trying to throw out Hernandez as he stole second base. D’Arnaud hit for himself and caught another inning before leaving with a cut and bruised right wrist.AdvertisementCollins said both players would be re-evaluated on Thursday but would probably need a day of rest.“No worries at all,” d’Arnaud said. “A short-term thing.”Bruce powered the Mets to victory, despite those small injuries to teammates, and after only small stumbles by starter Robert Gsellman and reliever Jerry Blevins.The Mets’ bullpen has already been worked heavily this season. Gsellman provided a boost with his solid pitching, becoming the first Mets starter to pitch into the eighth inning this season.On Wednesday, after two rough starts to begin the season, Gsellman turned in his best outing thanks to improved command and a dangerous two-seam fastball that froze left-handed hitters. He struck out seven and was charged with three runs.“I’ve been working on that consistently, and today was probably the best it’s been,” Gsellman said of his two-seam fastball. “Hopefully I can repeat it.”When Gsellman’s pitch count was at 98, Collins let him face one batter to start the eighth inning. Gsellman gave up a leadoff double to Altherr and was replaced with Blevins, who got two outs but coughed up a bloop single to Michael Saunders that tied the game.Bruce erased that in the bottom of the inning, much as he had done in the sixth. As the Mets trailed by 2-0 after five innings, Bruce smashed a hanging changeup from Phillies starter Vince Velasquez for a three-run home run that erased the earlier offensive sluggishness.After Blevins surrendered the one-run lead, Bruce faced Phillies reliever Edubray Ramos with Cespedes on base. This time Bruce sent a 94-mile-per-hour fastball over the right-field fence for a two-run homer. His five-R.B.I. game tied a personal best.AdvertisementThe blast was enough to withstand a run that closer Addison Reed gave up in the ninth before notching the save.Bruce said the team had not played well so far — “especially the last four games, some tough losses.”But although he said he does not believe in “must-win games in April,” he added: “It was good to get this win and look to build off it. We have a very, very good team that is going to get rolling.”A version of this article appears in print on April 20, 2017, on Page B13 of the New York edition with the headline: Mets Win as Bruce Drives in Five Runs With Two Homers.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.