By SETH BERKMANAPRIL 20, 2017
A confluence of maladies led to Jay Bruce’s start at first base for the Mets on Thursday, just the fifth time he had started at the position in his 10-year career. And in the fifth inning of a 6-4 loss to the Philadelphia Phillies, another bit of poor luck appeared to strike the Mets as Yoenis Cespedes limped off with an injury.Cespedes left gingerly after running toward second base during a double play and had his thigh heavily wrapped after the game.Manager Terry Collins said Cespedes would have a magnetic resonance imaging exam on Friday. “Anytime you’re talking about hamstrings, it’s a concern,” he said.A rare bright spot came in the form of Jeurys Familia, who returned from his domestic-violence suspension just in time to help the Mets’ beleaguered bullpen. Outside of the pitching staff, however, the injuries seemed to be piling up.AdvertisementIn the fifth inning of the Mets’ 5-4 win on Wednesday, Lucas Duda sustained a hyperextended left elbow after he collided with the Phillies’ Cesar Hernandez on a play at first. In the same inning, catcher Travis d’Arnaud injured his right hand hitting Aaron Altherr’s bat while attempting to throw out Hernandez.D’Arnaud pinch-hit in the ninth inning on Thursday, but Duda remained out of the lineup; Collins did not know when he might return. Because Wilmer Flores had already been ruled out before the game with an infection in one of his joints, Bruce, off to a hot start as a hitter this season, was the surprise replacement for Duda at first.There was one benefit of the reordered lineup. Moving Bruce to the infield opened up more room in the outfield, where the Mets have been trying to find more playing time for Michael Conforto.Get the big sports news, highlights and analysis from Times journalists, with distinctive takes on games and some behind-the-scenes surprises, delivered to your inbox every week.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.And then there was Familia, who returned to Citi Field as a member of the team’s active roster for the first time since last Oct. 5, when he surrendered a three-run, ninth-inning home run to Conor Gillaspie that gave the San Francisco Giants a victory in the National League wild-card game.Many Mets fans left the ballpark that night frustrated, deflated and questioning Familia’s ability to close out postseason games. During the 2015 World Series, Familia had three blown saves, although some of that was the result of bad luck and bad fielding.AdvertisementA lot has changed for Familia since that wild-card loss.Although Commissioner Rob Manfred concluded that Familia did not assault his wife or threaten anyone with physical harm in connection with an incident last Oct. 31, he did find that Familia was guilty of “inappropriate” conduct that night.As a result, Familia missed the first 15 games of the season while serving a suspension under Major League Baseball’s new domestic-violence policy.Unfortunately for the Mets, Familia cannot play first base or catch, but he can help out an overtaxed bullpen that has been on the losing end of several close games in recent days.Familia entered the ninth inning to his familiar closer’s tune, the Don Omar song “Danza Kuduro,” to a partial standing ovation. He walked two and struck out two in a scoreless inning.“I think I got a little bit excited,” Familia said, admitting he might have been “overthrowing” a little bit. “I’m happy to be back.”Collins’s assessment of Familia was more tempered: “Rusty, to say the least,” Collins said.For his teammates, his return had a just-in-the-nick-of-time feel.“It’s great to have Jeurys back,” outfielder Juan Lagares said before the game. “He’s probably one of the best closers in the game. That’s going to be good for us, the team.”Asked about Familia’s suspension, Lagares paused. “What can I say about that?” he finally answered. “Nobody knows for real what happened. Like I said, now he’s back, and that’s all that matters right now.”AdvertisementAs Familia returned, pitcher Rafael Montero was optioned to Class AAA Las Vegas. The Mets also optioned reliever Sean Gilmartin so they could recall catcher Kevin Plawecki from Las Vegas.Without the extra bullpen arm, the Mets needed length from Noah Syndergaard, Thursday’s starter. Syndergaard lasted seven innings but was tagged for five runs, three of them earned. Syndergaard struck out 10, but the Phillies were able to produce a number of hard-hit balls and take advantage of three errors.The damage against Syndergaard could have been worse if not for two stellar catches in the outfield by Conforto, who also had two hits in his unexpected start.A version of this article appears in print on April 21, 2017, on Page B13 of the New York edition with the headline: Familia Returns for Injury-Beset Mets.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.