By ALLAN KREDAJULY 8, 2017
A Brewers visit to Yankee Stadium has become a rarity since Milwaukee moved to the National League in 1998 — before Friday, they had played just one three-game series here, in 2011.But even before their move to the N.L., the Brewers had not won a game in the Bronx since September 1996, a 10-game skid.This year’s version of the Brewers, however, are leading the National League Central, ahead of the defending champion Chicago Cubs, thanks to the hitting prowess of outfielders Domingo Santana and Ryan Braun, and third baseman Travis Shaw.On Friday night, it was Jesus Aguilar emerging as the catalyst for the visitors, producing a seventh-inning grand slam — his second homer of the night — off reliever Tyler Clippard that broke a 4-4 tie. The Brewers went on to win, 9-4, in a contest that was delayed 51 minutes by rain in the fourth inning.AdvertisementBefore the grand slam, Clippard had walked Jonathan Villar and Santana, then intentionally walked Shaw after Braun flied out.Advertisement“The margins for me are small,” Clippard said. “It’s me understanding that and moving forward and doing better.”Aguilar also hit a two-run home run in the fourth off Yankees starter Jordan Montgomery and had a sacrifice fly in the sixth. His seven R.B.I. tied a Brewers team record.The Yankees briefly enjoyed a 4-2 lead in the fifth after Aaron Judge hit his 30th home run of the season, breaking Joe DiMaggio’s record for most by a Yankees rookie, set in 1936. It also made Judge the second rookie to hit 30 or more home runs before the All-Star break — Mark McGwire had 33 homers with the Oakland Athletics in 1987.Get the big sports news, highlights and analysis from Times journalists, with distinctive takes on games and some behind-the-scenes surprises, delivered to your inbox every week.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.“It’s pretty special. That’s a pretty special name,” Yankees Manager Joe Girardi said, referring to Judge topping DiMaggio. “The average he’s hit for, the defense he’s played. It’s been a special first half.”Judge almost reached that mark earlier, narrowly missing a home run in the first when his towering blast off Brewers starter Junior Guerra was caught 400 feet away by Keon Broxton.“It’s quite an honor,” Judge said of passing DiMaggio. “It’s been a fun first half so far. To be in this position with my teammates around me. Being put in the right spot.”Entering Friday, however, the injury-riddled Yankees — who had lost 16 of their past 22 games — were merely focused on trying to capture their final series before next week’s All-Star break. They had not won any of their previous seven.AdvertisementThe Yankees were aided early by five Brewers errors in the first four innings. They scored first, in the second inning, after Santana misplayed a one-out single to right field by Didi Gregorius, allowing him to reach third. The rookie Clint Frazier’s sacrifice fly put the Yankees ahead.Aguilar answered in the fourth with a two-run shot to put Milwaukee in front, 2-1, after Braun doubled off Montgomery to start the inning.In the bottom half of the inning, Gregorius reached on an error by Villar. After Frazier struck out, Ji-Man Choi hit his second home run since his recall from the minors this week to put the Yankees ahead, 3-2.The Brewers tied the game, 4-4, in the sixth. A wild pitch by Clippard allowed Braun to score, and Aguilar followed with a sacrifice fly to score Shaw.Then it all unraveled for the Yankees an inning later, as the hard-hitting Brewers took advantage of Clippard’s mistakes, ending a longstanding skid in the Bronx.Inside PitchBefore the game, Joe Girardi said he expected Matt Holliday (illness) and Starlin Castro (right hamstring) to be ready to return after next week’s All-Star break when the Yankees visit the Boston Red Sox next weekend … Through 84 games, the Yankees have not been shut out.We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.