AdvertisementSupported byBy Christopher ClareyWIMBLEDON, England — The United States Open will test a 25-second countdown clock between points and allow coaching from the stands during its qualifying tournament and several main-draw events this year, part of a package of changes intended to make the sport more appealing to modern audiences.The moves, confirmed on Thursday by Stacey Allaster, the chief executive for professional tennis at the United States Tennis Association, will not extend to the five main-draw events: men’s and women’s singles and doubles, and mixed doubles.At least not yet.“I think it’s one step at a time,” Allaster said in a telephone interview.The changes, some of which were first reported by The Daily Telegraph, also will be used in the junior, wheelchair and American Collegiate Invitational events at the Open.Allaster said the moves had been approved after consultation with officials from Wimbledon, the Australian Open and the French Open.“All the Slams are fully supportive of us trying this, and we are happy to take the lead,” Allaster said.Most of the changes are designed to speed the flow of play. Allaster said they included a 25-second countdown clock between points; a prematch countdown clock that will limit the warm-up period to five minutes; and, potentially, a change-of-attire clock to control the length of time players are absent from the court.“It depends on who’s playing, right? We’ve seen 22 seconds to 28 on average, but we’ve seen outliers who take 35 or 40,” Allaster said of the time between points. “We’ve seen some players take 15 minutes to do a change of attire or toilet break. The idea is to give the athletes what they need to perform at their best, but do it in such a way we can deliver to our fans and keep them engaged.”The Open already tested the countdown clock between points during last year’s junior and collegiate tournaments.There is a 25-second time limit between points on the ATP Tour, and a 20-second limit at Grand Slam events, although players are rarely penalized. Allaster said the chair umpire would control when to initiate the countdown procedure after a point concludes.“If it’s early in the match and there are regular points, I would anticipate the chair umpire would call the score and start the clock,” she said. “If we’re in the final set of a four-hour match after a 40-ball rally with the crowd going crazy, I would think the chair umpire will wait and quiet the crowd down and then set the clock. There are so many permutations.”The most radical change, however, is the coaching component. Coaching during matches, although allowed on changeovers on the WTA Tour, is banned at the Grand Slam tournaments and on the ATP Tour. Players are rarely penalized for infractions.Allaster was instrumental in introducing on-court coaching at the WTA. She said the United States Open initiative would allow coaching at any time between points, but only by those in the designated player box in the stands. She said allowing on-court coaching in a Grand Slam environment was considered “too avant-garde” by other Grand Slam officials.“But there was support for us to try from the stands,” Allaster said. “We know coaches sitting in players’ boxes are regularly communicating with players, so there’s hypocrisy around us not enforcing the rule. You either enforce it or make it part of the game, and we think this adds another element of excitement for the fans.”She said coaches would not be allowed to disrupt the flow of play and could communicate verbally with their players only when they are on the same side of the court. Otherwise, they will be permitted to use signals.She said the ATP Player Council was supportive of the Open’s in-match coaching experiment in qualifying.The ATP is already testing a number of changes at this year’s inaugural Next Gen ATP Finals, a youth event in Milan for players younger than 21. The changes include the shot clock, a no-let rule, coaching from the stands and shorter sets.For now, Allaster said there had been no discussion at the Grand Slam level about reducing men’s singles matches from best-of-five sets to best-of-three.“None,” she said. “But I do think we always have to be open-minded.”Advertisement