By DAVID WALDSTEINMARCH 25, 2016
CHICAGO —  A typical road game in the Atlantic Coast Conference can build a steely resilience for teams that regularly travel that circuit. A good squad must weather raucous arenas in places like Durham and Chapel Hill, in North Carolina, in order to prosper. Virginia has certainly done that.The No. 1-seeded Cavaliers (29-7) were one of the A.C.C.’s best teams this season, and when they took the floor on Friday, they were prepared to be the unpopular road team, even wearing white uniforms.Normally, crowds in the later rounds of the N.C.A.A. tournament are not so one-sided. But United Center, home of Chicago’s Bulls and Blackhawks, was overrun with the cardinal and gold colors of Iowa State fans, who had made the five-hour drive up from the university’s campus in Ames.They cheered and exhorted the No. 4-seeded Cyclones (23-12) with deafening roars at times, but aside from a few isolated moments, Virginia was unmoved. The Cavaliers cruised to an 84-71 victory in the Midwest Regional semifinal.AdvertisementVirginia, which advanced to its second regional final in three years, will play Syracuse, which defeated Gonzaga, 63-60, on Friday.AdvertisementThe Cavaliers are seeking their first appearance in the Final Four since 1984. That team, led by Rick Carlisle and featuring Olden Polynice and Othell Wilson, lost to Hakeem Olajuwon and Houston in the semifinal.These Cavaliers look motivated to match their forebears. With their so-called pack line defense and their strong inside game, the Cavaliers never trailed on Friday.Iowa State’s last, best charge came with 6 minutes 6 seconds left, when Deonte Burton hit a 3-pointer, pulling the Cyclones to 68-58 behind. But Virginia pulled away after that, to the dismay of the heavily partisan crowd.“It was like a home game for them more than anything,” said the Virginia senior guard Malcolm Brogdon. “But that’s something that fires us up as competitors. We got to the point where we were playing well during away games towards the end of A.C.C. play, so we embraced it. It was a challenge, and we were able to overcome it.”Anthony Gill led the Cavaliers with 23 points and 8 rebounds, Mike Toby had 18 points on 8-for-12 shooting, and London Perrantes added nine assists, controlling the tempo virtually throughout. Georges Niang, the 6-foot-8 senior guard from Methuen, Mass., had 30 points and 8 rebounds for the Cyclones, and left the floor with 25 seconds left in the game to a standing ovation and a hug from Coach Steve Prohm.“My teammates did a good job of encouraging me,” said Niang, who was saddled with four fouls, “and I’m just bummed that we couldn’t continue this run.”The Cavaliers can. But before they even left their hotel for the United Center on Friday, Bennett spent a few minutes with his father, Dick Bennett, the highly respected former college basketball coach.AdvertisementThe elder Bennett, who coached his son at Wisconsin-Green Bay and is considered the architect of the pack-line defense, reflected on how the day before had been the 20th anniversary of his own father’s death.That prompted Tony Bennett to ask his father what his grandfather would have said before such a big game. Bennett noted that his father’s father, a steelworker from Pittsburgh, had not been highly educated, but had been full of wisdom, nonetheless.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.“You know what your grandfather would tell you?” Tony Bennett recalled. “He’d tell you: ‘Don’t tiptoe into this one. No tiptoeing.’ I shared that with our guys. I said, ‘Do not tiptoe in this game,’ and I shared that story, and that meant a lot, because you have to go into these games. You can’t tiptoe.”With those words in their ears, Virginia stormed out in the first half, shot 60.7 percent shooting from the field (17 for 28), and seized control of the game. The Cavaliers protected a double-digit lead through much of the game. Perrantes, Virginia’s junior point guard, led the way in the half with seven of his assists, including a handful of picturesque passes to his big men.Late in the half Niang began to show life. He finished the half with 15 points and had a chance to draw the Cyclones to within a dozen points going into intermission. With the clock running down, he took the ball on the right wing and made a forceful drive to the basket, directly in front of the Virginia bench. But Gill slid over and swatted the ball out of bounds at the buzzer.It gave momentum back to Virginia and quieted the many Iowa State fans, and not for the last time.“Today was probably three quarters Cyclone fans,” Prohm said, “and you’re disappointed for them. You’re obviously more disappointed for your players, but you’re disappointed for every part of Cyclone Nation and Iowa State today.”SYRACUSE 63, GONZAGA 60 Syracuse shot just 31 percent from the field in the first half (9 for 29), and Gonzaga built an 11-point lead, but the 10th-seeded Orange (22-13) shot their way back and managed to prevail in the final seconds in their improbable run to the round of 8. Michael Gbinije scored 20 points for Syracuse, including the go-ahead basket with just over 20 seconds to play.Kyle Wiltjer scored 23 for 11th-seeded Gonzaga (28-8), and Domantas Sabonis, the son of the former N.B.A. center Arvydas Sabonis, grabbed 17 rebounds for the Bulldogs.Gonzaga led by 9 (57-48) with 6:30 to play, but Syracuse finished the game with a 15-3 run.The next fight will be between Syracuse and Virginia, two orange-themed A.C.C. programs.Advertisement“I know them; that’s the problem,” Syracuse Coach Jim Boeheim said. “They know us, and we know them, and what I know about them, I don’t like. They’ve got a great team. I’m going to try not to think about that for another 10 or 15 minutes.”On Friday night, with only 88 seconds remaining and Gonzaga leading by 2, Syracuse forced a 10-second violation but missed its ensuing shot. Sabonis missed a layup at the other end, and Syracuse grabbed the rebound and pushed the ball up the floor, where Gbinije scored on a follow-up layup with 21 seconds remaining to give Syracuse a 61-60 advantage.After a timeout, Gonzaga inbounded with 19.8 seconds to play. Following a scramble, Trevor Cooney appeared to have stolen the ball, but he was ruled to have stepped out of bounds. The referees reviewed the play and upheld the call.With two seconds left, the freshman guard Josh Perkins drove the lane, but Tyler Lydon blocked the shot, grabbed the loose ball and was fouled. He hit both free throws, Sabonis’s heave at the end missed the mark, and the Orange were left to celebrate.Few expected Syracuse to advance as far as it has, but Lydon said the Orange’s run should not be considered a fluke.“We’ve been confident the whole year,” he said. “We believe in our ability and we’ve just come together as a team.”A version of this article appears in print on March 26, 2016, on Page D4 of the New York edition with the headline: Even With the Crowd Behind It, Iowa State Can’t Catch Up .  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.