By THE ASSOCIATED PRESSMARCH 24, 2016
PITTSBURGH —  Kyle Palmieri scored twice in the first period and Scott Wedgewood stopped 39 shots for the first shutout of his career as the Devils beat the Penguins, 3-0, on Thursday night.Palmieri, who set career highs with 29 goals and 52 points, has a four-game points streak. He scored twice early, and Wedgewood held off the high-scoring Penguins until Adam Henrique sealed the win for the Devils with his 27th goal of the season midway through the third period.The Devils have won five of their last seven games.Marc-Andre Fleury finished with 21 saves for Pittsburgh, which saw its season-high six-game winning streak come to an end. The Penguins finished a run of nine games against Metropolitan Division opponents at 7-2.They remained 4 points behind the second-place Rangers in the division — and in the race for home-ice advantage in a first-round playoff series. The Islanders, a single point back in fourth place, hold the Eastern Conference’s first wild-card spot.AdvertisementDevils goaltender Cory Schneider has not played since injuring his knee on March 4. He returned to practice and could play next week.AdvertisementWedgewood spent the season in the East Coast Hockey League and mainly the American Hockey League before an emergency recall this week. He allowed one goal in his N.H.L. debut against the Columbus Blue Jackets on Sunday, stopping 27 shots to become the first Devils goaltender to win in his debut since Martin Brodeur in 1992.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.Wedgewood, the team’s third-round pick in 2010, followed his initial win with his first shutout against a Penguins team that ranks third in the league in offense since Mike Sullivan took over as coach in December.Sidney Crosby’s 12-game point streak came to an end. Crosby, Pittsburgh’s captain, scored six goals and had 20 points during what had been the longest active streak in the league.Palmieri opened the scoring 26 seconds into the game on a breakaway. He took a pass from Travis Zajac off the boards and squeezed a wrist shot through Fleury’s pads to give the Devils the lead.Palmieri scored eight seconds into a Devils power play later in the first period as his slap shot from the left point beat Fleury to the glove side.We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.