By DAVE CALDWELLJUNE 10, 2016
PITTSBURGH — Bill Mazeroski, the former Pittsburgh Pirates second baseman who is 79 years old, with silver hair but without that plug of tobacco in his cheek, had been invited to Consol Energy Center on Thursday as a yellow-towel-twirling good-luck charm.Mazeroski earnestly spun his towel as hard as anyone in the record crowd of 18,680, but the San Jose Sharks, stunned earlier by two goals after scoring twice on their first three shots, thwarted the city’s plans to celebrate a Stanley Cup by hanging on tightly for a 4-2 victory.All the Penguins needed was just one victory to win their fourth Stanley Cup — and it would have been the first time a team from Pittsburgh won a big-league title in the city since Mazeroski’s game-ending home run sank the Yankees in Game 7 of the 1960 World Series.But the Sharks got a go-ahead goal late in a frenetic first period from forward Melker Karlsson, off a slick no-look pass from Logan Couture, and Joe Pavelski rattled in an empty-net goal with 80 seconds left to seal the victory.AdvertisementSan Jose goaltender Martin Jones, outplayed in the first four games of the series by his 22-year-old rookie counterpart, Matt Murray, was stung in the first period for two goals in a 22-second span, but he stopped 44 of 46 shots, including all 14 he faced in the third period.AdvertisementPittsburgh leads the best-of-seven series, three games to two, with Game 6 scheduled for Sunday in San Jose, Calif. The Sharks still face long odds: Of the 32 teams that have trailed by 3-1 in the finals, only the 1942 Toronto Maple Leafs rallied to win the Stanley Cup.The Penguins had scored first in each of the first four games of the series, so the Sharks appeared to put themselves in good shape by scoring on their first and third shots in less than three minutes.San Jose defenseman Brent Burns scored his seventh goal of the playoffs after just 64 seconds. After Karlsson pounded the puck into the Penguins’ zone, Burns took it, curled around defenseman Justin Schultz and whipped it at the short side of the goal.The puck slipped under the stick of Murray, who had entered the game with a 14-5 playoff record, and went in for San Jose’s first lead of the series. It was the first time the Penguins had trailed during a game since Game 5 of the Eastern Conference finals. (The Sharks won Game 3 in overtime in San Jose.)“It was a step in the right direction, from a starting point of view,” San Jose Coach Peter DeBoer said.Less than a minute after Murray barely knocked aside another shot by Burns with his blocker, the Sharks scored again at 2 minutes 53 seconds into the period, when Couture, uncovered in front of the goal, tipped a shot from the point by defenseman Justin Braun for his first goal of the finals.That juicy lead would disappear in just 2:13. The veteran forward Dainius Zubrus, a healthy scratch in Game 2, sent a clearing pass over the glass, earning a delay-of-game penalty. The Penguins scored on their first shot of the power play.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.After San Jose forward Chris Tierney blocked a shot attempt by defenseman Kris Letang, Penguins center Evgeni Malkin tracked down the puck, held it, then wristed a shot that bounced off Braun’s left skate and slid past Jones. The crowd thundered.AdvertisementMalkin’s sixth playoff goal was followed a mere 22 seconds later by Carl Hagelin’s sixth playoff goal. Nick Bonino, the center on Hagelin’s line, intercepted a sloppy clearing pass by defenseman Brenden Dillon and threw the puck to the goal. It bounced off Hagelin and went in.After 5:06 of breathless ice time, the teams had combined for four goals on six shots. With the crowd in free yellow T-shirts whipping up a din, Pittsburgh pressed for another goal, rolling up an 11-4 edge in shots at one point. But the Penguins did not score.“We couldn’t seem to find that third goal,” said Mike Sullivan, Pittsburgh’s first-year coach.He added, “I think our team as a whole was a little unsettled at the beginning of the game, but we settled in fast.”The Sharks took the lead back at 14:47 of the first period. San Jose forward Patrick Marleau won a battle for the puck behind Murray. Couture took a pass in the low slot and backhanded the puck to Karlsson, who scored his second goal in two games.Jones held onto the lead, barely at times. With less than five minutes to play in a scoreless second period, he stopped a rebound shot by Bonino with the toe of his left skate. Less than a minute later, Jones turned aside a point-blank shot by a charging Patric Hornqvist.“He did make some good saves, but our chances were there,” Pittsburgh center Sidney Crosby said of Jones.After Jones made the save on Hornqvist, the Penguins had a 32-13 edge in shots on goal. But the Sharks still had the lead, and that record crowd was much quieter — and much less interested in spinning yellow towels.“They’re good, and we’re good,” Burns said. “It’s going to be tight.”A version of this article appears in print on June 10, 2016, on Page B8 of the New York edition with the headline: After Frantic Opening, Gritty Goalie Saves the Sharks.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.