AdvertisementSupported bySports of The TimesBy George VecseyWhy do thriving sports feel the need to monkey around with their product? Let’s take current examples from the two sports I like and know best: soccer and baseball.The new gang running FIFA has voted to expand the 2026 World Cup from 32 teams to 48.Right, and in the spirit of this exercise in participatory democracy, I want my doodles placed in the Museum of Modern Art.Meanwhile, the geniuses who run baseball are tinkering to put a quicker end to some minor league games that go longer than nine innings — by borrowing a gimmick from softball and putting a runner on second base to start every extra inning.Right, and maybe baseball could have extra-inning games decided by foot races between clunky mascots of former presidents.Why this obsession to mess with what ain’t broke? Baseball already screwed up a hallowed sport by allowing the designated hitter. Now it’s got wild-card games. Gimmicks.The owners didn’t notice when their sluggers’ craniums and jawbones kept growing. Now the owners notice when an occasional game goes long?There is a certain fascination to extra-inning games because they smack of anarchy — television schedules disrupted, travel plans delayed, things off-kilter. But still, something, eventually, will happen to decide the game. You just don’t know when, or how, or whether the trains will stop running, or who will be the last survivor on the mound.Besides, nobody is being held prisoner in the ballpark. The turnstiles work in reverse. Fans are free to go home if getting up for class or work is so important to them.I can understand baseball’s desire to protect pitchers from being overworked, with the new breed conditioned to pitch counts. No less a wise old head than Joe Torre was quoted as saying it is not “fun” to see teams run out of pitchers. With all due respect to Torre, I submit it is jolly good fun to watch teams resort to position players, serving it up to weary opponents at some outrageous witching hour.There is a list of 552 position players (from Abbey to Zeile) who have pitched at least once, most of them in emergencies in extra innings. I once saw Rocky Colavito and Gene Michael pitch on successive days for the Yankees in 1968. Believe me, that was fun.In one game in 1982, Tom Lasorda used two of his aces, Fernando Valenzuela and Bob Welch, in left field in extra innings. Baseball survived.Baseball even survived a 32-inning doubleheader in 1964 in which the great Willie Mays played shortstop for three innings of the second game. Nothing was hit to him, but people still remember that long day’s journey into night.In the 23-inning second game, no position players desecrated the holy site known as the mound, but there were signs of emergency. Bill Wakefield started for the Mets but got an early hook from Casey Stengel, and was watching while his pal Larry Bearnarth pitched innings eight through 14.At some point, Casey told Wakefield to warm up, and Wakefield had to remind him that he had already pitched. Later, Wakefield and Bearnarth dressed and went into the stands to avoid tempting fate with Casey. They saw the Giants’ last pitchers warming up with a security guard because the extra catchers had gone into the game.Come to think of it, Casey’s stratagem to slip Wakefield back into the game was better than the goofy stuff being proposed now. A designated runner on second base? Most likely followed by sacrifice bunts? What is a sacrifice bunt?From the Bay Area on Friday, Wakefield emailed this proposal: “Put Wakefield in and there will be a man on second with no outs in a heartbeat.”Let the players play. One of my favorite words in soccer is “footballer,” used respectfully for a versatile player who can defend, pass, dribble and shoot — maybe with either foot. Footballer. Let the baseball players settle the outcome. Let them be baseballers.Of course, soccer is about to adulterate its own product. The world soccer body, FIFA, has not yet outgrown the 1,000-year Chernobyl of shame — the money slipping around, the brilliant proposals by the disgraced Sepp Blatter to make female players wear tighter shorts. Blatter used to talk about having World Cups all the time — the more the merrier — and in his tenure with FIFA, its ultimate event expanded from 16 to 32 teams.There was a certain logic to making it easier to qualify, as even the United States began to get the hang of the sport. Using 32 teams in the final tournament every four years allowed more teams from Africa and Asia to qualify. Bravo. Outsiders have been a joy: In 2002, Turkey and South Korea, a co-host, were gallant semifinalists.But 48 nations? Assuming this planet is still spinning by 2026, co-hosts could be the trend — perhaps a Nafta World Cup from Toronto to Mexico City. But some potential hosts might be overwhelmed by hosting 48 entries and their entourages.I hate to break the news to the so-called leaders of FIFA, but they already have a wonderful system for culling the strays — regional qualifying tournaments, an integral part of the four-year calendar, in which great soccer powers sometimes get bushwhacked. Brazil, as you might have guessed, is the only nation to appear in all 20 final tournaments.The qualifiers are terrifying. I saw the United States beat Trinidad and Tobago, 1-0, in Port of Spain in 1989 to reach its first World Cup since 1950 — joyous for the Yanks, heartbreaking for the sporting T & T fans. And in 1993 I was in Milan to watch Italy, who needed at least a draw with Portugal to qualify. The damp night air was sour with “an advanced case of communal anxiety,” as I wrote, until Dino Baggio scored to relieve a fearful nation.I’ll never understand why officials of baseball and soccer don’t respect the glorious traditions of their own business.Email: geovec@nytimes.comAdvertisement