

      By RICHARD SANDOMIR

JUNE 10, 2016

Clinton presented Ali with awards during his presidency, including the Presidential Citizens Medal, and spoke eloquently about him at various other events, including the dedication of the Muhammad Ali Center in Louisville in 2005. Although evidence of a close friendship is difficult to find, Clinton is a big admirer of Ali. The day after Ali’s death, Clinton was campaigning in Inglewood, California, for his wife, Hillary, where he said: “When I was a boy and I saw him box for the first time, I thought we’re looking at something we may never see again. I mean, he was like Golden State on the basketball court … You couldn’t decide if he was a boxer or a ballerina; the way he moved, the speed, the grace, the poetry. I knew it was something magical.” Four years earlier, during an interview with David Frost, Clinton said: “When he risked it all to oppose the Vietnam War, in a funny way, it could have destroyed him, but it didn’t because people realized that he’d been very forthright and was prepared to pay the price for his convictions. No one could say he’s not brave or he’s not patriotic—well, some people said it—but he could say he put his life where his mouth is.”Ali began calling Crystal “little brother” after being captivated by the comic’s impression of him. At a 1979 retirement extravaganza for Ali at the Great Western Forum in Los Angeles, Crystal deftly imitated Ali and Howard Cosell in a routine called “15 Rounds” that traced Ali’s career to that point. Throughout his performance, Ali’s delighted reactions were shown in a small inset at the top of the screen.  In a 2010 USA Today essay, Crystal recalled being with Ali at Cosell’s funeral in 1995 when Ali asked, “Do you think he’s wearing his hairpiece?” If not, Ali wondered, “How will God recognize him?” Crystal also wrote that Ali’s refusal to be inducted into the U.S. Army inspired his mother to speak passionately, and successfully, to their local draft board to prevent her older son’s induction because he was the family’s sole support.  “Mom got it right,” Crystal wrote. “He was the voice we needed to hear. He put his life on the line. Would any other athlete do that today?” Gumbel met Ali as a teenager through a friend who lived next door to Elijah Muhammad, the head of the Nation of Islam, in the Hyde Park section of Chicago. For a 2000 documentary about the first fight between Ali and Joe Frazier, he told HBO Sports: “Ali had just, I think, defeated George Chuvalo. And he drove up and we ran over and shook hands. And then over the course of many years, I’ve probably interviewed him a zillion and one times. And we struck up a relationship, and he was kind enough on my last day of ‘Today’ to be there with me.” During a 1991 interview Gumbel talked about Parkinson’s disease affecting Ali’s facial expression (Ali’s response was to smile as broadly as he could) and Ali said, almost audibly, “I hope not,” when Gumbel asked if the illness had affected his mental capacity. Gumbel unabashedly refers to Ali as a hero, telling Thomas Hauser in his book, “Muhammad Ali: His Life and Times”: “He danced through our imagination as much as through real life and we loved him because he was our guy. When my generation needed pride, he was it. When we needed victories he supplied them. He was bigger than life. I’ll never say a bad word about him.”Yolanda Williams, known as Lonnie, first encountered Ali in 1963, when she was six years old and he was 21-year-old Cassius Clay. Lonnie and her family lived across the street from Ali’s parents. One day, her mother, looking toward the Clays’ home, told her daughter, “That’s Cassius Clay.” She was shy around him and, as she told The New York Times in an interview four years ago, “went back to hide behind my mother’s dress tails after nine, 10 minutes.”  By age 17, though, she had determined to marry Ali, and eventually did, not only becoming his wife, but his caregiver through the long siege of Parkinson’s disease, and the protector of his assets. She grasped Ali’s appeal to the world, helping him maintain his public profile even as his health faltered, while she stayed in the background.  In an undated interview with caregiver.com, she said: “You never know why you are given a certain cross to bear. Sometimes you feel like you’re in the fight alone but I think that if you have a strong spiritual base, that there’s always going to be a higher being there to support you and that you can always turn to. It’s been a very important thing in my life and in my husband’s life, and I don’t want to be preachy, but it is just a part of our life; and I think that is almost a foundation in the lives of many caregivers.”  Muhammad Ali Was Her First, and Greatest, Love Advertisement