AdvertisementSupported byMediatorBy Jim RutenbergFive years ago, the Comcast chief executive Brian Roberts faced his first challenge as the new majority owner of NBC. On the eve of the bidding for the rights to show the 2014 and 2016 Olympic Games, he lost his top sports executive, Dick Ebersol, when talks for a new contract for Mr. Ebersol failed.It was the equivalent of the Yankees losing Derek Jeter just before the World Series. Mr. Ebersol had made the Olympics central to the NBC brand for two decades, and he was hands-down the American television executive best connected to Olympic officials in Switzerland.Mr. Roberts, a second-generation cable executive but a newbie in broadcast television, faced two seemingly bad options: He could break with Mr. Ebersol’s legacy and go down in television history as the person who failed to keep the Olympics in the NBC stable or he could become known as the person who lost by keeping them.The rights were going to cost many billions of dollars, and NBC had lost more than $200 million on the 2010 Vancouver Games, an ominous harbinger. Mr. Roberts and his executive team — including Mr. Ebersol’s successor, Mark Lazarus, and the NBCUniversal chief executive Steve Burke — had less than 30 days to figure it out. “It was a really stressful time,” he told me in an interview on Wednesday.Comcast and NBC shocked the television and sports worlds by outbidding their closest competitor — Fox Sports — by nearly a billion dollars, offering $4.4 billion for four Olympics ending in 2020. And they followed that with a second deal to secure the rights for six Olympics through 2032 — at a cost of $7.75 billion. All told, Comcast has paid about $12 billion for rights to the Olympics, nearly 25 percent of what it paid for NBC itself.In short, Team Comcast bet the store, or, at least, a quarter of it. And they did it for what some analysts were calling “a loss leader,” something that was good for the brand, maybe, but bad for the bottom line. Or so it seemed.This year, the risk is starting to make sense, and it has to do with not only profits — which are considerable — but also the future of television and the way people watch it.First, there’s the profit part.Comcast and NBC expect a record take from the Rio Games, which start Friday. They have already drawn more than $1.2 billion in ad sales, and receipts are continuing to come in.This despite the fact that overall traditional television viewing is ticking consistently down, due in large part to new competition from the internet.But in that environment, big-ticket live sports broadcasts have emerged as the last refuge for advertisers distraught by the slow death of the 30-second commercial, which is under siege from DVRs and online programming. The Olympics — like the Super Bowl or the World Cup — are best enjoyed live, when commercials still work the old fashioned way; they sneak up on you during breaks.“TV is the best in terms of drawing people together and aggregating large audiences,” Mr. Roberts said.It doesn’t hurt that this year’s Games are taking place one hour later than Eastern time, meaning Americans can easily watch them as they’re happening, rather than on the dreaded tape delay (potentially after they already know the results).But more important to Comcast, and the entire media industry, is the future-of-television part of this equation.The trends that are causing television audiences to erode are not promising to abate any time soon. Alternative entertainment and media options continue to proliferate. But Comcast and NBC are using that as an opportunity during the Olympics; they are planning to fill every stream — on cable and the internet — as never before.To understand how significant a change this is, Mr. Roberts pointed to the last time the Summer Olympics were truly taking place live in prime time: the Atlanta Games in 1996.“Twenty years ago, there was something like 170 hours of live content on one channel,” Mr. Roberts said. “Now we’ll have 6,800 hours on 11 channels, and up to 41 live streams. So that’s effectively 52 channels with 6,800 hours versus one channel with 170 hours.”It’s also a ridiculous amount of content. Just think about it: How do you navigate that much sports? And do you even want to?Mr. Roberts thinks NBC and Comcast have found the solution. They’ve arranged their most high-tech cable boxes – called the X1, it’s in eight million homes, plus more through a licensing deal with Cox — so that viewers can easily click into whatever they want to watch, whether it’s tennis on the Bravo network, or highlights from swimming on an internet feed that the box will send into the television.The box serves as a guide not only to the television, but also to the internet, or, at least, the parts of it where Comcast owns rights. It’s the kind of vast media-world navigation that Mr. Roberts says will one day make the content glut more navigable. (As ReCode reported Thursday, Apple is now similarly viewing navigation as the key to the future of television, with plans for a new super-guide.)In full promotional mode, Mr. Roberts told me, 21st Century Fox is media and Google is technology. “We are at the cross-section between media and technology.”Got that, 21st Century Fox and Google (now called Alphabet)? Of course, their executive chairmen — Rupert Murdoch and Eric Schmidt — would most likely beg to differ (and they are welcome to call me anytime to discuss it).A lot can still go wrong: the Zika virus; serious concerns about water quality, and that small matter of the Russian doping scandal that resulted in the disqualification of more than 100 athletes.“You can only control what you can control,” Mr. Roberts said. And should the worst fears come to pass, he said, “We will report on all the reality of Rio — we’re not trying to in any way make light of any serious issues.”And of course, profits are never guaranteed, as Vancouver proved. Mr. Roberts said he was still optimistic, and predicted these would be “a very profitable Olympics,” and possibly, “the largest aggregated audience in the history of television.”The Olympics’ place at the heart of NBC’s brand was a passion for Mr. Ebersol, a classic programmer from a bygone era. Comcast could have used the billions it spent on the Olympics on something else. Its decision to go all-in was predicated on a new bet — that for all their new options, Americans still want a big shared experience like the Olympics, and that big-ticket events are still part of the television future. All it takes is $12 billion and a dream.Advertisement