By BENJAMIN HOFFMANNOV. 6, 2016
Scores and analysis from Week 9 of the N.F.L. season:The Indianapolis Colts had quite a task ahead of them in trying to beat the Green Bay Packers at Lambeau Field, but on the opening kickoff, as Jordan Todman cut through the middle of the field before streaking down the right sideline on his way to a 99-yard touchdown, the tone was set in a game that the Colts would go on to win 31-26.Todman’s kickoff return was just part of a difficult first half for Green Bay that also included a touchdown pass by Andrew Luck and a touchdown run by Frank Gore. That the score remained as close as it did was a result of Ha Ha Clinton-Dix intercepting two of Luck’s passes and Aaron Rodgers having one memorable play when he found Jordy Nelson in the end zone for a difficult touchdown catch in traffic.The second half was more competitive, with the Packers outscoring the Colts 16-7, but the hole they had dug was simply too deep.The meeting between star quarterbacks did not live up to its potential, with both Luck and Rodgers topping 280 yards but neither standing out in any regard.AdvertisementDespite the loss, the game did mark the successful return of Ty Montgomery, Green Bay’s wide receiver turned running back, who had sat out last week after some complications arose from an illness related to sickle-cell trait. While Montgomery had still functioned mostly as a receiver in his previous two games, accruing 20 receptions for 164 yards versus 12 rushes for 66 yards, he was more of a running back in this game, rushing 7 times for 53 yards and catching 3 passes for 38 yards.AdvertisementThe Packers are now just 4-5 in the team’s last nine home games and will be on the road next week against Tennessee.The real Ben Roethlisberger showed up in the fourth quarter, but by then it was far too late as the Pittsburgh Steelers lost on the road to the Baltimore Ravens, 21-14.For three quarters the game had been all Ravens. Joe Flacco found former Steelers wide receiver Mike Wallace for a 95-yard touchdown at the end of the first quarter to take a lead, and then added to it by driving for two field goals to stretch the lead to 13-0.While not qualifying as a great display of offense, it was plenty considering how thoroughly the Baltimore defense was dominating Roethlisberger and the Steelers. Other than kneeling the ball to end the first half, the Steelers started the game by punting on eight consecutive drives, with Pittsburgh never gaining more than 21 yards. Roethlisberger ended the streak of punts by throwing an interception, then Pittsburgh punted two more times, the second of which was blocked and returned for a touchdown and 2-point conversion, leading to a 21-0 deficit.Roethlisberger finally woke up in the fourth quarter. He threw a 21-yard touchdown pass to Antonio Brown to finish off a 75-yard drive, and with less than a minute to play he showed his surgically-repaired knee was not limiting his mobility all that much as he ran the ball in for a four-yard rushing touchdown.Down by seven points, Pittsburgh tried an onside kick but Chris Boswell got a little too fancy by trying to employ a soccer move, feinting a kick to the left side and then kicking behind his ankle to the right. Unfortunately, he kicked the ball into his own foot and the Ravens were awarded the ball at the Steelers’ 38-yard line, allowing them to kneel twice and let time run out.In a matchup between the N.F.L.’s worst team, and one that is trying to lay claim to being its best, the winless Cleveland Browns struck first, with Cody Kessler engineering a few big plays that helped lead to a field goal on the team’s opening drive. The optimism faded as Dak Prescott and the Dallas Cowboys barely broke a sweat while cruising to a 35-10 victory.AdvertisementWhile Kessler, the 93rd pick in this year’s draft, has shown some promise for a terrible team, Prescott, the 135th pick, has distinguished himself from all of the other rookie quarterbacks in the N.F.L. this season. With yet another dominating performance, and the team’s seventh consecutive win, Prescott continues to make an argument for keeping the starting position after Tony Romo returns from injury.In a laugher against a defense that was comically overmatched, Prescott completed 21 of 27 passes for 247 yards and 3 touchdowns, with things going so well that Mark Sanchez, Precott’s backup, got some work in at the end of the game.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.As usual, Prescott had a ton of help from his fellow rookie, Ezekiel Elliott, who carried the ball 18 times for 92 yards and scored his sixth and seventh rushing touchdowns of the season. With 891 rushing yards through eight games, he is not quite on pace to match Eric Dickerson’s rookie rushing record of 1,808 yards, but he has more yards at this point in his career than any player other than Adrian Peterson and Dickerson.The Cowboys will try to continue the team’s winning streak next week when they play the Steelers in Pittsburgh. It’ll be interesting to see how the quarterback situation plays out between now and then.Matthew Stafford threw a 28-yard touchdown pass to Golden Tate, who vaulted into the end zone in overtime to give the Detroit Lions a 22-16 victory over the Minnesota Vikings on Sunday.After Matt Prater kicked a 58-yard field goal as time expired to force overtime, Tate finished the opening drive when he ran through arm tackles by Xavier Rhodes and Harrison Smith and leaped in for the winning score. — Associated PressHeading into Sunday’s game with Philadelphia, the Giants had lost their last four meetings against the Eagles and five of the last six games between the teams.While it took a tense defensive stand in the final minutes, the Giants held on to defeat the Eagles, 28-23, at MetLife Stadium. It was the Giants’ third successive victory and improved their record to 5-3.Quarterback Eli Manning threw four touchdown passes in the game, and the Giants jumped out to a two-touchdown, first-quarter lead. The Giants never trailed, but a late Manning interception nearly allowed the Eagles (4-4) to rally for what would have been a stunning comeback. Read Bill Pennington’s report here.AdvertisementJets Come Up Short: Rookie returner Kenyan Drake was delighted to find himself at the bottom of a pile of players, because they were teammates in the end zone.Drake caused the celebration when he scored untouched on a 96-yard kickoff return with 5:15 left Sunday, the final swing in a seesaw game that helped the Miami Dolphins beat the New York Jets, 27-23.Rams’ Fans Give Up Early: The Los Angeles Rams, in their second stint as a tenant of Los Angeles Memorial Coliseum, got a stiff reminder of what a tough place it can be to play when things are not going well. In the second half of the team’s 13-10 loss to the Carolina Panthers, the stands of the sprawling stadium started emptying long before the team got within a field goal in the game’s final minute. Amid calls for Jared Goff, the No. 1 pick in this year’s draft, to get a chance to play at quarterback, Case Keenum had an uneven effort, completing 27 of 46 passes for 296 yards, 1 touchdown and 1 interception.Panthers quarterback Cam Newton complete 20 passes for 225 yards and a touchdown.We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.