By THE ASSOCIATED PRESSNOV. 6, 2016
Tim Howard made two saves in a shootout Sunday as the Colorado Rapids beat the Los Angeles Galaxy, 3-1, on penalty kicks in Commerce City, Colo., to advance to the M.L.S. Western Conference finals.Colorado won the game, 1-0, which tied the two-game, total-goals series at 1-1 and forced the tiebreaker. Los Angeles had won by 1-0 at home last Sunday.The Rapids’ Shkelzen Gashi scored in the 36th minute after taking a pass just past the center circle, smashing a shot off the left post.Get the big sports news, highlights and analysis from Times journalists, with distinctive takes on games and some behind-the-scenes surprises, delivered to your inbox every week.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.In the shootout, Steven Gerrard put Los Angeles in front, but the Galaxy missed their next three attempts. Giovani dos Santos sent his shot over the crossbar, and Howard denied Ashley Cole. Howard then sealed the result by diving to his right to block Jeff Larentowicz’s rolling attempt.AdvertisementSOUNDERS LOSE BUT MOVE ON Seattle advanced to the Western Conference finals, winning its two-leg series with F.C. Dallas, 4-2, despite falling in the second game, 2-1, in Frisco, Tex.The Sounders will host the Rapids in Game 1 on Nov. 20.Dallas, which had the best regular-season record in the league, was just the third team in M.L.S. history to face a three-goal deficit after the first game in a two-leg series.AdvertisementSeattle’s Nicolas Lodeiro tied the score in the 54th minute on Sunday. Two minutes later, Maximiliano Urruti gave Dallas a 2-1 lead.A version of this article appears in print on November 7, 2016, on Page D6 of the New York edition with the headline: Howard’s Heroics Help Rapids Advance.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.