By THE ASSOCIATED PRESSAPRIL 18, 2017
The first week of the N.H.L. postseason has been as unpredictable as anyone could imagine, even in a sport where upsets are the norm, home-ice advantage is often meaningless and a hot goaltender can overshadow everything else.The Chicago Blackhawks, a perennial Stanley Cup favorite, are down by three games to none to the Nashville Predators, and the N.H.L.-leading Washington Capitals trail the Toronto Maple Leafs by two games to one in their first-round series.But those are only parts of the story. Seven of the first 24 games featured a blown lead of two goals or more, 11 went to overtime, and winning goals came from the unlikeliest of sources.On Monday, all four games went to overtime for only the third time in N.H.L. history and the first time since 1985. The Blackhawks and the Capitals blew two-goal leads, sowing more seeds of doubt and giving the Predators and the Maple Leafs a jolt of confidence.Advertisement“Our guys think they’re a good hockey team, and they’re playing a good hockey team,” Toronto Coach Mike Babcock said. “But I think you gain respect for yourself in the process, and you start believing that maybe you can do this.”AdvertisementThe Blackhawks’ core has three Stanley Cups in the past seven years and a lot of experience to lean on. Washington has only playoff disappointments in the rearview mirror, and panic about another early exit is setting in, with Game 4 looming Wednesday night.The Capitals will not have the shutdown defenseman Karl Alzner, missing his second consecutive game with an upper-body injury, a significant blow to their depth and penalty killing. But Alex Ovechkin should play more than the 15 minutes 8 seconds he did in the Game 3 loss.Get the big sports news, highlights and analysis from Times journalists, with distinctive takes on games and some behind-the-scenes surprises, delivered to your inbox every week.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.“That’s on me, to get him in the ice time,” Washington Coach Barry Trotz said. “It wasn’t based on play. I thought Ovi was playing terrific. It’s on me to get him a little more ice time, no question.”Ovechkin and the Capitals were heavy favorites to beat the young Maple Leafs, but the series has been anything but one-sided as all three games have gone to overtime.“It’s a lot closer match than people let on,” Trotz said after a Game 3 loss in Toronto. “It’s not David and Goliath.”Chicago versus Nashville looked that way before the series, but the Blackhawks now face a daunting task trying to become just the fifth N.H.L. team to overcome a 3-0 series deficit. They have some company in that hole, with the Minnesota Wild down by 3-0 to the St. Louis Blues and the Calgary Flames down by 3-0 to the Anaheim Ducks.Trotz has tried to argue that the talent gap is not big between even the top and bottom playoff teams, but there is a chance for four sweeps. There were only four sweeps combined in the first round of the past seven playoffs.AdvertisementThe defending champion Pittsburgh Penguins entered Tuesday night’s game in Columbus ahead of the Blue Jackets, 3-0. That is not a big surprise, given how Columbus stumbled down the stretch, but Blue Jackets goaltender Sergei Bobrovsky has been a disaster. Bobrovsky, the favorite to win the Vezina Trophy as the league’s best goalie, opened the playoffs with an 0-3 record, a 3.49 goals against average and a league-worst .897 save percentage after finishing first in both categories during the regular season (2.06 G.A.A., .931 save percentage).Some of the biggest goals so far have come from surprising players, including Zack Kassian scoring two game-winning goals for the Edmonton Oilers to put them up by 2-1 over the San Jose Sharks entering Tuesday’s Game 4.Even the Ottawa Senators have gotten goals from defenseman Dion Phaneuf and the struggling wing Bobby Ryan to go up by 2-1 on the Boston Bruins heading into Game 4 Wednesday.Senators Coach Guy Boucher said of Ryan, “I always say that you make your money during the season, but you make your reputation in the playoffs, and right now he’s showing everybody that he’s a gamer.”We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.